Page 1
PREAMBLE
We, the citizens of Pasadena, Texas, give thankful recognition for the guidance of
Almighty God as we establish this Charter.
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, AND POWERS
Section 1. - Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Pasadena, Harris County, Texas, residing within its
corporate limits as heretofore or hereafter established, are hereby constituted and shall
continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the
"City of Pasadena," hereinafter referred to as the "City, with such powers, privileges, rights,
duties, and immunities as are herein provided.
Section 2. - General Powers.
The City shall have all the power granted to cities by the Constitution and Laws of
the State of Texas together with all of the implied powers necessary to carry into execution
such granted powers. The City may use a corporate seal; may sue and be sued; may
contract and be contracted with; may cooperate with the government of the State of Texas
or any agency or any political subdivision thereof or with the federal government or any
agency thereof to accomplish any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interest,
welfare, health, morals, comfort, safety, and convenience of the city and its inhabitants;
may acquire property within or without its corporate limits for any municipal purpose in fee
simple or in any lesser interest or estate by purchase, gift, devise, lease, or condemnation
and, subject to the provisions of this Charter, may sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage,
improve, and control such property as may now or hereafter be owned by it; may pass
ordinances and enact such regulations as may be expedient for the maintenance of the
good government, order, and peace of the City and the welfare, health, morals, comfort,
safety, and convenience of its inhabitants. The powers hereby conferred upon the City
shall include but are not restricted to the powers conferred expressly and permissively by
Chapter 147, Page 307, Acts of the 33rd Legislature of the State of Texas, Regular
Session, 1913, enacted pursuant to the Home Rule Amendment of the Constitution of
Texas, known as the Enabling Act and including Articles 1175, 1176, 1177, 1178, 1179
and 1180 of the Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as heretofore or hereafter
amended, all of which are hereby adopted. In addition to the powers enumerated herein
and subject only to the limitations imposed by the Constitution and Laws of the State of
Texas and by this Charter, the City shall have, without the necessity of express
enumeration in this Charter, each and every power which by virtue of Article XI, Section V,
of the Constitution of the State of Texas, the people of the City are empowered by election
to grant or to confer upon the City by expressly and specifically granting and enumerating
the same herein. All such powers whether expressed or implied shall be exercised and
enforced in the manner prescribed in this Charter or, when not prescribed herein, in such
manner as shall be provided by ordinance of the Council.
Page 2
Section 3. - Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this Charter shall be and shall be known as
"Mayor-Council Government." Pursuant to the provisions of and subject only to the
limitations imposed by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas and by this Charter,
all powers of the City shall be vested in and exercised by an elective Council composed of
a Mayor and eight Councilmembers, hereinafter referred to as "the Council," which shall
enact legislation, adopt budgets, and determine policies of the City.
Section 4. - Streets and Public Property.
The City shall have exclusive dominion, control, and jurisdiction in, upon, over, and
under the public streets, sidewalks, alleys, public squares, and public ways within the
corporate limits of the City, and in, upon, over, and under all public property of the City.
With respect to each and every public street, sidewalk, alley, highway, public square,
public park, or other public way within the corporate limits of the City, the City shall have
the power to establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate the same, to regulate,
establish, or change the grade thereof; to control and regulate the use thereof, and to
abate and remove in a summary manner any encroachment thereon.
Section 5. - Street Development and Improvement.
The City shall have the power to develop and improve, or cause to be developed
and improved, any and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public
ways within the corporate limits of the City by laying out, opening, narrowing, widening,
straightening, extending, lighting, and establishing building lines along the same; by
purchasing, condemning, and taking property therefor; by filling, grading, raising, lowering,
paving, repaving and repairing, in a permanent manner, the same; and by constructing,
reconstructing, altering, repairing, and realigning curbs, gutters, drains, sidewalks, culverts,
and other appurtenances and incidentals in connection with such development and
improvement authorized hereinabove, or any combination of part thereof. The cost of such
development and improvement may be paid partly or entirely by assessments levied as a
lien against the property abutting thereon and against the owners thereof, and such
assessments may be levied in any amount and under any procedure not prohibited by the
Laws of the State of Texas; provided, that no assessment shall be made against such land
or owners in excess of the enhancement in value of such property occasioned by such
improvement.
If improvements be ordered constructed in any part of any such area used or
occupied by the tracks or facilities of any railway or public utility, then the City Council shall
have power to assess the whole cost of improvements in such area and the added costs of
improvements in areas adjacent thereto made necessary by such use or occupancy
against such railway or utility, and shall have power by ordinance to provide for the
enforcement of such assessment.
Page 3
As an alternate and cumulative method of developing, improving, and paving any
and all public streets, sidewalks, alleys, highways, and other public ways within its
corporate limits, the City shall have the power and authority to proceed in accordance with
Chapter 106, Page 489, Acts of the Fortieth Legislature of the State of Texas, First Called
Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended, the same being Article 1105b of the
Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925.
Section 6. - Change of Boundaries and Annexation of Territory.
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to fix the boundary limits of the City
and to provide for the alteration and extension of said boundary limits, the annexation of
additional territory lying adjacent to the City, and the detachment or disannexation of
territory, with or without the consent of the owners and inhabitants of the territory annexed,
detached, or disannexed, in any manner not inconsistent with the procedural rules
prescribed by Chapter 160, Page 447, Article 1, Acts of the 58th Legislature of the State of
Texas, Regular Session, 1963, as heretofore or hereafter amended, the same being the
Municipal Annexation Act. Upon the final passage of any ordinance annexing territory, the
corporate limits of the City shall thereafter include the territory so annexed; and when any
additional territory has been so annexed, the same shall be a part of the City of Pasadena
and the property situated therein shall bear its pro rata part of the taxes levied by the City,
and the inhabitants thereof shall be entitled to all of the rights and privileges of all citizens
and shall be bound by the acts and ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
Upon the final passage of any ordinance detaching or disannexing territory from the City,
the corporate limits of the City shall be reduced by the territory so detached or disannexed.
ARTICLE II. - THE COUNCIL
Section 1. - Number, Selection, and Term of Office.
The Council shall be composed of a Mayor and eight Councilmembers. One
Councilmember shall be nominated and elected by the voters in each of six Council
Districts, and two Councilmembers shall be nominated and elected by the voters of the
entire City. The Mayor shall be elected by the qualified voters of the entire City. The
Mayor, unless sooner removed under the provisions of the Charter, shall serve for fouryear
(4) terms, from the first (1st) day of July four (4) years later or until his successor has
been elected and duly qualified. Each Councilmember, unless sooner removed under the
provisions of the Charter, shall serve for two year (2) terms, from the first day of July
following his/her election until the first day of July two years later, or until his/her successor
has been elected and duly qualified.
No person shall be elected to more than two consecutive regular four year terms as
Mayor. No person shall be elected to more than four consecutive regular two year terms as
a Councilmember. Any reference to Councilmember in this Charter shall mean
Council/men/women.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. I), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
Page 4
NOTE: Pursuant to the United States District Court’s Final Judgment and Order of
Injunction in Patino v. City of Pasadena, Civil No. H-14-3241 (S.D. Tex.) (Jan 16, 2017) the
City of Pasadena City Council consists of a Mayor elected at large and eight
Councilmembers elected from single-member districts rather than from a combination of
single-member districts and at-large positions as set out in Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Article
II of the Charter.
Section 2. - Qualifications and Eligibility.
At the time of his/her election to office and during his/her tenure of office, each
member of the Council shall be a citizen, resident, and qualified voter of the State of Texas
and the City of Pasadena. Council members elected to represent districts must physically
reside within the District he/she represents for a period of twelve months immediately
preceding the day of the election at which he/she is elected. The Mayor and Council
Members elected at-large must have been residents of and have physically resided within
the City for twelve months immediately preceding their election. No member of the Council
shall hold any other office or employment under the City government while he/she is a
member of the Council, nor shall he/she hold any paid employment under the City
government within two years thereafter. A member of the Council ceasing to possess any
of the foregoing qualifications shall immediately forfeit his/her office.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Props. I, IV), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
NOTE: Pursuant to the United States District Court’s Final Judgment and Order of
Injunction in Patino v. City of Pasadena, Civil No. H-14-3241 (S.D. Tex.) (Jan 16, 2017) the
City of Pasadena City Council consists of a Mayor elected at large and eight
Councilmembers elected from single-member districts rather than from a combination of
single-member districts and at-large positions as set out in Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Article
II of the Charter.
Section 2(a). - Proof of Physical Residency.
Requirements for proof of physical residence:
(a) As part of the application for election to office, as well as upon election to office,
and, if requested by the City Secretary, Mayor, or Council as a body, during
their term in office, each candidate or Councilmember shall submit to the City
Elections Official proof of their physical residence, as described in sections (b)
and (c) herein, sufficient for the City Elections Official and/or Council to
determine the candidate's compliance with Article II, Section 2.
(b) If the candidate seeks to establish residency and physical residence at a
property they own, a copy of the deed and copies of the candidate's utility bills
for the applicable period, showing service to such property must be provided,
upon request, as proof of compliance with Article II, Section 2.
Page 5
(c) If the candidate seeks to establish residency and physical residence at a
property they do not own, a sworn affidavit by the owner of such property must
be provided, upon request, to confirm the candidate's compliance with Article II,
Section 2. If the residence is leased to the candidate, a copy of the lease and
copies of utility bills for the applicable period must accompany the affidavit of
the property owner.
(d) Additional proof as determined by Council may be required such as valid driver's
license and voters registration card. etc.
(e) If a candidate fails to provide proof of residency and physical residence as
required by Article II, Section 2 such that the City Elections Official may make a
clear and final determination of the candidate's compliance with Article II,
Section 2, the City Elections Official shall not approve the application for office.
Should a majority of the Council, after notice and hearing find that a
Councilmember has failed to comply, or continue to comply with the
requirements of this Article, they may, in addition to the other reasons permitted
by any law, remove the Councilmember from Council.
(f) The City Elections Official shall not accept for filing any candidate application
without proof of residency and physical residence as required by Article II,
Section 2.
(g) The City Elections Official shall not accept election to office any candidate
without proof of residency and physical residence pursuant to Article II, Section
2.
(h) The decisions of the City Elections Official or Council, as applicable under this
Article, are final subject to any judicial review that may be available by law.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. IV), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
Section 2(b). - Financial Disclosures Sources of Income.
Each Candidate for office and each elected office holder, shall be required to place
on file with the City Secretary a Financial Disclosure list showing all sources of their
income. The Financial Disclosure list shall be updated by the tenth day of January of each
succeeding year. Any violation of this section shall constitute malfeasance in office and
immediate forfeiture of said office.
Section 3. - Designation of Members of Council.
The eight Councilmembers shall be designated as:
Single-Member Districts
Councilmember Place A
Page 6
Councilmember Place B
Councilmember Place C
Councilmember Place D
Councilmember Place E
Councilmember Place F
At-Large Positions
Councilmember Place G
Councilmember Place H
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. I), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
NOTE: Pursuant to the United States District Court’s Final Judgment and Order of
Injunction in Patino v. City of Pasadena, Civil No. H-14-3241 (S.D. Tex.) (Jan 16, 2017) the
City of Pasadena City Council consists of a Mayor elected at large and eight
Councilmembers elected from single-member districts rather than from a combination of
single-member districts and at-large positions as set out in Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Article
II of the Charter.
Section 4. - City Divided into Districts.
The City shall be divided into six single-member Districts to be known and
designated as Districts A, B, C, D, E, and F. The Councilmembers for Districts A-F shall be
elected by the voters of their respective Districts. Within six months of the date this
provision of the Charter is adopted, the Council shall divide the City into six Districts to be
denominated as Districts A-F. Each District shall contain relatively equal numbers of
persons so that the total deviation between the largest and smallest Districts does not
exceed ten percent. As soon as practicable following the publication of each federal
decennial census, the Council shall determine if the Districts are materially imbalanced
and, if so, shall redraw the Districts to achieve relative population equality.
The Councilmembers for Places G and H shall be elected from the City at large.
Such redistricting ordinances and the six Districts defined therein shall apply to the
next succeeding City general election and to all City general and special elections and
appointments thereafter until enactment and application of the next redistricting ordinance.
In the event the limits of the City are extended, annexed territory shall become a
part of the District to which it adjoins until changed by the next redistricting ordinance; and
in the event any annexed territory adjoins two or more Districts, the Council shall designate
to which District or Districts the area is to be assigned.
The Council is authorized to pass all ordinances necessary to effectuate the division
of the City into Districts in accordance with law.
Page 7
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. I), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
NOTE: Pursuant to the United States District Court’s Final Judgment and Order of
Injunction in Patino v. City of Pasadena, Civil No. H-14-3241 (S.D. Tex.) (Jan 16, 2017) the
City of Pasadena City Council consists of a Mayor elected at large and eight
Councilmembers elected from single-member districts rather than from a combination of
single-member districts and at-large positions as set out in Sections 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Article
II of the Charter.
Section 5. - Investigative Body.
The Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any
department, agency, office, officer, or employee of the City, and for that purpose shall have
the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses, compel the production of books,
papers, and other evidence material to the inquiry. The Council shall provide by ordinance
penalties for contempt in failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce any
such books, papers, or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such
contempt in the manner provided by such ordinance. No member of the Council shall ever
vote upon any matter involving the consideration of his own official conduct.
Section 6. - City Secretary.
The Council, upon recommendation of the Mayor, shall appoint the City Secretary,
who shall serve at the pleasure of the Council. The City Secretary shall keep the records of
the Council, and shall have such other duties and responsibilities as may be assigned to
him/her by this Charter or by the Council. The City Secretary shall appoint such assistants
to him/her as may be authorized by the Council. The City Secretary shall furnish two
copies of the minutes of all council meetings to the City Library within thirty days after their
approval; such copies of minutes of the Council shall become and be maintained as
permanent public records.
Section 7. - Meetings of the Council.
There shall be regular meetings of the Council on the first and third Tuesday of
each month unless said Tuesday is a holiday; in which case the meeting shall be
rescheduled within the next three business days. Council may hold as many additional
meetings during the month as may be necessary. Special meetings may be called at any
time by the Mayor as necessary. Procedures for meetings shall be governed by the laws of
the State of Texas for open meetings, and as provided by the Charter and City ordinances
not in conflict therewith. All meetings of the Council, regular or special, shall be open to the
public and shall be held at the City Hall of the City.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. II), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
Section 8. - Rules of Procedure.
Page 8
The Council shall by ordinance determine its own rules and order of business. A
majority of the Council qualified and serving shall constitute a quorum for all meetings for
the transaction of all business, but no action of the Council shall be of any force and effect
unless it is adopted by the favorable vote of a majority of the members of the Council
qualified and serving, unless otherwise provided by this Charter. Minutes of all meetings of
the Council shall be taken and recorded, and such minutes shall constitute a public record.
Section 9. - Each Member Present Must Vote on All Matters.
Except as otherwise herein provided, each member of the Council in attendance at
the council meeting shall vote upon every issue upon which a vote is called. Any member
present who fails or refuses to vote under such circumstances shall be recorded as having
cast a negative vote.
Section 10. - Powers of the Council.
All powers and authority which are expressly or impliedly conferred on or possessed
by the City shall be vested in and exercised by the Council; provided, that the Council shall
have no power to exercise those powers which are expressly conferred on other city
officers by this Charter.
Section 11. - Override of Mayor's Veto.
At any meeting of the Council held not less than seven nor more than thirty days
after the Mayor has vetoed any ordinance or resolution of the Council, the
Councilmembers may, by the affirmative vote of a majority of its members qualified and
serving, override such veto, in which event such ordinance or resolution shall be
considered finally passed and approved and shall not be subject to further veto.
Section 12. - Removal of Appointed, Salaried Officers and Employees.
Subject only to such limitations as may be imposed by the Laws of the State of
Texas or by this Charter, two-thirds of the Councilmembers qualified and serving may
suspend without pay any appointed, salaried officer or employee of the City. Provided,
however, such suspension must be made at a meeting of the Council. Such suspension
shall permanently terminate such officer's or employee's appointment or employment with
the City without recourse to the officer or employee unless he files a petition with the
Council requesting a hearing on such suspension in the time and manner provided for in
this Charter.
Section 13. - Reinstatement of Appointed, Salaried Officers or Employees
Suspended Without Pay.
In the event two-thirds of the Councilmembers qualified and serving, the Mayor, or
the City Controller suspends without pay any appointed, salaried officer or employee of the
City in the manner authorized by this Charter, such suspended officer or employee may
Page 9
within fifteen days after the date of his/her suspension, file a written petition with the
Suspension Appeals Board of the City of Pasadena requesting a hearing on such
suspension. Said Board shall be a standing board consisting of five members appointed by
the Mayor and subject to confirmation and approval by the Council to hear petitions for
reinstatement made by City of Pasadena employees. Said petition shall be signed by the
officer or employee, shall contain his/her home address, and shall state whether he/she
desires a public or private hearing. If the petition is timely and properly filed, the
Suspension Appeals Board shall, within ten days thereafter, set a time for hearing such
petition within not less than six nor more than twenty days thereafter.
The suspended officer or employee may request either a public or private hearing.
The City Secretary shall give written notice of the time of such hearing to the suspended
officer or employee at the address shown in the petition by depositing the same, postage
paid by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested in the United State mail at
least five days prior to the date of such hearing. All such hearings shall be held at City Hall.
At the hearing, the Councilmembers, the Mayor, or the City Controller, as the case may be,
and the suspended officer or employee shall be given the right to be heard. Within ten
days following such hearing, the Suspension Appeals Board shall make a recommendation
to the Councilmembers either upholding or rejecting the suspension. The Councilmembers
shall then consider the recommendation of the Suspension Appeals Board and rule on
said recommendation.
If the recommendation of the Suspension Appeals Board is to affirm reinstatement
and if the Councilmembers uphold such recommendation and removes said suspension,
then the officer or employee is to be reinstated to his/her office or position of employment
and further, shall be entitled to receive all wages and benefits lost during the period of
his/her suspension. However, if the petition is not timely or properly filed or if a majority of
the Councilmembers qualified and serving do not remove the suspension and reinstate
such officer or employee, his/her removal and discharge shall be effective as of the date of
his/her suspension by the majority of Councilmembers, by the Mayor, or by the City
Controller. The action of the Councilmembers on the question of the removal of such
suspension and reinstatement shall be final. Any procedures necessary to effectuate this
Charter provision shall be adopted by ordinance of the governing body.
Section 14. - Procedure to Enact Legislation.
The Council shall legislate by ordinance, and the enacting clause of every
ordinance shall be, "Be it ordained by the City Council of the City of Pasadena." The City
Attorney shall approve as to legality all ordinances adopted by the Council, or shall file
with the City Secretary his written legal objections thereto. Evidence of approval of an
ordinance by the City Attorney may be made by notation on the ordinance itself or by
separate paper or instrument. Each ordinance finally enacted by the Council shall be
signed by the Mayor, subject only to his right to veto, and shall be filed with and recorded
by the City Secretary. In the event the Mayor fails or refuses to sign an ordinance after the
period in which he may veto the same has expired or in the event he fails or refuses to
sign an ordinance passed over his veto, such ordinance shall be signed by the Mayor Pro
Page 10
Tem or by two Councilmembers. The reading aloud of the title and caption of the
ordinance or resolution shall suffice as a reading, provided printed copies of the
ordinance, in the form required for adoption, are in front of all members of council and a
reasonable number of additional copies are available to citizens present at the meeting.
Ordinances or resolutions may be read in their entirety at the discretion of a majority of
the City Council. All ordinances, unless otherwise provided by or by the terms of such
ordinance, shall take effect immediately upon final passage thereof. The requirements for
reading ordinances on two separate days may be dispensed with respect to ordinances
authorizing the issuance of obligation of the City or where an ordinance relating to the
immediate preservation of the public peace, health, safety, or welfare is adopted by the
favorable vote of two-thirds of all members of council qualified and serving, and contains
a statement of the nature of the emergency.
Section 15. - Publication of Ordinances.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the City Secretary shall
give notice of the enactment of every ordinance imposing any penalty, fine, or forfeiture
for any violation of any of its provisions, and every other ordinance required by law or by
this Charter to be published, by causing the ordinance, or its descriptive caption and
penalty, to be published at least one time within twenty days after final passage thereof in
the official newspaper of the City. The affidavit of such publication by the publisher of
such newspaper taken before any officer authorized to administer oaths and filed with the
City Secretary shall be conclusive proof of the legal publication and promulgation of such
ordinance in all courts. Such ordinance shall take effect ten days after the date of such
publication, provided that any penal ordinance passed as an emergency measure shall
take effect immediately upon publication.
Section 16. - Code of Ordinances.
The Council shall have the power to cause all general ordinances of the City to be
compiled and printed in code form. Every general ordinance enacted subsequent to such
codification shall be enacted as an amendment to the code. The Council shall cause all
general ordinances to be codified, recodified, and reprinted whenever in its discretion
such is deemed desirable, or when such codification or recodification is required by law.
When adopted by the Council, the printed code of general ordinances contemplated by
this section shall be in full force and effect without the necessity of such code or any part
thereof being published in any newspaper. The caption, descriptive clause, and other
formal parts of the ordinances of the City may be omitted without affecting the validity of
such ordinances when they are published as a code.
Section 17. - Limitation of Number of Terms of Councilmembers.
No person shall be elected to more than four (4) consecutive regular two (2) year
terms as a Councilmember. Term limitations provided for in the previous Charter are
carried forward with the adoption of this Charter.
Page 11
Section 18. - Compensation of Councilmembers.
Each Councilmember shall receive a monthly salary of Three Hundred ($300.00)
Dollars. Provided, in the event a Councilmember is absent from any regular meeting of
the Council, Twenty-Five Dollars shall be deducted from his/her salary for that month for
each regular meeting from which he/she was absent during such month, except on city
business; also, a Councilmember may be excused from two meetings per year for either
vacation, sickness or death in the family.
Section 19. - Vacancies in Office of Councilmember.
Vacancies in the office of Councilmember arising from any cause shall be filled by
a majority vote of the remaining members of the Council for the unexpired term. However,
if two or more vacancies exist at the same time, a special election shall be called in the
manner provided for City general elections to elect successors to fill such vacancies for
the unexpired terms, unless such vacancies shall exist within ninety days of the next City
general election, in which event such vacancy shall be filled by appointment as in other
cases. Any person elected or appointed to fill a vacancy in the office of Councilmember
shall possess all of the qualifications herein required for the office.
Section 20. - Forfeiture of Office of Councilmember Because of Absence.
Any Councilmember who is absent from four consecutive regular meetings of the
Council, unless such absences are the result of his/her illness or the conduct of official
city business, shall be deemed to have forfeited his office and the Council shall fill such
vacancy in the manner prescribed by this Charter.
ARTICLE III. - THE MAYOR
Section 1. - Head of City Government.
The Mayor shall be the chief administrator and executive officer of the City; he
shall devote his full time and efforts to and shall be responsible for the proper
administration of its affairs. The Mayor shall preside at all meetings of the Council and
shall be recognized as the head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes, for
the purpose of receiving civil process, for emergency purposes, and for military purposes.
Section 2. - Mayor Pro Tem.
At the first meeting following each general City election, the Council shall by
election designate a member(s) as Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor Pro Tem may conduct
Council meetings in the absence of the Mayor and may act as Mayor upon the disability
or disqualification of the Mayor. Upon vacancy of the position of the Mayor Pro Tem, the
position may be filled as needed.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. III), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
Page 12
Section 3. - Acting Mayor.
In the event of the absence, disability, or disqualification of both the Mayor and
Mayor Pro Tem at any particular meeting of the Council, the remaining members of the
Council shall by election designate one of their members as Acting Mayor and he/she
shall act as Mayor for such particular meeting and shall have power to perform every act,
except the power to remove or suspend officers and employees and the power of veto,
the Mayor could perform if present.
Section 4. - Vacancy.
In the event of a vacancy in the office of Mayor arising from any cause, the Mayor
Pro Tem shall become Mayor for the completion of the unexpired term if one year or less
of such unexpired term remains. However, if more than one year of such unexpired term
remains, the Council shall within ten days following such vacancy call a special election to
be held within not less than forty nor more than sixty days thereafter to fill such vacancy
for the unexpired term. The Mayor Pro Tem shall act as Mayor until a successor to the
office of Mayor has been elected and duly qualified and, during such time as he/she acts
as Mayor under such circumstances, but only under such circumstances, the Mayor Pro
Tem shall be entitled to receive the compensation of Mayor.
Section 5. - General Powers of the Mayor.
The Mayor shall have and exercise such powers, prerogatives, and authorities as
are expressly or impliedly conferred on him by this Charter or by the Council.
Section 6. - Privilege of Vote and Veto.
The Mayor, as a member of the Council, shall be entitled to vote upon all matters
considered by the Council, except in those instances where such privilege of vote is
specifically denied him/her by this Charter. He/she shall have the power to veto any
ordinance or resolution enacted or adopted by the Council, except those ordinances or
resolutions which are not subject to the initiative or referendum process under the
provisions of this Charter. To be effective, such veto must be accomplished within ten
days after the final passage or adoption of the ordinance or resolution and must be
accompanied by a veto message setting forth in writing the Mayor's reason for such veto,
which such veto and veto message must be filed with the City Secretary within such ten
day period. The City Secretary shall deliver the Mayor's veto and veto message to the
Council at its next regular meeting.
Section 7. - Removal of Appointed, Non-Paid Persons.
Except as may be otherwise provided by the Laws of the State of Texas or by this
Charter, the Mayor shall have the exclusive authority to remove from office or position all
persons appointed by him/her to serve on boards, commissions, committees, or agencies
Page 13
of the City or to serve in any similar non-paid offices or positions of the City. The action of
the Mayor shall be final.
Section 8. - Suspension Without Pay of Appointed, Salaried Officers and
Employees.
The Mayor shall have the authority to suspend without pay any appointed, salaried
officer or employee of the City, except officers and employees of the Department of
Finance. Provided, however, notice of such suspension shall be given by the Mayor to the
Council at a regular meeting of the Council held within ten working days after the effective
date of such suspension. Such suspension shall permanently terminate such officer's or
employee's appointment or employment with the City without recourse to the officer or
employee unless he files a petition with the Council requesting a hearing on such
suspension in the time and manner provided for in this Charter.
Section 9. - Other Duties and Powers.
Unless otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the powers and
responsibilities of the Mayor shall include, but shall not be limited by, the following:
(a) To appoint, subject to confirmation and approval by the Council, all officers and
employees of the City and the members of all boards, commissions,
committees, and agencies of the City.
(b) To exercise control and direction over all departments and divisions of the City
and to supervise and direct all officers and employees of the City appointed by
him/her.
(c) To recommend to the Council such measures, resolutions, and ordinances as
he/she may deem proper and necessary.
(d) To advise the City Council as to the financial status of the City. The Mayor may
appoint subject to confirmation and approval by the Council and supervise a
Budget and Financial Planning Officer who will work with the Mayor and the
City Controller to ascertain the needs of the City and prepare an annual budget
and a multi-year plan based on the present and projected financial revenues of
the City.
(e) To perform such other duties as may be prescribed by this Charter or required
of him/her by the Council.
Section 10. - Compensation of Mayor.
Effective May 1, 1975, the Mayor shall receive a minimum annual salary of Twenty-
Five Thousand Dollars, with an annual cost-of-living adjustment at the 100% recovery
Page 14
rate, the amount of which will be determined by the cost-of-living index figure as found in
the current Consumer Price Index as determined by the United States Government.
Such annual salary shall be paid in twelve equal monthly installments and the
annual cost-of-living adjustment shall become effective from and after each May 1,
beginning 1976. Each incoming Mayor shall receive the salary of his/her predecessor with
the cost-of-living adjustments effective May 1 of each succeeding year.
Section 11. - Limitation on Number of Terms of Mayor.
No person shall be elected to more than two (2) consecutive regular four (4) year
terms as Mayor. Term limitations provided for in the previous City Charter are carried
forward with the adoption of this Charter.
ARTICLE IV. - ELECTION
Section 1. - General Elections.
The first regular City general election for Mayor and Councilmember shall be held
on the first Saturday in May, 1993. Regular City general elections shall be held on the first
Saturday in May in each odd numbered year thereafter, all Councilmembers to be elected
every two years and a Mayor to be elected every four years. In each such election, each
qualified voter shall vote for not more than one candidate for Mayor, if such position is to
be filled at such election, and for not more than one candidate for Councilmember. Said
election shall be ordered by the Mayor or, in the event he/she fails to do so, by the
Council. The City Secretary shall give notice of such election by causing said notice to be
published at least forty days prior to the date of such election in the official newspaper of
the City.
Section 2. - Run-off Elections.
In the event any candidate for Mayor for Councilmember fails to receive a majority
of all votes cast for his/her particular office at any regular or special election, the Mayor or,
if he/she fails to do so, the Council shall on the first day following the completion of the
official count of ballots cast at the first election order a second election to held on the last
Saturday in May following the date of such order, at which election the two candidates
receiving the highest number of votes cast for such particular office in the first election at
which no one was elected to such office by receiving a majority of all votes cast for all
candidates for such particular office shall again be voted for, and the one receiving the
highest number of votes cast shall be elected to such office. The City Secretary shall give
notice of such run-off election by causing said notice to be published at least ten days
prior to the date of such election in the official newspaper of the City.
Section 3. - Order of Names on Ballot.
Page 15
In all elections, regular or special, first or run-off, the order of names of candidates
for a particular office on the ballot shall be determined by the drawing of lots.
Section 4. - Regulation of Elections.
All election procedures for the City of Pasadena shall be governed by the laws of
the State of Texas for municipal elections, and as provided by the Charter and City
Ordinances not in conflict therewith. The Council shall appoint the Election Judges and
other election officials and shall provide for the compensation of all election officials in city
elections and for all other expenses of holding such elections.
Section 5. - Filing of Candidates.
Any qualified person who desires to become a candidate for election to the office of
Mayor or Councilmember shall file an application for his/her name to appear on the ballot
with Mayor or, if designated by the Mayor, the City Secretary, at least thirty days prior to
the date of election or at such earlier time as may be required by state law. Such
application shall clearly designate the office and, if a candidate for Councilmember, the
Place for which the candidate seeks election and shall contain proof of physical residence
as well as a sworn statement by the candidate that he/she is fully qualified under the
Laws of the State of Texas and the provisions of this Charter to hold the office he/she
seeks.
(Ord. No. 13-126, § 1(Exh. A-Prop. I), 8-22-13/11-5-13)
Section 6. - Method of Filing.
An application to become a candidate for Mayor or for the office of Councilmember
must be accompanied by any one of the following means of qualification:
(a) A filing fee of Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars to become a candidate for the
office of Mayor. A filing fee of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars to become a
candidate for the office of Councilmember. The payment of such filing fees
shall be in cash or by cashier's check or certified check made payable to the
order of the City of Pasadena.
(b) A nominating petition requesting that his/her name be placed on the ballot
bearing signatures of qualified electors who are residents of the City of
Pasadena equal in number to the greater of 25 voters or ½ of one (1%) percent
of the total vote cast for the office of Mayor at the last preceding City General
Election. The petition shall show the address of each signer, the number of
his/her voter registration certificate, and the county of its issuance.
Section 7. - Canvassing Election and Declaring Results.
The returns of every municipal election shall be delivered forthwith by the Election
Judges to the City Secretary. The Council shall canvass the returns, investigate the
Page 16
qualifications of the candidates, and declare the official results of the election not later
than the first regular meeting following the delivery of the votes to the City Secretary. The
returns of every municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the Council by
precinct totals. At each first election the qualified person receiving a majority of all votes
cast for the office he/she seeks shall thereupon be declared by the Council elected. In
each run-off election, the qualified person receiving the highest number of votes cast for
the office he/she seeks shall thereupon be declared by said Council elected. The decision
of the Council as to qualifications of candidates shall be conclusive and final for all
purposes.
Section 8. - Notification and Qualification of City Officials.
It shall be the duty of the City Secretary to notify all persons elected or appointed to
office of their election or appointment. All officials newly elected at a City general election
may enter upon their duties on the first day of July next following the date of their election.
All other newly elected or appointed officials may enter upon their duties immediately. Any
official elected at a City general election must qualify by taking and subscribing his/her
oath of office not later than the thirty-first day of July next following the date of his/her
election; otherwise, the office shall be deemed vacant. All other elected or appointed
officials must qualify by taking and subscribing their oath of office within thirty days;
otherwise, the office shall be deemed vacant.
Section 9. - Special Elections.
The Council may by ordinance or resolution call such special elections as are
authorized by the Laws of the State of Texas and by this Charter, fix the time and place of
holding same, and provide all means for holding such special elections, provided that
every special election shall be called and held as nearly as practicable according to the
provisions governing City general elections. It is specifically provided, however, that if the
Laws of the State of Texas specify a different period or method of notice of any special
election, the time and method provided for therein shall prevail over the general
provisions of this Charter.
ARTICLE V. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, AND RECALL
Section 1. - Power of Initiative.
The people of the City reserve the power of direct legislation by initiative, and in the
exercise of such power may propose any ordinance, except ordinances appropriating
money of levying taxes or issuing obligations of the City, or ordinances repealing
ordinances appropriating money or levying taxes, not in conflict with this Charter or the
Constitution or the Laws of the State of Texas. Any initiated ordinance may be submitted
to the Council by a petition signed by the qualified voters of the City equal in number to at
least twenty percent (20%) of the qualified voters of the City.
Section 2. - Power of Referendum.
Page 17
The people reserve the power to approve or reject at the polls any legislation
enacted by the Council which is subject to the initiative process under this Charter, except
ordinances authorizing the issuance of obligations payable from taxes, revenues, or both
taxes and revenues, whether original or refunding obligations, shall not be subject to such
referendum. Prior to or within thirty days after the effective date of any ordinance which is
subject to referendum, a petition signed by qualified voters of the City equal in number to
at least twenty percent (20%) of the qualified voters of the City may be filed with the City
Secretary requesting that any such ordinance be either repealed or submitted to a vote of
the people. When such a petition has been certified as sufficient by the City Secretary, the
ordinance specified in the petition shall not go into effect, or further action thereon shall be
suspended if it shall have gone into effect, until and unless it is approved by the voters as
herein provided.
Section 3. - Form of Petitions.
Initiative petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed legislation in the
form of an ordinance, including a descriptive caption. Referendum petition papers shall
contain a sufficient description of the ordinance sought to be referred to identify it, or if the
ordinance has been passed by the Council, the full text of the ordinance sought to be
referred shall be included in such papers. The signatures to the initiative or referendum
petitions need not be all appended to one paper, but each signer shall sign his/her name
in ink or indelible pencil, together with a notation showing his/her residence address and
the ward or precinct number and serial number that appear on his/her voter registration
card or such other document as may be prescribed by the Laws of the State of Texas to
identify qualified voters under any future legislation. No signature shall be counted where
there is reason to believe it is not the actual signature of the purported signer or that it is a
duplication either of name or of handwriting used in any other signature on the petition,
and no signature shall be counted unless the residence address of the signer is shown, or
unless it is signed exactly as the name of the voter appears on the official copy of the
current list of voters or such other document as may be prescribed by the Laws of the
State of Texas to identify qualified voters under any future legislation, or unless the
precinct number and serial number that appear on the signer's voter registration card or
such other document as may be prescribed by the Laws of the State of Texas to identify
qualified voters under any future legislation are noted as above required. Before the
signatures on any petition paper may be counted, one of the signers of such petition
paper, a qualified voter, shall make oath before the City Secretary or any other officer
competent to administer oaths, that the statements made therein are true, that each
signature to the paper appended is a genuine signature of the person whose name
purports to be signed thereto, and that such signatures were placed thereon in his/her
presence.
Section 4. - Filing, Examination, and Certification of Petitions.
Within thirty days after an initiative or referendum petition is filed, the City
Secretary shall determine whether the same is properly signed by the requisite number of
Page 18
qualified voters. The City Secretary shall declare void any petition paper which does not
have an affidavit attached thereto as required in Section 3 of this Article. In examining the
petition, the City Secretary shall write the letters "D.V." (declared void) in red ink opposite
the names of signers found not qualified. After completing examination of the petition, the
City Secretary shall certify the results thereof to the Council at its next regular meeting. If
the certificate of the City Secretary shall show an initiative or referendum petition to be
insufficient, the City Secretary shall notify the person filing the petition, and it may be
amended within ten days from the date of such notice by filing a supplementary petition
upon additional papers signed and filed as provided for in the original petition. Within thirty
days after such amendment is filed, the City Secretary shall examine the amended
petition and certify as to its sufficiency. If the amended petition is then found to be
insufficient, no further proceedings shall be had with regard to it, except as provided in
Section 6 below.
Section 5. - Council Consideration and Submission to Voters.
When the Council receives an authorized initiative petition certified by the City
Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall either: (a) pass the initiated ordinance without
amendment within twenty-one days after the date of the certification to the Council; or (b)
submit said initiated ordinance without amendments to a vote of the qualified voters of the
City at the next regular election date as established by the laws of the State of Texas that
allows time to comply with this Charter and other laws applicable to elections; or (c) at
such election; submit to a vote of the qualified voters of the City said initiated ordinance
without amendment, and an alternative ordinance on the same subject proposed by the
Council. Council may, in its discretion, and if no regular election is to be held on such day
shall, provide for a special election. When the Council receives an authorized referendum
petition certified by the City Secretary to be sufficient, the Council shall reconsider the
referred ordinance, and if upon such reconsideration such ordinance is not repealed with
twenty-one days, it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the City at the next regular
election date as established by the laws of the State of Texas that allows time to comply
with this Charter and other laws applicable to elections.
Special elections on initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more
frequently than once each six months, and no ordinance on the same subject as an
initiated ordinance which has been defeated or on the same subject as a referred
ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters within
two years from the date of such election.
Section 6. - Petition Signed by Less than Twenty Percent of Qualified Voters.
If an authorized initiative petition or referendum petition be signed by qualified
voters of the City equal in number to at least ten percent (10%) but less than twenty
percent (20%) of the qualified voters of the City, then such ordinance, without amendment
or alteration, shall be submitted by the Council to the qualified voters of the City at the
next City general election that shall be held at any time after sixty days from the date of
Page 19
the City Secretary's certification of sufficiency attached to the petition accompanying said
initiated or referred ordinance.
Section 7. - Results of Election.
Any number of ordinances may be voted on at the same election in accordance
with the provisions of this Article. If a majority of the legal votes cast is in favor of an
initiated ordinance it shall thereupon be effective as an ordinance of the City. An
ordinance so adopted may be repealed or amended at any time after the expiration of two
years by a vote of two-thirds of the members of Council qualified and serving. A referred
ordinance which is rejected by a majority of the legal votes cast in a referendum election
shall be deemed thereupon repealed and may not be re-enacted by the Council for a
period of two years.
Section 8. - Power of Recall.
The people of the City reserve the power to recall any elected officer of the City of
Pasadena and may exercise such power by filing with the City Secretary a petition, signed
by qualified voters of the City equal in number to at least thirty percent (30%) of the
qualified voters of the City, demanding the removal of such elected officers. The petition
shall be signed and verified in the manner required for an initiative petition.
Section 9. - Recall Elections.
The provisions regulating examination, certification, and amendment of initiative
petitions shall apply to recall petitions. If the petition is certified by the City Secretary to be
sufficient, the Council shall within ten days thereafter order an election to be held within
thirty-five days thereafter to determine whether such officer shall be recalled.
Section 10. - Results of Recall Election.
If the majority of the legal votes cast at a recall election be for the recall of the
officer named on the ballot, the Council shall immediately declare his/her office vacant,
and a special election for the filling of such vacancy shall be called and held forthwith in
accordance with provisions of this Charter on elections. An officer thus removed shall not
be eligible to hold office again in the City of Pasadena within a period of two years from
the date of his/her recall.
Section 11. - Limitation on Recall.
No recall petition shall be filed against an officer within six months after he/she
takes office, and no officer shall be subjected to more than one (1) recall election during a
term of office.
ARTICLE VI. - ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICES AND DEPARTMENTS
Page 20
Section 1. - Administrative Offices and Departments.
There shall be such offices and departments of the City as are established by this
Charter and as may be established by ordinance, all of which, unless otherwise provided
in this Charter, shall be under the control and direction of the Mayor. The Council may
abolish or combine one or more offices or one or more departments created by it, and
may define, assign, or transfer duties of any such offices or departments of the City from
one office or department to another by ordinance.
Section 2. - Directors of Departments.
At the head of each department there shall be a Director. Such Directors shall have
supervision and control over their respective departments and may serve as chiefs of
divisions within their respective departments. Two or more departments may be headed
by the same individual.
Section 3. - Departmental Organization.
The work of each department shall be distributed among such divisions as may be
established by ordinance. Pending passage of ordinance establishing department
divisions, the Mayor may establish temporary divisions in any department.
Section 4. - Bonds of City Officers.
The Council may require any officer of the City to give bond with such surety and in
such sums as may be prescribed by ordinance, which sum shall always be of sufficient
amount to protect the City. The premium of such bond shall be paid for by the City.
ARTICLE VII. - DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Section 1. - City Attorney.
There shall be a Department of Law, the head of which shall be the City Attorney.
The City Attorney shall be a competent attorney who shall have practiced law in the State
of Texas for at least five years immediately preceding his/her appointment. The City
Attorney shall be the legal advisor of and attorney for all of the offices and departments of
the City, and he/she shall represent the City in all litigation and legal proceedings. He/she
shall draft, approve, or file his/her written legal objections to every ordinance adopted by
the Council, and he/she shall pass upon all documents, contracts, and legal instruments
in which the City may have an interest.
Section 2. - Assistant City Attorneys.
There shall be such Assistant City Attorneys as may be authorized by the Council.
Such Assistant City Attorneys shall be authorized to act for and on behalf of the City
Attorney.
Page 21
ARTICLE VIII. - MUNICIPAL COURT
Section 1. - Municipal Court.
There shall be a court known as the Municipal Court of the City of Pasadena,
which court shall be deemed always open for the trial of causes, and with such
jurisdiction, powers, and duties as are given and prescribed by the Laws of the State of
Texas.
Section 2. - Judge of the Municipal Court.
The Municipal Court shall be presided over by a magistrate who shall be known as
the "Judge of the Municipal Court" and the Judge of said court shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the approval of Council. He shall be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the State of Texas.
In the event the Judge of the Municipal Court is temporarily unable to act for any
reason, a qualified person shall be appointed to act in his place.
The Council shall have the power to create and establish additional Municipal
Courts. The Mayor shall have the power to appoint additional Municipal Court Judges
subject to the approval of the Council.
Section 3. - Clerk of the Municipal Court.
There shall be a Clerk of the Municipal Court who shall be appointed by the Judge
of the Municipal Court subject to the approval of the Council. Such Clerk shall have the
power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, fix the seal of the Court
thereto, and otherwise perform any and all acts necessary in issuing process of such
Court and conducting the business thereof.
There shall be such Deputy Clerks of the Municipal Court as may be authorized by
the Council and appointed by the Judge of the Municipal Court subject to the approval of
the Council, which Deputy Clerks shall have authority to act for and on behalf of the Clerk
of the Municipal Court.
The Clerk and Deputy Clerks of the Municipal Court shall be responsible to the
Judge thereof and shall be subject to his direction and control.
Section 4. - Cost, Process, and Procedure in the Municipal Court.
The Council shall determine what costs, if any, shall be charged for proceedings in
and for processes issued by said Court.
Page 22
The style of all writs issued out of the Municipal shall be in the name of the City of
Pasadena.
All jurors shall be residents of said City and otherwise possess the same
qualifications as jurors in the State courts, and they shall be summoned in the same
manner as provided for in Justice Courts.
Section 5. - Court Separate from All Departments.
The Municipal Court of the City shall always be separate and apart from all
departments of the City.
ARTICLE IX. - FINANCE
Section 1. - Department of Finance.
There shall be a Department of Finance, the head of which shall be the City
Controller. The City controller shall have knowledge of and a minimum of five years of
experience in municipal accounting, banking, and municipal bonds. The five years of
experience shall have been gained through professional employment in municipal
budgeting, accounting, taxation, and financial control; provided, however, such
experience shall not have been gained as an elected official. Said City Controller shall
provide a bond with such surety and in such amounts as the Council may require,
provided said bond shall be in an amount of at least One Hundred Thousand
($100,000.00) Dollars. The premiums on such bond shall be paid by the City.
Section 2. - Mayor Denied Voice and Vote.
The Mayor shall have neither voice nor vote in the employment or removal and
discharge of the City Controller nor of any personnel in the Department of Finance, it
being the intent of this Charter to divest the Mayor of any authority, control, or direction
over the Department of Finance, its officers and employees, except where specifically
authorized herein.
Section 3. - Appointment, Removal, and Discharge of City Controller.
The City Controller shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of not less than a
majority of the Councilmembers qualified and serving. However, no person shall be
appointed to the office of City Controller until the Councilmembers shall have caused
his/her qualifications to be published once a week for two consecutive weeks in the official
newspaper of the City. The person appointed City Controller may be removed and
discharged from his office only at a regular meeting of the Council by the affirmative vote
of a majority of the Councilmembers qualified and serving. The action of the
Councilmembers in removing and discharging any person holding the office of City
Controller shall be final.
Page 23
Section 4. - Personnel of the Department of Finance.
There shall be such personnel in the Department of Finance as may be authorized
by the Council. Such personnel shall be appointed by the City Controller, subject to the
approval of a majority of the Councilmembers qualified and serving, and shall be
responsible to the City Controller and subject to his/her direction and control.
There shall be an Assistant Controller appointed by the City Controller subject to
approval of Councilmembers. The position of Assistant Controller shall be permanently
filled. In the event such position goes unoccupied for sixty or more calendar days then a
majority of Councilmembers may appoint a qualified person to fill said position. The duties
of the Assistant Controller shall be established by the City Controller except during
periods when the City Controller is absent from his position, in which case the Assistant
Controller will assume the full powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Controller.
To qualify as an applicant, the Assistant City Controller shall have knowledge of
and a minimum of three years of experience gained through professional employment in
municipal budgeting, accounting, taxation, and financial control; provided, however, such
experience shall not have been gained as an elected official.
Section 5. - Suspension Without Pay of Personnel of Department of Finance.
The City Controller shall have the authority to suspend without pay any officer or
employee of the Department of Finance. Provided, however, notice of such suspension
shall be given by the City Controller to the Council at a regular meeting of the Council
held within ten working days after the effective date of such suspension. Such suspension
shall permanently terminate such officer's or employee's appointment or employment with
the City without recourse to the officer or employee unless he/she files a petition with the
Councilmembers requesting a hearing on such suspension in the time and manner
provided for in this Charter.
Section 6. - Powers and Duties of City Controller.
The City Controller shall administer and supervise all financial affairs of the City.
He shall have the power, the duty, and be required to:
(a) Have custody of and be responsible for all monies belonging to or under the
control of the City or any office, department, or agency thereof, and shall
promptly deposit all such monies in the City depository or depositories, which
shall be designated by ordinance or resolution of the Council in accordance
with such regulations and subject to such requirements as to security for
deposits and interest thereon as may be required by the Laws of the State of
Texas and by ordinance of the Council.
(b) Render a complete and correct statement of all monies received and deposited
by him/her each month to each member of the Council on or before the tenth
Page 24
day of the month next following and at such other times as the Council may
require, in such form as the Council may prescribe.
(c) Appoint, subject to the approval of a majority of the Councilmembers qualified
and serving, such deputies, assistants, and employees in his/her department
as the Council may authorize.
(d) Prescribe the forms of receipts, vouchers, bills, claims, and bookkeeping
procedures to be used by all offices, departments, and agencies of the City.
(e) Examine all contracts, orders, and other documents by which the City
government incurs financial obligations, having previously ascertained that
money has been appropriated and allotted and will be available when the
obligation becomes due and payable.
(f) Assist the Mayor and all department heads in the preparation of the budgets for
all departments.
(g) Compile estimates of revenues and expenditures for the budget as required by
the Mayor and all department heads.
(h) Audit and approve before payment all bills, invoices, payrolls, and other
evidence of claims, demands, or charges against the City. The City Controller
shall, when he deems it necessary, seek the written advice of the City Attorney
in order to determine the regularity, legality, and correctness of such claims,
demands, or charges prior to presentation of the same to the Council for
approval.
(i) Submit in writing an itemized statement of all bids and claims payable by the
City to the office or home of each Councilmember at least twenty-four hours
prior to the Council meeting at which the bill or demand will be considered for
payment. Copies of this statement shall be made available to each person
attending the Council meeting who may be seated, and two copies of the same
shall be furnished to the Pasadena Public Library for its public journals at least
twenty-four hours prior to such meeting. One or more copies of such statement
shall be available in the office of the City Controller for public inspection during
normal office hours.
(j) Submit to each member of the Council a monthly statement of all receipts and
disbursements in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the
City. Two copies of such statement shall be submitted to the Pasadena Public
Library for its public journals on the same day of its submission to members of
the Council, and one or more copies of such statement shall be made available
in the office of the City Controller for public inspection during normal office
hours.
Page 25
(k) Publish a financial statement of the financial condition of the City, including the
status of all general and special accounts, and bonded and other indebtedness
of the City, in the official newspaper of the City in the form and as often as a
majority of the Councilmembers qualified and serving may require, but at last
once each fiscal quarter. Such financial report must be audited by a Certified
Public Accountant who is bonded and has no personal interest, directly or
indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of its departments, offices, or
agencies. Such audit shall be on a non-certified basis. The auditing Certified
Public Accountant shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of a
majority of the Councilmembers qualified and serving, and the same Certified
Public Accountant shall perform the quarterly and annual audits provided for in
this Charter for any given fiscal year. Prior to publication, the financial report
shall be submitted to the Council for its acceptance or rejection by a majority of
the Councilmembers qualified and serving. Such acceptance or rejection must
be made at a regular meeting of the Council and the results shall be made a
matter of record and shall be reflected on the published financial report, which
shall be published in the official newspaper of the City. A copy of the financial
report as approved or rejected shall be submitted to the Pasadena Public
Library for its public journals at the same time it is released for official
publication, and one or more copies of such report shall be made available in
the office of the City Controller for public inspection during normal office hours.
(l) Invest all funds deemed in excess of current needs in the manner authorized by
the Laws of the State of Texas; current needs are hereby defined as
expenditures to be made within a given ninety day period.
(m) Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the City, or in the
possession of the City in a fiduciary capacity, and have the safekeeping of all
bonds and notes of the City and the receipt and delivery of City bonds,
warrants, and notes for transfer, registration, or exchange. He/she shall be
responsible for the destruction of redeemed, paid, and cancelled bonds,
warrants, and notes.
(n) Supervise and be responsible for the preparation of a sequential list of all
checks issued by the City. Such listing shall include the name of payee,
amount of payment, and nature of the payment. Such list shall be published
along with the minutes of the preceding Council meeting and made available to
each person attending the Council meeting who may be seated and shall be
furnished to the Pasadena Public Library for filing in its public journals. One or
more copies of such list shall be available in the office of the Controller for
public inspection during normal office hours.
(o) See that every check, voucher, or warrant for the withdrawal of money from the
city depository is signed by the Mayor and countersigned by the City
Controller, except checks in the amount of ten ($10.00) Dollars or less and
checks for refunds of consumer deposits for utilities. In the event the City
Page 26
Controller is absent from his/her duties for a period of time which will not permit
him/her to conduct his/her duties as outlined in this Article, then each check,
voucher, or warrant shall be countersigned by another official in the
Department of Finance to be designated by a majority of Councilmembers
qualified and serving, except checks amounting to Ten ($10.00) Dollars or less
and checks for refunds of consumer deposits for utilities.
Checks amounting to the sum of ten ($10.00) Dollars or less may be signed by
the Mayor without any additional signature; however, such payments shall be
fully accounted for and thereby recorded for the records within the office of the
City Controller. It is specifically provided, however, that the Council, under such
regulations and limitations as it may prescribe, may by ordinance authorize the
use of machine imprinted facsimile signatures of said Mayor and City
Controller on such checks, vouchers, and warrants.
(p) Maintain a general accounting system for the City government and each of its
offices, departments, and agencies; keep books for and exercise financial
budgetary control over each office, department, and agency; keep separate
accounts for the items of appropriations contained in the city budget, each of
which account shall show the amount of the appropriations, the amount paid
therefrom, the unpaid obligations against it, and the unencumbered balance;
require reports of receipts and disbursements from each receiving and
spending office, department, or agency of the City to be made daily or at such
intervals as directed by the City Controller.
(q) Pay no claim against the City unless it is evidenced by a voucher submitted by
the head of the department for which the indebtedness was incurred and
approved by the Mayor; each officer and his/her surety shall be liable to the
City for all loss or damage sustained by the City by reason of his/her negligent
or corrupt approval of such claim.
(r) Establish and maintain a fund at all times of not less than Ten Thousand
($10,000.00) Dollars to be used for the sole purpose of initiative, referendum,
recall, and charter commission elections. Establish and maintain at all times
another fund of not less than Five Thousand ($5,000.00) for the operation of a
charter commission, if one is elected by the qualified voters of the City. Both
such funds shall be invested in a manner authorized by the Laws of the State
of Texas and such funds shall be reviewed annually to determine that the
highest possible rate of interest is being obtained from the investment of such
funds. In the event either or both such funds or any part thereof shall be used
for the purposes for which created, such fund or funds shall be replenished to
the original amount within sixty days out of current city revenue. The interest
derived from the investment of such funds shall become a part of and be
placed in the General Fund of the City at the close of each fiscal year. Such
fund shall be properly budgeted by the Council to comply with the intent of this
subsection.
Page 27
(s) To perform such other duties and to have such other powers as may be
authorized by ordinance adopted by a majority of the Councilmembers
qualified and serving, provided such duties and powers are not inconsistent or
in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. It is specifically provided that the
City Controller shall never be required to perform any act which is contrary to
the provisions of this Charter.
Section 7. - Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of October and end on the
last day of September of the succeeding year. All funds collected by the City during any
fiscal year, including both current and delinquent revenues, shall belong to such fiscal
year and, except for funds derived to pay interest and create a sinking fund of the bonded
indebtedness of the City, may be applied to the payment of expenses incurred during
such fiscal year, except as provided in this Charter. All revenues uncollected at the end of
any fiscal year, and any unencumbered funds actually on hand, shall become resources
of the next succeeding fiscal year.
Section 8. - Budget Preparation and Adoption.
At least thirty days prior to the end of each fiscal year, the Mayor shall submit to
the Council a proposed budget presenting a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal
year. Such budget shall be prepared and public hearing shall be held thereon in the
manner prescribed by the Laws of the State of Texas relating to budgets in cities and
towns. The budget shall be finally adopted not later than the twenty-seventh day of the
last month of the fiscal year. Should the Council take no final action on or prior to such
day, the budget, as submitted, shall be deemed to have been finally adopted by the
Council. No budget shall be adopted or appropriations made unless the total of estimated
revenues, income, and funds available shall be equal to or in excess of such budget or
appropriations, except as otherwise provided in this Article.
Section 9. - Appropriations.
From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as
proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several objects and
purposes named therein. Except as provided in this Article, no funds of the City shall be
expended nor shall any obligation for the expenditure of money be incurred, except
pursuant to the annual appropriation ordinance provided by this Article. At the close of
each fiscal year, any unencumbered balance of any appropriation shall revert to the fund
from which appropriated and become available for reappropriation for the next fiscal year.
The Council may transfer any unencumbered appropriated balance or portion thereof
from one office, department, or agency to another at any time. The Council shall have the
authority to transfer appropriation balances from one expenditure account to another
within a single office, department, or agency of the City.
Page 28
Section 10. - Emergency Appropriations.
At any time in any fiscal year, the Council may, pursuant to this Section, make
emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public expenditure, for other than
regular or recurring requirements, to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. Such
appropriations shall be by ordinance adopted by the favorable votes of two-thirds of the
Council and shall be made only upon recommendation of the Mayor. The total amount of
all emergency appropriations made in any fiscal year shall not exceed two and one-half
(2½%) of the tax levied for that fiscal year. Should the unappropriated and unencumbered
revenues, income, and available funds of the City for such fiscal year be not sufficient to
meet the expenditures under the appropriation authorized by this Section, thereby
creating a deficit, it shall be the duty of the Council to include the amount of such deficit in
its budget for the following fiscal year and said deficit shall be paid off and discharged
during the current fiscal year.
Section 11. - Borrowing to Meet Emergency Appropriations.
In the absence of unappropriated available revenues or other funds to meet
emergency appropriations under the provisions of the next preceding Section, the Council
may by resolution authorize the borrowing of money to meet such deficit by the issuance
of notes each of which shall be designated "Emergency Note" and may be renewed from
time to time, but all such notes of any such fiscal year and any renewals thereof shall
mature and be payable not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the
emergency appropriation was made.
Section 12. - Borrowing in Anticipation of Property Taxes.
In any fiscal year, in anticipation of the collection of the ad valorem property tax for
such year, whether levied or to be levied in such year, the Council may by resolution
authorize the borrowing of money, not to exceed in any fiscal year an amount equal to ten
percent (10%) of the budget for that fiscal year. Such borrowing shall be by the issuance
of negotiable notes of the City, each of which shall be designated "tax anticipation note for
the year 19" (stating the tax year). Such notes shall mature and be payable not later than
the end of the fiscal year in which issued, and may be secured by the pledge of the ad
valorem property taxes for such year.
Section 13. - General Obligation Bonds.
The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to
issue general obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public
purpose not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas, and to issue
refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the City previously issued. All bonds shall
be issued in conformity with the Laws of the State of Texas.
Section 14. - Limitations on Bonded Indebtedness Payable from Taxes.
Page 29
The maximum bonded indebtedness of the City outstanding at any one time and
payable solely from ad valorem taxes shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the assessed
valuation of all taxable property on the City's tax rolls.
Section 15. - Revenue Obligations.
The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing,
purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of public utilities, recreational facilities, or
any other self-liquidating facility not prohibited by the Constitution and Laws of the State
of Texas, and to issue revenue obligations to evidence the obligation created thereby.
Such obligations shall be a charge upon and payable solely from the properties, or
interest herein, pledged, or the income therefrom, or both, and shall never be a debt of
the City. All such obligations shall be issued in conformity with the Laws of the State of
Texas.
Section 16. - Sale of Bonds.
All bonds except refunding bonds issued by the City shall be sold at public sale
upon sealed bids after at least ten days’ notice thereof has been published at least once
in a publication carrying municipal bond notices and devoted primarily to financial news,
and at least ten days’ notice thereof has been published at least once in the official
newspaper of the City. Such sealed bids must be opened at a regular meeting of the
Council.
No bond, other than refunding bonds issued to refund and in exchange for
previously issued outstanding bonds, issued by the City shall be sold for less than par
value and accrued interest.
All bonds of the City having been issued and sold in accordance with the terms of
this Section, and having been delivered to the purchaser thereof, shall thereafter be
incontestable, and all bonds issued to refund and in exchange for outstanding bonds
previously issued shall, after said exchange, be incontestable.
Section 17. - Use of Bond Proceeds.
The proceeds of all bonds authorized, issued, and sold by the City shall be used
only for the purpose for which voted or authorized and the diversion of any such bond
proceeds to any other purpose may be enjoined by any property tax paying citizen of the
City.
Section 18. - Purchase Procedure.
All purchases made and contracts executed by the City shall be pursuant to a
requisition from the head of an office, department or agency whose appropriation will be
charged, and no contract or order shall be binding on the City unless and until the City
Controller certifies that there is to the credit of such office, department or agency a
Page 30
sufficient unencumbered appropriation and allotment balance to pay for the supplies,
materials, equipment, or contractual services for which the contract or order is to be used.
Any debt hereafter contracted by any officer of the City, or by any person on
account of the City, the payment of which has not been previously provided for by
ordinance duly adopted by the Council, shall be absolutely null and void and uncollectible
at law or in equity.
The Council may by ordinance confer upon the Mayor general authority to contract
for expenditures without further approval of the Council for all budgeted items not
exceeding State statutory limits for competitive bidding as set forth by the latest
Legislative proceedings of the State of Texas. All contracts for expenditures involving
funds in excess of those provided by the State statutory limits must be expressly
approved in advance by the Council. In every instance required by State law, contracts
shall be submitted for competitive bidding prior to being entered into by the City.
Procedures for such competitive bidding shall be prescribed by the Council, but the
procedures must be in accordance with State Law. The Council may determine by
ordinance the dollar amount above which contracts or purchases shall be let to the lowest
and best responsible bidder, after there has been given opportunity for competitive
bidding as provided for by law or ordinance; provided, however, that said dollar amount
shall not be greater than the maximum amount allowed by State law. The Mayor, if
authorized to contract for the City, shall have the right to reject any and all bids.
No contract shall ever be made which binds the City to pay for personal services to
be rendered for any stated period of time; but all contracts for personal service shall be
restricted to the doing of some particular act or thing, and upon its completion no further
liability shall exist on the part of the City.
Section 19. - Independent Audit.
At the close of each fiscal year, and at such other times as it may be deemed
necessary, the Council shall cause a certified independent audit to be made of all
accounts of the City by a Certified Public Accountant. Such Certified Public Accountant
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, and shall be the
same Certified Public Accountant who performs the quarterly audits during such fiscal
year as provided for in this Charter. Such Certified Public Accountant so selected shall
have no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of the City or any of
its offices, departments, or agencies. Upon completion of the audit, the results thereof
shall be published immediately in the official newspaper of the City and copies placed on
file in the City Secretary's office as a public record and in the public journals of the
Pasadena Public Library.
ARTICLE X. - TAXATION
Section 1. - Department of Taxation.
Page 31
There shall be a Department of Taxation, the head of which shall be the City Tax
Assessor and Collector. The Assessor and Collector, as determined by the City, shall be
responsible for the assessment and collection of all taxes levied by the City of Pasadena
(§§ 6.22, 6.23, 6.24, 6.29, and Sections 26-34 Property Tax Code). The City Tax
Assessor-Collector shall also have such other powers as granted by the Texas
Constitution, the State Property Tax Code and the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances.
The Assessor-Collector shall be a Registered Texas Assessor.
Section 2. - Powers of Taxation.
Taxation procedure for the City of Pasadena shall be governed by the laws of the
State of Texas, and as provided by this Charter and city ordinances not in conflict
therewith.
Section 3. - Assessment of Property for Tax Purposes.
On January 1 of each year, or on any other date prescribed by the laws of Texas,
each person, firm, business, partnership and corporation owning real or personal property
in the City shall be subject to assessment for tax purposes, in accordance with the laws of
Texas.
Section 4. - Levying of Property Taxes.
Annually, the Council shall levy, by ordinance, on all property subject to property
taxation, a property tax, not to exceed the maximum rate allowable by Texas Constitution
and laws, however the maximum tax rate shall not apply to the taxes required to retire
principal and interest on general obligation bonds authorized in accordance with the Laws
of Texas.
Section 5. - Tax Payments.
All property taxes legally due the City shall be paid in legal tender at the office of
the City Tax Assessor-Collector, or the designated depository. All taxes shall become
delinquent February 1 or as required by State Property Tax Code and are subject to
penalty and interest in accordance with the laws of Texas. The ad valorem taxes levied by
the Council shall become due and payable upon approval and shall become delinquent as
provided by the Texas Property Tax Code and shall be subject to such penalties and
interest as are imposed by the Constitution or State Property Tax Code.
Section 6. - Levy, Assessment and Collection of Other Municipal Taxes and Other
Fees.
The Council shall have power by ordinance to levy and collect occupation, license,
franchise, hotel-motel occupancy taxes and other taxes and fees, in a manner not
inconsistent with Texas laws. These taxes and fees shall be collected by the officer as
designated by the Council and local ordinances.
Page 32
Section 7. - Tax Liens and Liability.
All property, real, personal, and mixed, situated in the City on the first day of
January of each year shall stand charged with a special lien in favor of the City from said
date for the taxes due thereon. The liens provided herein shall be superior to all other
liens except liens for State and County taxes, regardless of when such other liens were
created. All persons purchasing any of said property after the first day of January in any
year shall take the same subject to the liens herein provided. In addition to the liens
herein provided, the owner on the first day of January of any year of property subject to
taxation by the City shall be personally liable for the taxes due thereon for such year. The
City shall have power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without
foreclosure, or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and
foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears that the description of any property in the
City assessment rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the City shall have the right
to plead a good description of the property to be assessed, to prove the same, and to
have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien or for personal judgment against the owner for
such taxes.
Section 8. - Arrears of Taxes Offset to Debt Against City.
The City shall be entitled to counterclaim and offset any debt, claim, demand, or
account owed by the City to any person, firm or corporation who is in arrears to the City
for taxes, in the amount of taxes so in arrears, and no assignment or transfers of such
debt, claim, demand, or account after the said taxes are due, shall affect the right of the
City to so offset the said taxes against the same.
Section 9. - Other Rules and Regulations.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by this Charter, the Council shall have the
power to provide by ordinance for the assessment and collection of all taxes, and to make
such rules, regulations, and mode of procedure to enforce the collection by and payment
to the City Tax Assessor and Collector as it may deem expedient, and may provide such
penalties for the failure to pay such taxes as it may deem expedient.
ARTICLE XI. - FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 1. - Inalienability of Control of Public Property.
The right of control and use of the public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys,
parks, public squares, and public places of the City is hereby declared to be inalienable
by the City, except by ordinances not in conflict with the provisions of this Charter. No act
or omission by the Council or any officer or agent of the City shall be construed to grant,
renew, extend, or amend, expressly or by estoppel or implication, any right, franchise, or
easement affecting such public streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, public
squares, public places, and other real property, except as provided in this Charter.
Page 33
Section 2. - Power to Grant Franchise.
The Council shall have the power by ordinance to grant, renew, and extend all
franchises of all public utilities of every character operating within the City and, with
consent of the franchise holder, to amend the same. Provided, however, that no franchise
shall be granted for a term of more than fifty years.
Section 3. - Ordinance Granting Franchise.
Every ordinance granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility
franchise shall be read at two regular meetings of the Council, and shall not be finally
acted upon until thirty days after the first reading thereof. Within five days following each
of the two readings of the ordinance, the full text thereof shall be published one time in the
official newspaper of the City, and the expense of such publication shall be borne by the
prospective franchise holder
Section 4. - Transfer of Franchise.
No public utility franchise shall be transferred by the holder thereof except with the
approval of the Council expressed by ordinance.
Section 5. - Franchise Value Not Allowed.
In fixing reasonable rates and charges for public utility service within the City and in
determining the just compensation to be paid by the City for public utility property which
the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise, nothing shall be included as the
value of any franchise granted by the City under this Charter.
Section 6. - Regulation of Franchise.
Every grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of a public utility franchise,
whether so provided in the ordinance or not, shall be subject to the right of the Council:
(1) To forfeit any such franchise by ordinance at any time for failure of the holder
thereof to comply with the terms of the franchise. Such power shall be
exercised only after written notice to the franchise holder stating wherein the
franchise holder has failed to comply with the terms of the franchise and setting
a reasonable time for the correction of such failure, and shall be exercised only
after hearing and after such reasonable time has expired.
(2) To impose reasonable regulations to insure safe, efficient, and continuous
service to the public.
(3) To require such expansion, extension, enlargement, and improvement of plants
and facilities as are necessary to provide adequate service to the public.
Page 34
(4) To require every franchise holder to furnish to the City, without cost to the City,
full information regarding the location, character, size, length, and terminals of
all facilities of such franchise holder in, over, and under the streets, alleys, and
other public properties of the City, and to regulate and control the location,
relocation, and removal of such facilities.
(5) To collect from every public utility operating in the City such proportion of the
expense of excavating, grading, paving, repaving, constructing, reconstructing,
draining, repairing, maintaining, lighting, sweeping, and sprinkling the streets,
alleys, bridges, culverts, viaducts, and other public places of the City as
represent the increased cost of such operation resulting from the occupancy of
such public places by such public utility, and such proportion of the cost of
such operations as results from the damage to or the disturbance of such
public places caused by such public utility; or to compel such public utility to
perform, at its own expense, such operations as above listed which are made
necessary by the occupancy of such public places by such utility or by damage
to or disturbance of such public places caused by such public utility.
(6) To require every franchise holder to allow other public utilities to use its poles
and other facilities, including bridges and viaducts, whenever in the judgment
of the Council such use shall be in the public interest, provided that in such an
event a reasonable rental shall be paid such owner of the facilities for such
use. Provided further, that inability of such public utilities to agree upon rental
facilities shall not be an excuse for failure to comply with such requirement by
the Council.
(7) (a) To require the keeping of accounts in such form as will accurately reflect the
value of the property of each franchise holder which is used and useful in
rendering its service to the public and the expenses, receipts, and profits of all
kind of such franchise holder.
(b) To examine and audit at any time during business hours the accounts and
other records of any franchise holder.
(c) To require reports on the operation of the utility, which shall be in such form
and contain such information as the Council shall prescribe.
(8) To require that the public utility give notice to any subscriber to its service prior
to the permanent or temporary discontinuance or disruption of such service by
the public utility, except in cases of emergency, and to require that no officer,
agent, servant, or employee of the public utility nor any vehicles or equipment
under their control shall make use of, go upon or across any private property in
the City without first obtaining the permission of the owner or occupant of such
property, except in cases of emergency, and to provide a penalty for the
violation of such requirements.
Page 35
(9) To impose such other reasonable regulations, restrictions, requirements and
conditions as may be deemed necessary or desirable to promote the health,
safety, welfare, or accommodations of the public.
Section 7. - Franchise Records.
Within six months after the effective date of this Charter, every public utility operating in
the City and every owner of public utility franchise within the City shall file with the City
Secretary certified copies of all franchises owned or claimed or under which such utility is
operating in the City of Pasadena. The City shall compile and maintain a public record of
public utility franchises.
Section 8. - Regulation of Rates.
The Council shall have full power after notice and hearing to regulate by ordinance
the rates, charges, and fares of every public utility franchise holder operating in the City,
provided that no such ordinance shall be passed as an emergency measure. Every
franchise holder who shall request an increase in rates, charges, or fares shall have, at
the hearing of the Council called to consider such request, the burden of establishing by
clear, competent, and convincing evidence the value of its investments properly allowable
to service in the City, and the amount and character of its expenses and revenues
connected with the rendering of such service. If, upon such hearing, the Council is not
satisfied with the sufficiency of the evidence so furnished, it shall be entitled to call upon
such public utility for the furnishing of additional evidence at a subsequent date to which
said hearing may be adjourned. No public utility franchise holder shall institute any legal
action to contest any rate, charge, or fare fixed by the Council until such franchise holder
has filed a motion for rehearing with the Council for a specific date setting out each
ground of its complaint against the rate, charge, or fare fixed by the Council, and until the
Council shall have acted upon such motion. Such motion shall be deemed overruled
unless acted on by the Council within a reasonable time, not to exceed ninety days from
the filing of such motion for rehearing; provided that the Council may by resolution extend
such time limit for acting on said motion for rehearing from ninety days to one hundred
eighty days.
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1. - Interim Government.
The present Charter of the City shall continue in force and effect until the first day
of May, 1965, provided, however, upon the adoption of this Charter the provisions hereof
relating to the division of the City into Districts, City general elections, the election of a
Mayor and six Councilmen, qualifications and requirements as candidates and as officers,
and the calling and notice of such general election, first and, if necessary, run-off shall
apply and be effective and shall prevail over comparable provisions in the present
Charter. It is the specific intent of this Section to make the provisions of the Charter
Page 36
applicable and effective in all material respects to the election of a Mayor and six
Councilmen as provided for herein at the first City general election, first, and if necessary,
run-off, held after the adoption of this Charter; and the incumbent Mayor and
Commissioners shall have all of the powers provided in this Charter necessary to
accomplish such results. The new Council elected at such City general election shall have
all of the powers provided in this Charter. All other officers and employees of the City shall
continue in their present offices and employments until appropriate provisions of this
Charter shall be put into effect by ordinance or resolution of the new Council. Such
Council shall, as soon as possible, put this Charter into effect by ordinance or resolution.
The new Council, in carrying out the duties imposed by this Section, may put into effect
the whole, or may put all or a part of this Charter into effect as to particular offices,
departments, or actions of the City government without so providing as to other
departments, offices, or actions of the City. Provided, that this Charter shall go into effect
finally and completely without further action by the Council on August 1, 1965, and
thereupon all offices, employments, powers, actions, and procedures of the City shall be
under and in accordance with this Charter.
The budget adopted for the City for the current fiscal year shall be and become the
budget for the same fiscal year under this Charter, and shall be enforced and followed as
such, subject to the provisions in the preceding paragraph.
Section 2. - Continuation of Government.
Any ordinance in effect at the time this Charter is adopted, and not otherwise in
conflict with this Charter, which refers to some office or employment of the City which
ceases to exist under this Charter, shall continue in force and the powers and duties
therein prescribed shall be the powers and duties of such office or employment which,
under this Charter, succeeds to the same general powers and duties of such office or
employment under the previous Charter. When the term "City Commission" appears in
any ordinance, it shall be construed as "The Council" after the effective date of this
Charter.
Section 3. - Effect of Charter on Existing Law.
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations in force in the City on the
effective date of this Charter, and not in conflict with this Charter, shall remain in force
until altered, amended, or repealed by the Council. All taxes, assessments, liens,
encumbrances, and demands, of or against the City, fixed or established before such
date, or for the fixing or establishing of which proceedings have begun at such date, shall
be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of the
beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this Charter.
Section 4. - Official Oath.
Page 37
All officers of the City shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective
offices, take and subscribe the official oath prescribed in the Constitution of the State of
Texas.
Section 5. - Public Records.
All public records of every office, department, or agency of the City shall be open to
inspection by any citizen at all reasonable times, provided that police records, vital
statistic records, records and files of the Department of Law, and any other records closed
to the public by law, shall not be considered public records for the purpose of this Section.
During normal office hours, any citizen of the City or any duly authorized representative of
the press or other news media shall have the right to examine any such public records
belonging to the City and shall have the right to make copies thereof under such
reasonable rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Council.
Section 6. - Official Newspaper.
The Council shall have the power to contract annually with and, by ordinance or
resolution, designate a public newspaper of general circulation in the City as the official
organ thereof and to continue as such until another is designated, and shall cause to be
published therein all ordinances, notices, and other matters required by this Charter, by
the ordinances of the City, and by the Constitution or Laws of the State of Texas to be
published.
Section 7. - Notice of Claim.
The City of Pasadena shall not be held responsible on account of any claim for
damages or injuries to any person, (whether such damages or injuries resulted in death or
not), or property unless the person making such complaint or claiming such damages or
injuries shall, within six months after the time in which it is claimed such damages or
injuries were inflicted upon such person or property, file with the City Secretary a true
statement as to the nature and character of such damages or injuries, the extent of the
same, and the place where same happened, the circumstances under which it happened,
the conditions causing same, and a detailed statement of each item of damages and the
amount thereof and, if it be for personal injuries, whether resulting in death or not, giving a
list of witnesses, if any, known to affiants who witnessed such accident.
The City of Pasadena shall not be liable to any person for damages caused from
streets, ways, crossings, bridges, culverts or sidewalks being out of repair because of
negligence of said City unless the same shall have remained so for a reasonable time
after special notice in writing is given to the Mayor and City Council.
The City of Pasadena shall not be liable to any person for damages sustained in
any park, playground or public building belonging to said City or because of any
apparatus, furnishings, fixtures or improvements thereon or thereupon situated being
Page 38
defective or out of repair unless the same shall have remained so for a reasonable time
after special notice in writing is given to the Mayor and City Council.
The City of Pasadena shall never be liable to any contractor or other person, firm
or corporation doing work in connection with any street paving, or the opening and
widening of streets, or the building of any drains or storm sewers, or the laying of sanitary
sewers or any other character of public improvement, whereby a part or the whole of the
cost thereof is to be paid for by special assessment, on account of the failure of any
officer of the government or the members of the Council to pass suitable ordinances or
resolutions to take necessary steps to fix liens, or to make said assessments, or to issue
certificates therefor, or to provide for reassessments on account of the invalidity of any
lien attempted to be fixed, or any failure or omission with respect thereto.
Section 8. - Assignment, Execution, and Garnishment.
The property, real and personal, belonging the City shall not be liable for sale or
appropriation under any writ or execution. The funds belonging to the City, in the hands of
any person, firm, or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment, or
sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may
owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owing to any person. Neither the City nor
any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on
any account whatever. The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of
wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors.
Section 9. - Security or Bond Not Required.
It shall not be necessary in action, suit, or proceeding in which the City shall be a
party for any bond, undertaking, or security to be executed in behalf of the City; but all
actions, suits, and proceedings shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond,
undertaking, or security had been given. The City shall have all remedies of appeal
provided by law to all courts in this State without bond or security of any kind. For all the
purposes of such actions, suits, proceedings, and appeals, the City shall be liable in the
same manner and to the same extent as if the bond, undertaking, or security in ordinary
cases had been given and executed.
Section 10. - Remission of Fines and Penalties.
The Council shall have power to remit in whole or in part, on such conditions as it
may deem proper, by a vote of two-thirds of the Council qualified and serving, any fine or
penalty belonging to the City which may be imposed or incurred under any penal
ordinance of the City.
Section 11. - Personal Interest in City Contracts.
Page 39
Procedures related to conflicts of interest and personal interests in City contracts
shall be governed by the laws and definitions of the State of Texas and as provided by
City ordinances not in conflict therewith.
Section 12. - Nepotism.
Nepotism procedures for the City of Pasadena shall be governed by the laws of the
State of Texas and as provided by City ordinances not in conflict therewith.
Section 13. - Limitation on Reimbursement of Expenses.
The Council may authorize the reimbursement of actual and receipted expenses
incurred by any officer or employee of the City while acting in the City's behalf in his
official capacity; provided, the Mayor shall not be entitled to such reimbursements
exceeding One Thousand ($1,000.00) Dollars for each fiscal year and Councilmembers
shall not be entitled to such reimbursements in an amount exceeding Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollars each for each fiscal year. It is specifically provided, however, that such
limitations shall apply only to reimbursed expenses and shall not restrict or limit the
authority of the Council to authorize expenditures by the Mayor or Councilmembers for
such purposes in excess of such amounts prior to the time such expenditures are made.
Section 14. - Mineral Leases on City Owned Property.
No City owned property or any part thereof shall be leased for the purpose of
prospecting for, mining, drilling, or producing oil, gas, or other mineral therefrom unless
such lease agreement specifically provides that the City shall retain a royalty interest
equivalent to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the total production of such oil, gas, or
other minerals therefrom.
Section 15. - Limitations on Contracts.
The Council may award contracts only at regular meetings of the Council except in
the event of grave public emergency or calamity. It is further provided that from the date
of any City general election until the members of the council elected at such election have
duly qualified and taken office, the Council shall not create, make or enter into any
contract for the purchase of materials, supplies, land, or buildings, or for the construction
or repair of any public building or the carrying on of any public work, or professional
services requiring or authorizing any expenditure in excess of State statutory limits for
competitive bidding as set forth by the latest Legislative proceedings of the State of Texas
which creates or imposes on the City any obligation or liability of any nature or character
whatsoever, except in the event of grave public emergency or calamity. It is specifically
provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to contracts lawfully authorized prior
to any City general election or to contracts or other obligations which may hereafter be
lawfully authorized by a vote of the qualified voters of the City, or to contracts made for
the purposes of continuing the normal functions of any regularly established department
of the City. Any and all contracts hereafter made by the City in violation of the terms of
Page 40
this provision shall be void and shall not be enforceable in any court of this State, and the
performance of same and the payment of any money thereunder may be enjoined by any
property tax-paying citizen of the City. All contracts, plans and specifications for public
works and payment and performance bonds made under any contracts, in which the City
is a party of interest shall be made a part of the public records of the City, and a copy of
each such contract, plans and specifications, and payment and performance bonds shall
be delivered to the Pasadena Public Library for filing in its public journals and shall be
kept for that purpose for at least six (6) years from the date of such contract, plans and
specifications, or payment and performance bonds.
Section 16. - Qualifications of Contractors.
All contractors who bid and/or contract with the City for the construction or repair of
public works must meet the bid requirements and possess the qualifications required of
contracts of similar public works by the Highway Department of the State of Texas.
Section 17. - Participation of City Employees or Use of City Equipment in Municipal
Politics.
No officer or employee of the City shall be required to participate in any City
election in behalf of any candidate for Mayor or Councilmember, nor shall any City
equipment be used by or in behalf of any candidate for Mayor or Councilmember.
Section 18. - Health, Life, and Accident Insurance for City Employees.
The City Council shall have the power, exercisable in its discretion, and subject to
such limitations and regulations as it may deem proper to create, operate, amend, and
contract for an insurance plan covering health, life, and accident insurance, or any of
them, for any and all City officers and employees, except members of the Council, and to
pay the premiums therefor.
Section 19. - Publicity of Reports Relating to Municipal Matters.
All reports made by the State of Texas or any of its agencies or departments
concerning the City or any function performed by it shall be read publicly at the first
regular meeting of the Council following receipt of such report.
Section 20. - Violation of Charter Provision or Laws of the State of Texas.
Any willful violation of the provisions of this Charter or of the Laws of the State of
Texas relating to Home Rule Cities shall constitute malfeasance in office, and any officer
or employee of the City guilty thereof shall immediately forfeit his office or position, and
said office or position shall be deemed vacant.
Section 21. - Rearrangement and Renumbering.
Page 41
The Council shall have the power, by ordinance, to renumber and rearrange all
Articles, Sections, and paragraphs of this Charter, or any amendments thereto, as it shall
deem appropriate, and upon the passage of such ordinance, a copy thereof, certified by
the City Secretary, shall be forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing.
Section 22. - Judicial Notice.
This Charter shall be deemed a public act, and shall have the force and effect of
the general law, may be read in evidence without pleading or proof, and judicial notice
shall be taken thereof in all courts and places without further proof.
Section 23. - Construction of Charter.
This Charter shall not be construed as a mere grant of enumerated powers, but
shall be construed as a general grant of power and as a limitation of power on the
government of the City in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a
limitation on the powers of the Legislature. Except where expressly prohibited by this
Charter, each and every power under Article XI, Section 5, of the Constitution of Texas,
which it would be competent for the people of the City of Pasadena to grant expressly to
the City, shall be construed to be granted to the City by this Charter.
Section 24. - Severability Clause.
If any section or part of a Section of this Charter is held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not invalidate or
impair the validity, force, or effect of any other Section or part of a Section of this Charter.
Section 25. - Intergovernmental Relations.
Nothing in this Charter shall be construed as a bar upon the consolidation of City
departments, either with one another or with agencies of government of Harris County or
other political subdivisions within Harris County. Further, nothing in this charter shall be
construed as a bar upon consolidation between the City and the County.
The results of the election at which the Charter was adopted were certified by the
governing body by Resolution No. 1155, passed and approved December 22, 1964.
The results of the election at which the Charter was amended were certified by the
governing body by Ordinance No. 75-44, passed and approved March 11, 1975.
The results of the election at which the Charter was amended were certified by the
governing body by Resolution No. 92-102, passed and approved August 11, 1992.

Code of Ordinances CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted, March 28, 1972 
Effective, May 1, 1972 
____________ 
Code Reproduced through Supplement No. 21 
Published by Order of the City Council, October, 1983 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
This Code is a complete recodification of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, Texas, adopted April 28, 1964, together with ordinances subsequently enacted. Throughout the Code, changes in terminology have been made to reflect the change in form of government effected by adoption of the new Home Rule Charter on December 12, 1964. 
The chapters of the Code are arranged in alphabetical order and the sections within each chapter are appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant provisions of the Charter and of the state law are included. The source of each section indicated in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 17 is 17-14. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 2-4 and 2-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 2-4.1, 2-4.2 and 2-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a fraction after the chapter number; e.g., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12½. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
The index for the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code may be cited as a part hereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Robert D. Ussery, Vice President, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publishers are most grateful to Mr. Charles A. Easterling, City Attorney, and Mr. Russell L. Drake, City Secretary, for their supervision, cooperation and interest during the preparation of this Code. 
April, 1972 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 72-72 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas; Establishing the Same; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing when This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the City Council of the City of Pasadena: 
Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 through 37 and Appendices A and B, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, Texas" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the city council on or before April 13, 1971 to the extent provided in Section 2 hereof. 
Section 2. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 1st day of May, 1972, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before the 13th day of April, 1971, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference thereto are hereby repealed from and after the 1st day of May, 1972. 
Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
Section 4. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), as provided in section 1-7 of such Code. 
Section 5. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, Texas" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
Section 6. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in section 4 of this ordinance and section 1-7 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
Section 7. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city secretary may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city secretary or his duly authorized representative to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such Code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be, from time to time, repealed by the city council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
Section 8. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Pasadena to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 4 of this ordinance. 
Section 9. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this 21st day of March, A.D., 1972. 
APPROVED this 21st day of March, A.D., 1972. 
	/s/ Clyde Doyal, Mayor, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Russell L. Drake, 
      City Secretary, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 	
 	 
	/s/ Charles A. Easterling, 
      City Attorney, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 
 	 
PASSED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this 28th day of March, A.D., 1972. 
APPROVED this 28th day of March, A.D., 1972. 
	/s/ Clyde Doyal, Mayor, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 
 	 
ATTEST: 
/s/ Russell L. Drake, 
      City Secretary, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 	
 	 
	/s/ Charles A. Easterling, 
      City Attorney, 
      City of Pasadena, Texas 
 	 
STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF HARRIS 
CITY OF PASADENA 
I, the undersigned Russell L. Drake, City Secretary of the City of Pasadena, Texas do hereby certify that this is a true and correct copy of ORDINANCE NO. 72-72 passed and approved by the City Council on the 28th day of March, A.D., 1972. The original being on file in the OFFICE OF THE CITY SECRETARY within the City Hall of Pasadena, Texas. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE this 18th day of April, A.D., 1972. 
/s/ Russell L. Drake 
      City Secretary 	
 	 
(SEAL)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, Texas" and may be so cited. Such ordinances may also be cited as the "Pasadena Code." 
(Code 1964, § 1-1) 
Charter reference— Codification of ordinances, Art. II, § 16. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to adopt Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a.  
Sec. 1-2. - Catchlines of sections. 
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1964, § 1-2)  
Sec. 1-3. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following rules and definitions shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the council: 
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly indicated. 
City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Pasadena, in the County of Harris and State of Texas. 
City secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The words "city secretary," "chief of police" or other references to an officer or department shall be construed to mean the city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal officer or department, respectively, of the City of Pasadena, Texas. References to any city officer shall include his duly authorized assistants, deputies, agents and representatives, unless the context indicates to the contrary. 
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had, the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall be counted in computing the time, but the day on which such proceeding is to be had shall not be counted. 
Council. The term "council," or "city council" shall mean the City Council of the City of Pasadena. 
Councilman. The term "councilman" shall mean a member of the city council. 
County. The term "county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Harris, Texas. 
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared. 
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or part of such building or land. 
Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Signature or subscription. The words "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas. 
Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel or causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Similar definitions of state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 10, 23.  
Sec. 1-4. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances, as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number, subsection number, or part thereof, of this Code to be amended. In the event two (2) or more sections, or parts of either, within one chapter of the Code are amended, reference to the chapter number shall be sufficient. The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, it may be expressly stated that such section is an addition to this Code and may specify the chapter to which the same shall belong; provided, however, additions to the Code may be made by an ordinance purporting to amend the Code, where repealing or altering thereof is otherwise made, and the intent that such addition shall be to the Code is clear therefrom. The new matter shall be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1964, § 1-4; Ord. No. 1774, § 1, 2-15-66)  
Sec. 1-5. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies; 
(5)  Any ordinance granting any right or franchise; 
(6)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements and assessments therefor; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 1-6. - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.  
Sec. 1-7. - General penalty for violation of Code; continuing violations. 
Whenever any city ordinance which governs fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, is violated, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, such violation, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine or penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); all other violations of this Code or of any ordinance of the city in which an act is prohibited or made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, other than fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including dumping of refuse, such violation, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00); provided, however, that no penalty shall be greater or less that the penalty provided for the same offense under the laws of the state. Each and every day any violation of this Code or any ordinance shall continue constitutes a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 1-5; Ord, No. 83-352, § 1, 11-22-83; Ord. No. 86-100, § 1, 5-27-86; Ord. No. 90-62, § 1, 4-3-90) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe penalties for violation of Code of Ordinances, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1176a, § 1.  
Sec. 1-8. - Cumulative remedies. 
Any remedy prescribed by this Code shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law.  
Sec. 1-9. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1964, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-10. - Emergency action. 
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to most effectively deal with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure to use ordinary care in such emergency. 
(Ord. No. 85-235, § 1, 12-3-85)  
Sec. 1-11. - Fee for negotiable instrument. 
A charge of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be assessed and collected by the city for the processing of a negotiable instrument given to the City of Pasadena in full or in part payment of any debt for which payment is refused upon presentation by the drawee for any reason, per refusal. Thereafter, the city may, at its option, require that such payment be made by cash, money order, or cashier's check. 
(Ord. No. 94-1, § 1, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 04-156, § 1, 7-27-04)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Disposition of money and property seized under "Controlled Substances Act," § 20-9.2; traffic and transportation commission, § 36-206 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 2-1. - Corporate seal—Adopted; use generally. 
(a)  A corporate seal for the city is hereby adopted, the design of which shall be as follows: 
 
(b)  The corporate seal adopted by this section shall be affixed to all papers, documents and instruments officially executed as the act of the city, and as otherwise required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1691, § 1, 8-24-65; Ord. No. 98-165, § 1, 10-20-98) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to use corporate seal, Art. I, § 2.  
Sec. 2-2. - Same—Custodian. 
The city secretary is hereby exclusively entrusted with the duty and responsibility of custody, use and maintenance of the corporate seal of the city; provided, however, subject to his direct supervision and control, duly constituted agents for, assistants to, and deputies of the city secretary may have custody and use and effect maintenance of true copies or facsimiles of such corporate seal, all of which, duly and lawfully used, shall have the same legal effect. 
(Ord. No. 1691, § 2, 8-24-65)  
Sec. 2-3. - Same—Reproduction on documents, letterheads, etc. 
The design of the corporate seal of the city may, by written order of the mayor or by motion of the city council duly recorded in the minutes thereof, be imprinted or otherwise reproduced on such papers, documents, stones, woods, metals or other materials as so designated. The design of such corporate seal shall appear on all department, division and agency letterheads of the city. The designs referred to in this section may be of varying diameters, depths and other dimensions. 
(Ord. No. 1691, § 3, 8-24-65)  
Sec. 2-4. - Use of facsimile signature of mayor, city controller and building official. 
(a)  The mayor and the city controller are hereby authorized to sign all checks, vouchers, and warrants for the withdrawal of money from the city depository, which are required to be signed by the mayor and countersigned by the city controller, by stamping or imprinting their respective names thereon, or causing the same to be done, by use of machine imprinted facsimile signatures. 
(b)  The building official and his duly authorized representative are hereby authorized to sign any and all occupational or trade licenses issuable by the building official by stamping or imprinting his or their names thereon or causing the same to be done, by use of machine imprinted facsimile signatures. 
(Code 1964, § 2-1; Ord. No. 1692, § 1, 7-27-65; Ord. No. 1769, § 1, 2-22-66) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to enact ordinance similar to subsection (a) above, Art. IX, § 6(o).  
Sec. 2-5. - Bonds for city officers and employees. 
(a)  The director of purchasing, the director of public works, the building official, all clerks employed in the water division of the department of public works, all clerks of the municipal court, the director of parks and recreation, pool managers and assistant pool managers of the parks department and all other city employees who handle city funds shall be covered by a blanket bond in the amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for each of such employees, payable to the city, conditioned upon the faithful performance of their duties and upon any other condition as may be required by the city council. 
(b)  The city controller shall give bond in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) payable to the city as provided for in subsection (a) above. 
(c)  The tax assessor and collector shall be covered by a bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) payable to the city as provided in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  The bonds required by the provisions of this section shall be executed by a solvent commercial surety company authorized to do business in Texas and acceptable to the city council, and the premiums thereon shall be paid by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 2-2; Ord. No. 68-75, § 1, 5-21-68; Ord. No. 68-185, § 1, 11-5-68) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to require official bonds, Art. VI, § 4; bond for city controller, Art. IX, § 1.  
Sec. 2-6. - Authority of mayor to pay certain damage claims. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to pay claims against the city, notice of which has been filed pursuant to Article XII, section 7, of the Charter, in amounts not exceeding two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), upon the written recommendation of the city attorney, based upon a complete investigation of the claim. 
(Ord. No. 70-172, § 1, 8-25-70; Ord. No. 75-92, § 1, 6-3-75)  
Sec. 2-7. - Fixed or capital assets inventory procedure. 
(a)  The mayor shall be responsible for the fixed or capital assets of the city. The mayor may assign such assets or any of them to the various departments of the city as acquired or needed and may authorize the transfer of such property from time to time and from department to department as deemed necessary for the continuance and proper operation of the city's business. 
(b)  To the extent possible, such assets shall be assigned to a particular department of the city, which shall safeguard such assets. 
(c)  The compilation shall be kept current by the addition to the inventory of any item of property purchased of a permanent nature or property purchased with an expectation of its existence for an indefinite period. 
(d)  Assets in inventory shall be numbered and tagged, where practical. 
(e)  Items appearing on the fixed or capital assets inventory that have outlived their usefulness to the city shall be disposed of or sold as provided by ordinance and deleted from the inventory. 
(f)  All compilations of fixed or capital assets inventory shall be transmitted to the city controller and updated by personnel in the finance department. 
(Ord. No. 83-250, § 1, 9-20-83)  
Sec. 2-8. - Data processing or programming. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance relating to data processing or programming or creating any office or agency for the city for the purpose of data processing or programming and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 2-9. - Development board. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect Ordinance No. 1749, adopted January 11, 1966, relating to the City of Pasadena Development Board, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 2-10. - Sale of city land generally. 
(a)  Any land owned by the city, other than land provided for in sections 2-11, 2-12, and 2-13 determined not to be needed for city purposes, shall be advertised and may be sold to the highest bidder upon authorization of the city council, based upon the appraised fair market value of such land. The selling price for such land shall never be for less than the market value fixed by city council, which determination as to such market value will be final. 
(b)  When such land is advertised for sale upon authorization of the city council, any bidder may bid on the basis of all or part of the consideration for such land being the bidder's conveyance to the city of good, clear and merchantable title to land which the city council, prior to the advertisement for bids, has determined is needed by the city for public purposes. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80)  
Sec. 2-11. - Abandonment of streets and alleys. 
Streets or alleys, whether owned in fee or used by easement, may be sold to the abutting owner or owners, in proportion to the underlying fee ownership as exists, or would exist if by easement. When ownership is of the underlying fee, the apportionment shall be determined by city council, which determination will be final. Upon the payment of: 
(1)  A fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46, and 
(2)  The appraised market value of the street or alley, based on not less than one appraisal, or 
(3)  The actual costs to the city based upon a "per square foot" proration of the city's cost plus the cost of any city improvements subsequently made that pertain to the property covered by the street or alley; 
whichever is greater; and, after abandonment of the street or alley, the city will deliver a quitclaim deed to the owners of the fee simple title thereto or abutting owners. The market value of any street or alley shall be fixed by city council, which determination as to such market value will be final. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80; Ord. No. 18-102, § 1, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 2-12. - Abandonment of easement. 
Upon the payment of: 
(1)  A fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46, and 
(2)  The appraised market value of the easement, based on not less than one appraisal, or 
(3)  The actual costs to the city based upon a "per square foot" proration of the city's costs plus the cost of any city improvements subsequently made that pertain to the property covered by the easement; 
whichever is greater; and, after abandonment of the easement, the city will deliver a quitclaim deed to the owners of the fee simple title thereto. The market value of any easement shall be fixed by city council, which determination as to such market value will be final. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80; Ord. No. 18-102, § 1, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 2-13. - Narrow strips of land. 
Fee-owned narrow strips of land, or land so shaped as to be incapable of being used independently, may be sold to the abutting owner or owners, in proportion to the abutting ownership. Apportionment will generally be based on: 
(1)  The projection of existing abutting property lines over such narrow strip, or 
(2)  Street frontage, if any, or 
(3)  Access to the property. 
Said apportionment to be determined by city council which determination will be final. Payment for such land will be based on the appraised market value of the land, such market value to be fixed by city council, which determination as to such market value will be final. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80)  
Sec. 2-14. - Conditions to all sales. 
(a)  Nothing in this section, nor in sections 2-10, 2-11, or 2-12 shall require the city council to accept any bid or offer, or be required to consummate any sale of any land or property interest under such sections. 
(b)  Any applicant under sections 2-11 or 2-12 will be required to make a three hundred dollar ($300.00) deposit to be applied toward the purchase price under section 2-11, or 2-12. The deposit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) will be forfeited to the city in the event the abandonment and sale is not completed. 
(c)  The land and those interests described by subsections 2-11 and 2-12 of this article I may not be conveyed, sold, or exchanged for less than the fair market value of the land or interest unless the conveyance, sale, or exchange is with one or more abutting property owners who own the underlying fee simple. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80; Ord. No. 11-075, § 1, 4-19-11)  
Sec. 2-15. - Sections 2-10 through 2-14 not to be construed as grant of right. 
Sections 2-10 through 2-14 shall never be construed to give any person a vested right to compel the city either to abandon, vacate or dispose of any land or any easement or right therein, or to compel or require that the same be upon any particular or exact term or consideration. 
(Ord. No. 80-266, § 2, 11-18-80)  
Secs. 2-16—2-23. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RULES OF PROCEDURE FOR COUNCIL MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Council meetings, Art. II, § 7 et seq.; council to determine, by ordinance, its own rules and order of business, Art. II, § 8. 
 
Sec. 2-24. - Order of business. 
(1)  Call to order. 
(2)  Roll call of members. 
(3)  Invocation. 
(4)  Pledge of allegiance. 
(5)  Community interest comments in accordance with Chapter 551.0415 of the Government Code; ie. 
• Expression of thanks, congratulations, or condolences; 
• Information regarding holiday schedules; 
• An honorary or salutary recognition of a public official, public employee, or other citizen; 
• A reminder about an upcoming event organized or sponsored by the governing body; 
• Information regarding a social, ceremonial, or community event; and 
• Announcements involving an imminent threat to the public health and safety of people in the political subdivision that has arisen after the posting of the agenda. 
(6)  Citizens wishing to address council. 
(7)  Docketed city council hearings. 
(8)  Presentation of proclamations and awards and community events. 
(9)  Proposals for city business. 
(10)  Presentation of minutes. 
(11)  Presentation of minutes of special meetings. 
(12)  Contract change orders. 
(13)  Progress payments. 
(14)  Finance resolutions/miscellaneous claims and invoices. 
(15)  Personnel changes. 
a.  Regular employees. 
b.  Finance department employees. 
c.  Administration changes in personnel. 
d.  Introduction of new city employees. 
(16)  Mayoral appointments. 
(17)  City boards and commissions. Reports. 
(18)  Reports of committees. 
(19)  Mayor's report. 
a.  Ordinances. 
1.  Final readings. 
2.  First readings. 
3.  Emergency readings. 
4.  Issuance of obligations. 
b.  Resolutions. 
(20)  Other business. 
(21)  Executive session. 
(22)  Adjournment by the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1884, § 1, 12-6-66; Ord. No. 67-1922, § 1, 3-21-67; Ord. No. 2016, § 1, 9-12-67; Ord. No. 96-93, § 1, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 97-207, § 1, 11-12-97; Ord. No. 99-7, § 1, 1-19-99; Ord. No. 01-111, § 1, 7-17-01; Ord. No. 02-179, § 1, 8-6-02; Ord. No. 14-020, § 1(Exh. A), 2-18-14)  
Sec. 2-25. - Agenda. 
For every regular meeting of the city council, an agenda, pursuant to the order of business prescribed in section 2-24, shall be prepared by the city secretary under the direction and control of the mayor; provided, however, the nonavailability to council members of an agenda prior to any regular meeting shall in no way invalidate or impair the force and effect of any mayor or council action at such meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1884, § 1, 12-6-66)  
Sec. 2-26. - Qualified adoption of Robert's Rules of Order. 
(a)  Robert's Rules of Order Revised, a current edition, except where otherwise provided by the City Charter, the laws of the State of Texas, this article, or other ordinance of the city, shall be the rules of order of the city council; provided, however, that failure of the council to observe or act in accord with any applicable rule of order prescribed therein shall in no way operate or work to invalidate, modify or diminish any otherwise lawful action or vote of the council. 
(b)  The following rules will specifically apply to city councilmembers: 
• A member must obtain the floor and be recognized by the presiding officer before beginning to speak. 
• Each member may speak for no more than two (2) minutes on an issue under consideration except that time extensions may be granted by the presiding officer when important to clarify the matter. 
• Debate must be germane (relevant) to the motion. 
• Speakers must address all remarks to the chair; cross talk between members is not allowed. 
• Speakers must be courteous and never attack other members or question the motives of the members. In controversial issues, the discussion must focus on ideas, not personalities. Members must not use inflammatory statements directed at other members of council or any other person. 
(Ord. No. 1884, § 1, 12-6-66; Ord. No. 96-93, § 2, 6-25-96; Ord. No. 14-020, § 2, 2-18-14)  
Sec. 2-27. - Rules of conduct for any person attending meetings of city council or other public meetings held under the auspices of the city government. 
(1)  Any person may address the council regarding any city related matter or agenda item that is relevant to any subject matter of city affairs or business which is within the scope of the authority and legislative functions of the city council. The mayor or any council member shall have the privilege of raising a point of order as to whether the subject matter to be heard and considered as presented by a citizen is germane and relevant to city affairs or business to be considered by council. A speaker may be ruled out of order and denied the opportunity to address council if he or she violates the rule of relevance. 
(2)  Any person wishing to address the council shall first sign the register provided by the city secretary and note the item about which they wish to speak. When the person's name is called they shall have three (3) minutes to address council. 
(3)  In the event a group of people desire to speak on a common issue it is suggested that a spokesperson be chosen for each group. In the event more than one person does speak on each side of an issue a maximum time limit of two (2) minutes per person is allowed. 
(4)  All remarks shall be addressed to council as a whole and no question shall be asked of council or the city staff except through the mayor. 
(5)  No person shall applaud, boo, clap, or otherwise audibly express approval or disapproval of an action being taken that would disturb the meeting. This shall not be interpreted so as to prevent positive public recognition initiated by the mayor or city council. Any person in violation will be removed by security personnel. 
(6)  No person making an appearance before the council shall have in his or her possession at the podium any paper bag, plastic bag, handbag, briefcase, purse, satchel, box, envelope, tape recorder or other container of any sort. 
(7)  Loud, profane, abusive and/or disruptive language is inappropriate and will not be permitted. 
(8)  No person shall brandish, wave or display or cause to be brandished, waved or displayed any sign, placard, poster or banner during a meeting in such a manner as to impede the use of the aisles; interfere with the use of the seating area; or obstruct the view of another or in any other manner disturb or interfere with the orderly conduct of the meeting at any time during which the city council is conducting a meeting. 
(9)  No person shall brandish, wave or display or cause to be brandished any sign, placard, poster or banner or to make statements concerning political campaigns either for or against a political candidate. 
(10)  In order to speak, one must be recognized by the presiding officer and must step to the podium stating his or her name and address. 
(11)  Speakers may not defame or disparage any other persons. 
(12)  No person shall make personal, impertinent, or derogatory remarks or become boisterous during a council meeting. 
(13)  No person in the meeting will be allowed to delay, interrupt, or disrupt the proceedings or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer. 
(14)  Any person in violation of these rules who, after having been advised by the presiding officer of his or her noncompliance, continues to violate the rules shall, at the direction of the presiding officer, be ejected from the meeting. The operation of this provision shall not be construed to preclude any person from prosecution for violation of any applicable criminal law. 
(15)  Any speaker who is found in repeated violation (more than once) of the rules may be denied the opportunity for a twelve-month period to appear and address a meeting of the body before which the repeated violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 00-56, § 1, 4-18-00; Ord. No. 08-63, § 1, 3-11-08; Ord. No. 14-019, § 1(Exh. A), 2-18-14)  
Secs. 2-28—2-38. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERSONNEL[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Classification plan for classified service, § 30-27 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-39. - Department established. 
There is hereby created and established the department of personnel of the city, an executive department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66)  
Sec. 2-40. - Office of director established; appointment and term of director. 
There is hereby created and established the office of director of personnel. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by the city council. The director may serve for a term of one (1) year or until his successor is appointed, confirmed, approved and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66)  
Sec. 2-41. - General powers and duties of director. 
(a)  The director of personnel shall be the head of the department of personnel and of all officers and employees assigned thereto and their duties shall be performed subject to the supervision of the director. In addition to the specific duties prescribed in this chapter and other ordinances of the city, the director of personnel shall perform such other duties as he may be from time to time assigned by the mayor. 
(b)  The director of personnel shall coordinate with the city's wage and job classification consultant in developing a comprehensive wage and job classification proposal for the city and recommend substantive provisions for standard personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations and a complete revision of the civil service ordinances and applicable rules and regulations. It shall be the director's responsibility to continuously administer and study the operation of this chapter and recommend, at least annually to the mayor and the city council, such changes therein as he deems proper. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66)  
Sec. 2-42. - Director designated as director of civil service. 
The director of personnel is hereby declared to be the available officer of the city for designation by the civil service commission as director of the firemen's and policemen's civil service commission. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66) 
Cross reference— Civil service for policemen, § 30-27 et seq.  
Sec. 2-43. - Processing of requests and recommendations as to compensation, leaves and other personnel matters. 
All requests or recommendations relating to rates or amounts of compensation, method of compensation, sick leaves, vacations, leaves of absence, recruitment, hiring or employment, transfers, promotions, demotions, reductions in force, suspensions, resignations and terminations, as the foregoing terms are commonly understood, unless otherwise hereinafter expressly defined, of nonclassified, compensated, appointive personnel, except heads of departments and independent offices of the city and members of the firemen's and policemen's civil service of the city, shall be submitted to the director of personnel for initial action and processing. After processing and investigation, the director shall forward the same to the mayor, along with any written requests, recommendations or comments of any department or office head involved, with the director's written recommendation as to action, if any, to be taken thereon. The director shall particularly note in his recommendations the effect, if any of the proposed personnel action relative to the city wage and job classification and all other applicable city personnel rules, regulations, policies, procedures or practices. He shall also obtain, for transmittal to the mayor, a certification of funds from the city controller for any recommended increase in the compensation rate of a presently employed person or for the supplement of additional personnel. The mayor acquires no authority hereunder as to department of finance personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66)  
Sec. 2-44. - Investigation of personnel inquiries and complaints. 
The director of personnel may receive and investigate such inquiries or complaints of nonclassified, compensated, appointive personnel, outside the city civil service, regarding the matters enumerated in section 2-43, as may be submitted to him. 
(Ord. No. 1781, § 1, 3-22-66)  
Sec. 2-45. - General policies. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect Ordinance No. 67-2047 Adopted October 24, 1967, which ordinance prescribes certain personnel policies and procedures, and such ordinance is hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Secs. 2-46, 2-47. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, adopted April 18, 2006, repealed §§ 2-46, 2-47, which pertained to travel policies—generally, reimbursable expenditures and derived from Ord. No. 68-25, Arts. I, II, 2-20-68; Ord. No. 77-208, § 1, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 84-36, § 1, 3-6-84; Ord. No. 86, 170, § 1, 8-5-86.  
Sec. 2-48. - Wages, salaries and other compensation. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance establishing any wage, salary or compensation plan or otherwise relating to wages, salaries or other compensation of city officers and employees, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 2-49. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Election to participate. 
The city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all of the departments of the city participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, as provided in Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature, as amended, (Article 6243h of Vernon's Civil Statutes of Texas), and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees. 
(Code 1964, § 2-5)  
Sec. 2-50. - Same—Employees included; part-time employees excepted. 
(a)  Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department of this city, except part-time employees, and who is not already a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment, provided such person is then under sixty (60) years of age. 
(b)  Any member, after one year from the effective date of membership, shall be eligible for service retirement who has attained the age of fifty (50) years and has completed twenty-five (25) years of creditable service with this city, or who has attained the age of sixty (60) years and has completed at least ten (10) years of creditable service with participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of this section, or who has become eligible for service retirement under any other applicable provision of Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes. 
(c)  The membership of any member who has completed at least ten (10) years of creditable service with this city and other participating municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of Section XX of Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes shall not terminate because of absence from service. 
(d)  Any person who is an employee of a participating department of this municipality at the effective date of this section but who at the date of his employment was under sixty (60) years of age but did not become a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System because he was then above the maximum age then prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a member of the system at the effective date of this section, unless he has already become a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed for this municipality subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership and prior to the effective date of his membership. Such prior service credit shall be calculated using the same percentage of the base prior service credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or updated service credits in said system for current member employees of this city. 
(e)  The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of this section pursuant to the act governing said system. 
(Ord. No. 73-48, § 1, 2-27-73; Ord. No. 73-273, § 1, 11-6-73; Ord. No. 79-110, § 2, 9-4-79)  
Sec. 2-51. - Same—Rate of employees contributions. 
Effective January 1, 1991, all employees of the city, except part-time employees, who are members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall make deposits to the system at the rate of seven (7) per cent of their compensation, as such term is defined in Section 851.001 of the Government Code of the State of Texas, as the same may be hereafter amended. However, this rate shall not be applied to compensation in excess of the maximum compensation subject to retirement deductions as fixed by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 73-48, § 2, 2-27-73; Ord. No. 73-273, § 2, 11-6-73; Ord. No. 81-222, § 1, 11-17-81; Ord. No. 90-242, § 1, 12-11-90)  
Sec. 2-52. - Same—City contributions. 
For each month of current service thereafter rendered by each of its employees as members of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, the City of Pasadena will contribute to the current service annuity reserve of each such member at the time of his retirement, a sum that is two hundred (200) per cent of such member's accumulated deposits for such month of employment; and said sum shall be contributed from the city's account in the municipality current service accumulation fund. 
(Ord. No. 73-48, § 3, 2-27-73; Ord. No. 73-273, § 3, 11-6-73)  
Sec. 2-52.1. - Same—Eligibility for service retirement. 
From and after the 1st day of January, 1973, any employee of the City of Pasadena, Texas, who has attained the age of fifty (50) years, and who as an employee of this city has completed twenty-five (25) or more years of creditable service for which he is entitled to credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System, and who has been a member of the system for one year or more, shall be eligible for service retirement as provided in subsection 1(b), Section VII of Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended. Any such employee who shall have completed twenty (20) years or more of creditable service as an employee of said city shall continue as a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System despite subsequent absence from service for a period in excess of sixty (60) months, provided he does not withdraw his deposits during such absence, and shall be eligible to retirement upon and after attainment of the minimum age prescribed by the Act above mentioned. 
(Ord. No. 73-48, § 4, 2-27-73; Ord. No. 73-273, § 4, 11-6-73)  
Secs. 2-52.2, 2-52.3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— At the discretion of the editor, § 2-52.2, relative to antecedent service credits and § 2-52.3, relative to special prior service credits, have been deleted as being superseded by provisions deriving from Ord. No. 81-222, § 5, adopted Nov. 17, 1981 and codified as § 2-52.9. The deleted provisions derived from Ord. No. 73-48, §§ 5, 6, adopted Feb. 27, 1973 and Ord. No. 73-273, §§ 5, 6, adopted Nov. 6, 1973.  
Sec. 2-52.4. - Texas Municipal Retirement System—Remittance and certifications to board of trustees. 
The city controller is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by said board under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts of the 50th Legislature of the State of Texas, as amended, and the said city controller is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on behalf of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the city, and the average prior service rendered to the said municipality by each of the employees of the city, and the average prior service compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of the City of Pasadena, Texas, under the provisions of Chapter 75, Acts Regular Session, 50th Legislature, as amended, or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(Ord. No. 73-48, § 7, 2-27-73; Ord. No. 73-273, § 7, 11-6-73)  
Sec. 2-52.5. - Same—Supplemental death benefits fund. 
(a)  The City of Pasadena hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning on the first day of the calendar month following written notification to the system of the adoption of this section, for the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in Section XIX of the TMRS Act (Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended) for each of the city's employees who is a member of said system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided in said Section XIX for any annuitant whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city. 
(b)  The City of Pasadena is hereby authorized and directed to notify the director of the system of adoption of this section, and of the participation of the city in said fund. 
(Ord. No. 79-108, § 1, 9-4-79) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-108, § 1, adopted Sept. 4, 1979, enacted provisions designated § 2-55.4; in order to keep material relating to the state retirement system together, the editor has redesignated said section as § 2-52.5.  
Sec. 2-52.6. - Same—Buy-back allowance. 
(a)  Pursuant to subsection 8 of Section VI of Article 6243h, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow any member of Texas Municipal Retirement System who is an employee of this city on the seventeenth day of November, 1981, who has terminated a previous membership in said system by withdrawal of deposits while absent from service, to deposit with the system in a lump sum the amount withdrawn, plus a withdrawal charge of five (5) per cent of such amount for each year from date of such withdrawal to date of redeposit, and thereupon such member shall be allowed credit for all service to which the member had been entitled at date of termination of the earlier membership, with like effect as if all such service had been rendered as an employee of this city, whether so rendered or not. The city agrees to underwrite and hereby assumes the obligations arising out of the granting of all such credits, and agrees that all such obligations and reserves required to provide such credits shall be charged to the city's account in the municipality prior service accumulation fund. The five (5) per cent per annum withdrawal charge paid by the member shall be deposited to the credit of the city's account in said municipality prior service accumulation fund; and the deposits of the amount previously withdrawn by the member shall be credited to his individual account in the employees saving fund of the system. 
(b)  Paragraph (a) above shall become effective on the seventeenth day of November, 1981, which is a date on or after the date set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 81-222, § 2, 11-17-81) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 81-222, §§ 2—5, adopted Nov. 17, 1981, enacted provisions designated §§ 2-55.3—2-55.7; in order to keep material relating to the state retirement system together, the editor has redesignated said sections as §§ 2-52.6—2-52.10.  
Sec. 2-52.7. - Same—Military service credit. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1982 the city, pursuant to Subchapter F of Chapter 63, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, hereby elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves, during a period in which the United States is or was involved in a state of conflict with foreign forces. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in subsection (b) of Section 63.501 of said Subchapter F, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in that subchapter. 
(b)  In order to establish credit for military service hereunder, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that member's individual account in the employees saving fund), before the first anniversary of the effective date of this section, to wit, January 1, 1982, or before the first anniversary of the date the member becomes eligible to establish the credit (whichever is later) an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by fifteen dollars ($15.00), and the city must contribute an amount equal to the amount required of the member, multiplied by the city's current service matching percentage in effect on the date the member applies for credit hereunder. The city agrees to pay into its account in the municipality accumulation fund all sums which become due hereunder as a result of the granting of such credit. 
(Ord. No. 81-222, § 3, 11-17-81) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-52.6.  
Sec. 2-52.8. - Same—Elected officials membership. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 1982, the city, pursuant to Section 62.107 of Chapter 62, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, hereby elects to provide that persons who hold and are regularly engaged in the performance of duties of an elective office that normally requires actual performance of services of not less than one thousand (1,000) hours a year in a department of this city that participates in the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be and are hereby required to become members of that retirement system, provided that such persons are not ineligible for membership in the system under the applicable age restrictions of Subtitle G of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended. 
(b)  Any person required to become a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System under this section becomes a member of that system on the effective date, to wit, January 1, 1982, the date the person takes office, whichever is later. 
(c)  Any elected official who becomes a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System on the effective date of this section shall be entitled to prior service credit with the system, computed under Section 63.302 of Chapter 63, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended. 
(d)  Subject to the requirements of Section 63.003(c) of Chapter 63, Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, 1925, as amended, this provision shall be and become effective the first day of January, 1982, which is a date on or after the first day of January, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 81-222, § 4, 11-17-81) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-52.6.  
Sec. 2-52.9. - Same—Authorization of updated service credits. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Sections 63.401 through 63.403 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System who has current service credit or prior service credit in said system in force and effect on the first day of January, 1982, by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date has at least thirty-six (36) months of credit service with said system, shall be and is hereby allowed "updated service credit" (as that term is defined in subsection d of Section 63.402 of said title) in an amount that is one hundred (100) per cent of the "base updated service credit" of the member (calculated as provided in subsection c of Section 63.402 of said title). The updated service credit hereby allowed shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit or antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service. 
(b)  In accordance with the provisions of subsection d of Section 63.401 of said Title 110B, the deposits required to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System by employees of the several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after the date aforesaid on the full amount of such person's earnings as an employee of the city. 
(c)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the updated service credits hereby granted shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 81-222, § 5, 11-17-81) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-52.6.  
Sec. 2-52.10. - Same—Increase in retirement annuities. 
(a)  On the terms and conditions set out in Section 64.203 of Title 110B, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, as amended, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases below stated in monthly benefits payable by the Texas Municipal Retirement System to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of this city under current service annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to this city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or increased annuity previously granted to the same person. 
(b)  The amount of annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior and current service annuities on the effective date of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by seventy (70) per cent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December that is thirteen (13) months before the effective date of this section, to wit, January 1, 1982. 
(c)  An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the original annuity was reduced. 
(d)  If a computation hereunder does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed hereby. 
(e)  The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of this city and of its account in the municipality accumulation fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System. 
(f)  Subject to approval by the board of trustees of Texas Municipal Retirement System, the increases in retirement annuities granted hereby shall be and become effective on the first day of January, 1982. 
(Ord. No. 81-222, § 5, 11-17-81) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 2-52.6.  
Sec. 2-53. - Social security for employees—Execution of agreements. 
The city council, acting for and on behalf of the city, shall enter into all necessary agreements with the state department of public welfare for the purpose of securing federal old age and survivor's insurance benefits for city employees, as authorized in federal and state laws. The mayor is hereby appointed as agent of the city council and of the city to execute all necessary agreements and instruments for and in behalf of the city council for such purposes. 
(Code 1964, § 2-9) 
State Law reference— Social security coverage for municipal employees, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 695g.  
Sec. 2-54. - Same—Duties of city controller. 
The city controller is hereby directed to be the person responsible for assessments, collections, payments and reports, as required by the state department of public welfare, or its successor department or other agency, if any, as to these functions of the city regarding social security and federal and state old age and survivor's insurance benefits, under applicable state and federal laws in connection with social security and federal and state old age and survivor's insurance programs. 
(Code 1964, § 2-10; Ord. No. 1777, § 1, 3-8-66)  
Sec. 2-55. - Same—Fund established. 
A sufficient sum of money shall be allocated and set aside from available funds for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of the federal old age and survivor's insurance law, under applicable state and federal statutes, such money so allocated and set aside to be known as the City of Pasadena Social Security Fund, which fund shall be set aside and maintained in the regular city depository. 
(Code 1964, § 2-11)  
Sec. 2-56. - Holidays. 
(a)  The following holidays shall be declared official holidays for city employees. If the holiday falls on Saturday, it will be observed on Friday unless that day is already a holiday, in which case the holiday will be observed the following Monday. If the holiday falls on Sunday, it will be observed on Monday unless that day is already a holiday, in which case the holiday will be observed the preceding Friday. 
New Year's Day 	January 1 
Martin Luther King, Jr. Day 	Third Monday in January 
Good Friday 	Friday, before Easter Sunday 
San Jacinto Day 	April 21 
Memorial Day 	Last Monday in May 
Independence Day 	July 4 
Labor Day 	1st Monday in September 
Veterans' Day 	November 11 
Thanksgiving Day 	Fourth Thursday and following 
 Friday in November 
Christmas Eve 	December 24 
Christmas Day 	December 25 
 
All employees shall be given one-half day off on New Year's Eve if it falls on a work day. 
(b)  As many employees as possible shall be given each holiday off without loss of pay. All regular employees, except employees of the police department, fire department dispatchers, and utility plants, required to work on a holiday, which is a work day, shall, in addition to their regular pay for that day, be paid their regular rates for the actual time worked. Holiday time shall be considered actual time worked for pay purposes. 
(c)  When the holiday and regular day off occur on the same day, those employees scheduled off-duty on that day shall be entitled to additional pay or another day off. 
(d)  Part-time employees shall be paid their regular rates on a holiday only if required to work. No payment shall be allowed any employee for holiday work not specifically authorized by a department head. 
(e)  An employee who is absent without authorized leave on the day immediately preceding or following a holiday shall lose pay for the holiday as well as pay for that day. 
(f)  When the city council declares a special holiday, it shall be observed as provided above. 
(g)  Employees wishing to observe national or religious holidays not listed herein shall at their option be given time off without pay or have the time charged to their vacation. 
(Ord. No. 72-243, § 1, 9-5-72; Ord. No. 74-112, § 1, 6-4-74; Ord. No. 76-176, § 6.4, 9-21-76; Ord. No. 77-79, § 1, 4-26-77; Ord. No. 78-91, § 1, 6-20-78; Ord. No. 79-51, § 1, 5-1-79; Ord. No. 84-294, § 1, 11-27-84; Ord. No. 02-123, § 1, 5-28-02)  
DIVISION 2. - TRAVEL AND AUTHORIZATION AND EXPENSE POLICY GUIDE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 06-84, § 1, adopted April 18, 2006, added new provision which have been designated by the editor as §§ 2-57—2-66.1. 
 
Sec. 2-57. - Purpose of the guide. 
To protect the interest of the city and insure like treatment for all, uniform policies are established to govern expense allowances to be granted to city employees and city officials who travel out of the city on city business for public purposes. The representative of the city traveling is responsible for justifying their expenses adequately and fully to the satisfaction of the city controller within the limits set out in this Travel and Authorization and Expense Policy Guide and City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-58. - Travel authorization. 
All out-of-the-city travel at the expense of the city shall be made only on authorization of the department head or direct supervisor. Before making a trip, the city official or employee must submit a "Travel Advance and Expense Report" form on which the purpose of the trip, destination, times and dates of the departure and return, and estimates of the cost must be stated. (See section 2-66.1) 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-59. - Advance payments. 
City officials and employees will be allowed to request advance payments on estimated expenses to finance travel on city business for public purposes. Advance should be requested two (2) weeks before departure date however the advance will not be released before seven days prior to date of function. The expenditure will be charged to the accounting period that the seminar or business event takes place unless it benefits the city or if question of seating availability. Upon review, the city department head or direct supervisor may authorize advance payment of the estimated amount to the official or employee. Some type of supporting documentation, brochure, seminar form, must be attached to advance request. When advance payments for travel expenses, etc. are made, the reimbursement procedure, as stated in section 2-62, must still be followed. Advancing money for travel expense does not constitute approval for the expenses of the entire amount of advanced, as all expenses must be for public purposes and must have itemized documentation except as provided in this document. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-60. - Expenses approved for reimbursement. 
The following list of expense classifications is for information and guidance in determining which expenses are appropriate and reasonable when traveling on city business. The list is intended as a guide and is not necessarily all-inclusive. 
Items specifically prohibited include the purchase of personal items and alcoholic beverages. Prohibited also are the expenses of the official's or employee's family who accompany him/her on a trip. 
Officials and employees are expected to show good judgment about travel expenses and have proper regard for economy in conducting business away from the City of Pasadena. 
(a)  Transportation: The least expensive air fare (advance purchase, non-refundable tickets) will be considered standard air travel. For travel beyond a two hundred fifty-mile radius of the city, only transportation by air will be approved, except as provided below. It is the city's policy that air travel be used whenever possible to eliminate the lost time which is otherwise involved. Lodging will not be approved for traveling time in excess of one (1) day if the employee chooses to use personal vehicle. The use of a personal vehicle for a trip exceeding the two hundred fifty-mile radius by two (2) or more personnel traveling together, where the combined air fares would greatly exceed the cost of travel time (salaries) and mileage expense, will be an exception to this subsection, when the use of such private vehicle is approved by the department head or direct supervisor. 
When two (2) or more officials or employees are traveling by personal automobile to the same destination on city business, they are encouraged to car pool. 
The use of personal automobiles for travel may be approved when the convenience of the city is served and when the convenience of the official or employee is served. When personal automobiles are approved for the convenience of the city, reimbursement will be at the rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service using the most current "Texas Mileage Guide" on the internet at http://www.window.state.tx.us/comptrol/texastra.html to determine mileage between cities. The same mileage reimbursement rate will be allowed between Pasadena and a Houston airport for officials and employees (excluding employees who receive a monthly automobile allowance or the use of a city vehicle) using personal automobiles to reach the airport for air travel. Parking fees will also be allowed if the employee must park his/her car during the duration of his/her official leave of absence (a receipt is necessary). 
Travel in city vehicles may be approved when circumstances warrant it. When such travel is approved, purchase of gasoline, oil, other routine supplies, and emergency repairs for the vehicle will be allowed excluding car washes. The notation "city vehicle used" must be written on the travel advance and expense report. All itemized receipts for such payments must be furnished to obtain reimbursements. 
When air is used, expenses for local transportation, such as taxicab fare, will be allowed whenever such transportation is necessary for conducting city business. Itemized receipts are necessary to receive reimbursement. 
Car rentals will not be approved unless it can be demonstrated that rental is essential to the purpose of the trip and/or is more cost effective than other ground transportation alternatives. Approval must be received prior to departure and nothing larger than an intermediate car will be reimbursed, compact recommended depending on number of travelers. 
(b)  Lodging: Expenses will be allowed for adequate lodging. Hotel accommodations should be suitable to the purpose of the trip. The benchmark to review reasonableness of reimbursement will be the amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Service under the high-low substantiation method. (See section 2-66) Itemized receipts for lodging must be provided to obtain reimbursement. Refer to incidental expenses (Item h) for other charges incurred in addition to lodging costs. 
(c)  Meals and tips: Meals and incidental expenses will be reimbursed based upon itemized receipts or per diem rate may be used. Reimbursement will not exceed the per diem rate. It should be noted, no receipts are needed if the per diem rate is used for meals and tip reimbursement. The benchmark to review reasonableness of reimbursement will be the amount allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. (See section 2-66) 
(d)  Telephone: Reimbursement will be allowed for long distance telephone calls needed for city business only. 
(e)  Registration fees: Fees charged for registration at any convention or meeting are allowed for reimbursement or if possible pay for in advance with the procurement cards or city check. A receipt or some proof of the fee, such as a copy of the conference program setting forth the fee rate, must be provided with the expense report. Payment for the registration fees should normally be in the same fiscal year as the convention or meeting except under extreme circumstances, handled on case by case bases. 
(f)  Lodging, meals, and travel time when traveling by personal automobile: In instances where use of personal automobile for travel is allowed for the convenience of the official and employee, lodging, meals, and other expenses will be allowed on the same basis as if the official or employee traveled by air. The employee will charge to the city only the time that they would normally be at work. All time used in excess will be charged to vacation or accumulated compensatory time. 
(g)  Other methods of reimbursement: If the city is to be reimbursed for the official's or employee's travel expenses by another government or agency, the official or employee may use the travel policy from that government or agency for reimbursement of his/her travel expenses. A copy of the travel policy for that government or agency must be attached to the official's or employee's expense report. Also, officials or employees from other governments or agencies working with the city through joint task force agreements may use the travel policy of their government or agency. A copy of the travel policy for that government or agency must be attached to the expense report. 
(h)  Incidental expenses: Incidental expenses include, but are not limited to fees and tips for services, such as baggage handlers excludes waiter which is included in the meal per diem. It does not include expenses for laundry, cleaning and pressing of clothing, movie rental, maid services, and snacks. Note: Laundry and cleaning and pressing of clothing will be reimbursed if stay is in excess of five (5) working days. 
(i)  Non-allowable expenses: The city will not reimburse officials or employees for in-hotel pay television and videos, health clubs and spas, and alcoholic beverages. 
(j)  Spouse/family travel: When accompanied by a family member, an official or employee shall pay all incremental costs related to having the member along on the trip. Examples of incremental costs include the difference in lodging cost between single and double occupancy and all meals and incidental costs of the family. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-61. - Travel advance and expense report. 
Any official or employee traveling on city business shall complete the "travel advance and expense report" in which a detail record of his/her expenses must be stated. All items must be supported by itemized receipts attached to the report unless specifically exempted by this policy. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-62. - Reimbursement. 
To be reimbursed for travel expenses, the official or employee must sign, have his/her department head or direct supervisor approve his/her "travel advance and expense report", and submit it to the controller's office as soon as possible; but in no event later than fifteen (15) days after returning from the trip. No reimbursement will be made until the "travel advance and expense report" has been approved by the department head, city controller, and mayor. The department head shall check for reasonableness and the city controller shall review the expenses and check the accuracy of transportation costs and time covered. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-63. - Settlement of advance payments. 
If an official or employee has drawn expense money in advance, a settlement must be made on the basis of actual expenses and/or approved Internal Revenue Service per diem rates and the unused balance promptly deposited with the city controller. All expenditure reports must be filed with the controller's office within fifteen (15) days after the travel's return. Noncompliance will subject the traveler to a payroll deduction for funds advanced. If actual expenses exceed the estimate, upon approval of the mayor, the employee will be reimbursed by the city. Again, it is emphasized that when advance payments are made, they do not constitute approval to spend this amount. All expenses must be justified and documented. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-64. - Same day travel clarifications. 
The travel policy does not apply to same day travel to and return from any location. In these cases, officials and employees do not use the travel advance and expense report form. 
(1)  Mileage reimbursement. Reimbursement for mileage can be received by completing a mileage report form (see attached) and obtaining reimbursement from petty cash or by completing a cash payment requisition and attaching the mileage report form. The date, beginning and ending mileage, total mileage, and purpose of trip must be shown on the document used for reimbursement. If the official or employee uses a personal automobile, reimbursement for mileage will be at the "standard mileage rate" allowed by the Internal Revenue Service. Mileage should be based from City Hall to destination unless route from home is closer. The mileage reimbursement rate will be updated to remain consistent with the Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rate. 
(2)  Other expense reimbursement. For any other expenses (parking, etc. including meals) that the official/employee needs reimbursement for they should complete a cash payment requisition form and he/she must have a receipt and a written explanation of the city purpose of the expense. It should be noted that meals will be reimbursed for same day travel to and return from any location only if prior approval is obtained from the employee's direct supervisor. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-65. - Mileage reimbursement and official mileage guide. 
The mileage reimbursement rate for January thru August 2005 is 40.5 cents per mile and for September thru December 2005 is 48.5 cents per mile. Effective January 1, 2006 the mileage reimbursement rate will be 44.5 cents per mile. The mileage reimbursement rate will be updated to remain consistent with the Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rate. 
When personal automobiles are approved for the convenience of the city, reimbursement will be at the rate allowed by the Internal Revenue Service using the most current "Texas Mileage Guide" on the internet at http://www.window.state.tx.us/comptrol/texastra.html to determine mileage between cities. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-66. - Internal Revenue Service per diem rates. 
The standard ("low") reimbursement for 2006 (effective October 1, 2005) is forty-five dollars ($45.00) for meals which includes tips per day. See below for maximum ("high") per diem rates. The high/low reimbursement rates will be updated to remain consistent with the Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rate. 
The attached Publication 1542 Table 2 per diem rates is to be used for the benchmark for reimbursement for city travel away from home for lodging and meals for maximum ("high") per diem rates. The reimbursement rate will be updated to remain consistent with the Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rates. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06) 
TABLE 2 
LOCALITIES ELIGIBLE FOR $226 ($58 M&IE) 
PER DIEM AMOUNT UNDER THE 
HIGH-LOW SUBSTANTIATION METHOD 
(EFFECTIVE OCTOBER 1, 2005) 1, 2 
Note: The standard ("low") rate of (one hundred forty-one dollars ($141.00) (ninety-six dollars ($96.00) for lodging and forty-five dollars ($45.00) for M&IE) applies to all locations within the continental United States (CONUS) not specifically listed below or encompassed by the boundary definition of a listed point. 
	Per Diem Locality 	Effective date of 
State 	Key City 	County and/or Other Defined Location 	$226 Rate 
AZ 	Phoenix, Scottsdale 	Maricopa 	1/1—3/31 
CA 	Napa 	Napa 	All year 
	San Diego 	San Diego 	All year 
	San Francisco 	San Francisco 	All year 
	Santa Monica 	City limits of Santa Monica 	All year 
CO 	Aspen 	Pitkin 	12/1—3/31 
	Crested Butte, Gunnison 	Gunnison 	1/1—4/30 
			12/1—12/31 
	Silverthome, Breckenridge 	Summit 	1/1—3/31 
			12/1—12/31 
	Steamboat Springs 	Routt 	1/1—3/31 
			12/1—12/31 
	Telluride 	San Miguel 	1/1—4/30 
			10/1—12/31 
	Vail 	Eagle 	1/1—3/31 
			12/1—12/31 
DC 	Washington, DC *(also the cities of Alexandria, Fairfax, and Falls Church, and the counties of Arlington, Fairfax, and Loudoun, in Virginia; and the counties of Montgomery and Prince George's in Maryland) 		All year 
FL 	Key West 	Monroe 	All year 
	Miami 	Miami-Dade 	1/1—4/30 
	Naples 	Collier 	2/1—3/31 
	Palm Beach 	Palm Beach (also the cities of Boca Raton, Delray Beach, Jupiter, Palm Beach Garden, Palm Beach Shores, Singer Island, and West Palm Beach) 	2/1—3/31 
IL 	Chicago 	Cook, Lake 	1/1—6/30 
			9/1—12/31 
LA 	New Orleans 	Orleans, St. Bernard, Jefferson, and Plaquemines Parishes 	1/1—5/31 
			10/1—12/31 
MA 	Boston, Cambridge 	Suffolk; City of Cambridge 	All year 
	Martha's Vineyard 	Dukes 	7/1—8/31 
	Nantucket 	Nantucket 	6/1—8/31 
MD 	Counties of Montgomery and Prince George's 		All year 
	Baltimore 	Baltimore; Baltimore City 	All year 
	Cambridge, St. Michaels 	Dorchester, Talbot 	6/1—8/31 
	Ocean City 	Worcester 	6/1—9/30 
ME 	Bar Harbor 	Hancock 	7/1—8/31 
NH 	Conway 	Carroll 	7/1—8/31 
NJ 	Cape May, Ocean City 	Cape May 	7/1—8/31 
NY 	Floral Park, Garden City, Glen Cove, Great Neck, Roslyn 	Nassau 	All year 
	Lake Placid 	Essex 	7/1—8/31 
	Manhattan 	Boroughs of Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx, and Staten Island 	All year 
	Riverhead, Ronkonkoma, Melville, Smithtown, Huntington Station, Amagansett, East Hampton, Montauk, Southampton, Islandia, Commack, Medford, Stony Brook, Hauppauge, Centereach 	Suffolk 	All year 
	Saratoga Springs, Schenectady 	Sratoga, Schenectady 	7/1—8/31 
	Tarrytown, White Plains, New Rochelle, Yonkers 	Westchester 	All year 
PA 	Philadelphia 	Philadelphia 	All year 
RI 	Jamestown, Middletown, Newport 	Newport 	5/1—10/31 
	Providence 	Providence 	All year 
UT 	Park City 	Summit 	1/1—3/31 
			12/1—12/31 
WA 	Seattle 	King 	All year 
 
1 Transition rule. A payor who uses the high-low substantiation method in Table 2 for an employee during the first nine (9) months of calendar year 2006 must continue to use the high-low substantiation method for the remainder of calendar year 2006 for that employee. For travel on or after October 1, 2006, and before January 1, 2007, the payor may continue to use the rates and high-cost localities published in Table 2 or the updated rates and high-cost localities published in the revenue procedure that supersedes Revenue Procedure 2005-67, as long as those rates and localities are used consistently during this period for all employees reimbursed under this method. See Transition Rules under How to Use Per Diem Rate Tables for an example. 
2 Revenue Procedure 2005-67 in Internal Revenue Bulletin No. 2005-42. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
Sec. 2-66.1. - Travel advance and expense report and mileage report forms. 
CITY OF PASADENA 
Travel Advance and Expense Report 
Department: 				Date: 	
Low Orgn No.: 				Vendor # 	
Account No.: 				Post to 001-12305 	
City Controller Pay to: 
Purpose of Trip: 
Destination 	Departure Date 	Return Date 
	Travel Advance: 		Expense Report 	
Expenses 	# of days 	Price 	Total 	# of days 	Price 	Total 
Transportation 						
 (Ticket or mileage) 						
Meals: Breakfast 
Lunch 
Dinner 						
Lodging 						
Registration 						
Tips 						
Phone Calls 						
Car Rental 						
Car Storage/parking 						
Taxis 						
Other Receipts attached 						
TOTALS 						
AMOUNT OF ADVANCE: 						
BALANCE DUE TRAVELER: 						
BALANCE DUE CITY: 				RECEIPT NO: 
	TRAVEL ADVANCE 			EXPENSE REPORT 
Requested by: 			Submitted by: 			
Approved by: 			Approved by: 			
	Department Head 		Department Head 	
Funds available: 			Audited by: 			
	City Controller 		City Controller 	
Approved by: 			Approved by: 			
	Mayor 		Mayor 	
 
No later than fifteen (15) days after returning from trip, copy of this travel advance requisition with the receipts supporting the actual expenses must be turned in to the finance department. 
MILEAGE REPORT 
*Please turn this form in with your Cash Payment Requisition. 
Date 	Beginning 
Odometer Reading 	Ending 
Odometer reading 	Total Miles 	Purpose of trip 
				
				
				
				
		Total Miles _____ 		
 
Mileage Reimbursement Policy: 
If you use your personal vehicle while on city business it is reimbursable at the IRS approved rate: Mileage should be calculated from City Hall to your destination and back to City Hall. Travel from your home to your work site may be reimbursed only for travel other than your regular schedule work hours or work days (i.e. call out or call back). Travel to and from your home during regular work hours is commuting and is a personal expenditure not subject to reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 06-84, § 1, 4-18-06)  
ARTICLE IV. - CITY SECRETARY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 79-1, adopted Jan. 16, 1979, repealed §§ 2-67—2-70, pertaining to the city secretary, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted similar provisions codified as new §§ 2-67—2-70. Former Art. IV derived from Ord. No. 1760, § 1, adopted Feb. 1, 1966; Ord. No. 1797, § 1, adopted April 5, 1966. 
 
Sec. 2-67. - Office created. 
The department of the city secretary is hereby created and re-created in furtherance of Article II, Section 6 of the City Charter. The city secretary shall be the head of the department and shall be appointed by the city council, upon recommendation of the mayor, and shall serve at the pleasure of the council. 
(Ord. No. 79-1, § 2, 1-16-79)  
Sec. 2-68. - Compilation, printing, etc., of council agenda, and agendas and minutes of meeting of boards, commissions, etc. 
It shall be the duty of the city secretary to compile, prepare, print or reproduce and distribute copies of the agendas of all regular and special meetings of the city council, and the agendas and minutes of meetings of such commissions, boards, agencies, offices and departments of the city as the city council may, from time to time, direct. The city secretary shall furnish two (2) copies of the minutes of all council meetings to the city library within thirty (30) days after their approval; and the copies of the minutes of the council shall become and be maintained as permanent public records. 
(Ord. No. 79-1, § 2, 1-16-79)  
Sec. 2-69. - Duties with respect to ordinances and other official documents of council. 
The city secretary shall see that the original or master, as the case may be, of all ordinances, orders, resolutions, notices and other official documents of the city council are properly subscribed, recorded, filed, and, as required by law or the instruction of city council, posted or published. 
(Ord. No. 79-1, § 2, 1-16-79)  
Sec. 2-70. - Charges for copies of public records. 
(a)  For reproductions of a noncertified public record supplied to a requesting party the city secretary shall collect the most current fee(s) established or recommended by the state purchasing and general services commission, its successor department or other applicable state agency for the particular type of public record requested. 
(b)  For reproductions of certified public records supplied to a requesting party the city secretary shall collect the sum of fifty cents ($0.50) per reproduced sheet of such copy from the person ordering the same. 
(c)  The city council may by resolution adopted pursuant hereto, prescribe different charges for the sale of official documents and public records reproduced in pamphlet, book or other bound form. Such charges shall be based on the actual cost of providing the particular public record to the requesting party. 
(d)  All moneys collected under this section shall be nonrefundable, promptly deposited in a city depository, and shall be the sole property of the city. 
(e)  The governments of the United States of America, the State of Texas, Harris County, the Pasadena Independent School District, and their departments and agencies and the departments, offices and agencies of the city shall not be charged for copies of public records issued hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 79-1, § 2, 1-16-79; Ord. No. 89-129, § 1, 8-8-89) 
Cross reference— Fee for tax certificates and copies of tax records, § 34-4; charges for copies of official accident reports and accident photographs, § 36-24.  
Secs. 2-71—2-83. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 74-67, enacted April 2, 1974, repealed Art. V, §§ 2-84—2-88 and 2-96—2-108, pertaining to the department of public works. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 74-67 enacted a new Art. V, §§ 2-84—2-88 and 2-95—2-98 as herein set out. Former Art. V was derived from: Ord. No. 1681, §§ 1, 2, 4-1—4-6, 4-8—4-11, 5, 6, 6-8-65; Ord. No. 17-10, § 1, 9-14-65; Ord. No. 1718, § 1, 10-12-65; Ord. No. 71-177, § 1, 6-22-71. 
 
Sec. 2-84. - Created. 
There is hereby created and recreated within the municipal government of the city a department to be known as the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-85. - Office of director created; appointment and term. 
There is hereby created and recreated the office of director of public works. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by city council; and he shall serve subject to removal as provided by the city charter. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-86. - Director to be head of department; general powers and duties. 
The director shall be head of the department of public works and all officers and employees assigned thereto and their duties shall be performed subject to the supervision of the director. In addition to the specific powers and duties prescribed by this article, the director shall engage in such other executive functions and perform such other duties as are assigned by the mayor or by ordinance to the department or one of its divisions. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-87. - Divisions created. 
There are hereby created and recreated in the department of public works the following divisions and subdivisions: 
(1)  Public works administration—410 
(2)  Permit—442 
(3)  Sanitation—450 
(4)  Sanitary landfill—451 
(5)  Street and bridge—452 
(6)  Wastewater collection—713 
(7)  Wastewater plants—714 
(8)  Wastewater maintenance—715 
(9)  Water distribution—716 
(10)  Water production—717 
(11)  Water billing—718 
(12)  Meter reading—719 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74; Ord. No. 75-93, § 2, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 77-189, § 1, 10-11-77)  
Sec. 2-88. - Classification titles; salary grades; numbers, career codes. 
There shall exist in the department of public works the following classification titles, salary grades, numbers and career codes, to wit: 
Classification 	Number 	Grade 
(1) PUBLIC WORKS ADMINISTRATION—410 
Director 	1 	26 
Assistant director 	1 	18 
Engineer II 	1 	18 
Engineer I 	1 	16 
Party chief 	2 	10 
Inspector 	3 	10 
Rodman 	4 	4 
Contract administrator 	1 	9 
Secretary II 	1 	8 
Secretary I 	1 	6 
Draftsman 	3 	12 
Clerk II 	1 	3 
Chief inspector 	1 	12 
(2) PERMIT—442 
Building official 	1 	20 
Assistant building official 	1 	15 
Inspector 	1 	12 
Sign inspector 	1 	12 
Electrical inspector 	1 	12 
Plumbing inspector 	1 	12 
Building inspector 	1 	12 
Air conditioning inspector 	1 	12 
Plan checker 	1 	10 
Office manager 	1 	8 
Secretary I 	1 	6 
Clerk II 	1 	3 
(3) SANITATION—450 
 
	Number 	Grade 	Career 	Code 
Superintendent 	1 	17 	CS 	E 
Assistant superintendent 	1 	14 	CS 	E 
Inspector 	2 	09 	CS 	E 
Accounting clerk II 	1 	06 	CS 	
Clerk II 	1 	03 	CS 	
Operator I 	5 	06 	CS 	
Semiskilled laborer 	18 	05 	CS 	
Laborer II 	38 	04 	CS 	
 
Classification 	Number 	Grade 
(4) SANITARY LANDFILL—451 
Superintendent 	1 	14 
Foreman 	1 	12 
Operator II 	6 	8 
Semi-skilled laborer 	5 	5 
Laborer II 	2 	4 
(5) STREET AND BRIDGE—452 
Superintendent 	1 	14 
Assistant superintendent 	1 	12 
Foreman 	2 	9 
Operator II 	6 	8 
Operator I 	6 	6 
Crewleaders 	4 	9 
Semi-skilled laborer 	18 	5 
Laborer I 	21 	2 
(6) WASTEWATER COLLECTION—713 
Supervisor 	1 	14 
Assistant supervisor 	1 	12 
Water abatement officer 	1 	11 
Foreman 	8 	8 
Equipment operator II 	1 	8 
Semi-skilled laborer 	9 	5 
Laborer I 	17 	2 
(7) WASTEWATER PLANTS—714 
Superintendent 	1 	17 
Supervisor 	1 	14 
Lab technical 	1 	10 
Chief operator 	3 	10 
Operator II 	5 	8 
Operator I 	3 	6 
Semi-skilled laborer 	1 	5 
Laborer I 	4 	2 
(8) WASTEWATER MAINTENANCE—715 
Maintenance foreman 	1 	11 
Mechanic II 	3 	9 
Mechanic I 	3 	6 
(9) WATER DISTRIBUTION—716 
Supervisor 	1 	14 
Crew foreman II 	5 	8 
Equipment operator II 	1 	8 
Semi-skilled laborer 	3 	5 
Laborer I 	13 	2 
(10) WATER PRODUCTION—717 
Superintendent 	1 	17 
Maintenance foreman 	1 	11 
Secretary I 	1 	6 
Chief operator 	1 	10 
Operator II 	3 	8 
Operator I 	4 	6 
Mechanic II 	3 	9 
Mechanic I 	3 	6 
Laborer I 	2 	2 
(11) WATER BILLING—718 
Supervisor 	1 	11 
Assistant supervisor 	1 	8 
Accounting clerk II 	1 	
Clerk II 	6 	3 
(12) METER READING—719 
Supervisor 	1 	11 
Service foreman 	2 	9 
Serviceman 	3 	8 
Meter repairman 	4 	6 
Meter reader 	8 	6 
 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74; Ord. No. 74-150, § 2, 7-23-74; Ord. No. 75-93, § 3, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 77-189, § 1, 10-11-77; Ord. No. 77-236, § 2, 12-20-77; Ord. No. 81-62, § 1, 3-24-81)  
Sec. 2-89. - Duties with respect to collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
The director shall have charge of, and be responsible for the collection and disposal of garbage and refuse. 
(Ord. No. 77-189, § 1, 10-11-77)  
Secs. 2-90—2-94. - Reserved.  
Sec. 2-95. - Records; custody of property and return of same upon leaving. 
The director shall procure and use, at the cost and as the property of the city, suitable record volumes for statements and drawings of all city public works. He shall have full custody and control of and be accountable for all property pertaining to his office and shall receipt for them by inventory and return them to the mayor or his successor on leaving office. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-96. - Maps, designs, etc., to be property of city. 
All maps, plans, designs, profiles, field notes, estimates and other memoranda of surveys and other professional work made by the director or under his direction or control, during his incumbency in office, shall be the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-97. - Salary determination. 
The exact amount of salary within the salary range specified herein which shall be paid to the holder of the position hereby created, shall be determined by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-98. - Duties and responsibilities of various positions. 
The holder of the position herein created shall have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to him by the director of the department of public works and the mayor of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 74-67, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Secs. 2-99—2-104. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V½. - DEPARTMENT OF MAINTENANCE SERVICES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 74-68, enacted April 2, 1974, amended this Code by adding Art. Va, §§ 2-105—2-113. Said provisions have been redesignated as Art. V½ by the editors in order to maintain Code format. Sections 3 and 5 of said Ord. No. 74-68 have been codified as § 2-114 at the discretion of the editors. 
 
Sec. 2-105. - Department created. 
There is hereby created and recreated within the municipal government of the city a department to be known as the department of maintenance services. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-106. - Office created; appointment and term. 
There is hereby created and recreated a director of maintenance services. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by the city council; and he shall serve subject to removal as provided by city charter. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-107. - Director to be head of department; general powers and duties. 
The director shall be the head of the department of maintenance services and all officers and employees assigned thereto whose duties shall be performed subject to the supervision of the director. In addition to the specific powers and duties prescribed by this article, the director shall engage in such other executive functions and perform such other duties as are assigned by the mayor and city council by ordinance to the department or one of its divisions. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-108. - Divisions created. 
There are hereby created and recreated within the department of maintenance services, the following divisions: 
(1)  Maintenance services administration—610 
(2)  Communications—611 
(3)  Switchboard—612 
(4)  Warehouse—631 
(5)  Electrical—642 
(6)  Garage—654 
(7)  Building and equipment—655 
(8)  Janitorial—656 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74; Ord. No. 77-190, § 1, 10-11-77)  
Sec. 2-109. - Sale of city equipment; collection of fees. 
The department of maintenance services of the City of Pasadena is hereby authorized to sell, from time to time, as the director may deem advisable: 
(a)  Any scrap metal which may accumulate upon city property either: 
(1)  By public auction as authorized by city council, or 
(2)  If the value of such scrap is under twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) by private sale at fair market value, such values and sale to be verified by a representative of the finance department. 
(b)  Garbage bags in quantities of not less than ten (10) bundles at the cost per bundle to the City of Pasadena to local businesses for resale to the customers of such business. Such local business shall be restricted to fifteen (15) per cent markup on the bids for resale. 
(c)  Quantities of not less than one bundle at the same price as the cost per bundle to the City of Pasadena to any individual representing a family resident of the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  Any surplus vehicles and/or equipment, etc., by public auction as authorized by city council. All monies collected under this section shall be nonrefundable, promptly deposited in a city depository and shall be the sole property of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74; Ord. No. 83-113, § 1, 5-3-83)  
Sec. 2-110. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 77-190, § 1, enacted Oct. 11, 1977, repealed § 2-110, pertaining to duties with respect to collection and disposal of garbage refuse. Said former § 2-110 was derived from Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, April 2, 1974.  
Sec. 2-111. - Supervision of vehicles, equipment, etc. 
The director shall have charge and supervision over the servicing, maintenance, repair, rebuilding and reclamation of all motor vehicles, tow equipment, trailers and other manual or power equipment, tools and appliances used primarily in outdoor operations or in the execution of work assigned to the department of maintenance services. He shall be responsible for the operation of all places where the same are stored, worked upon or housed. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-112. - Duties with respect to municipal buildings and electrical systems and controls. 
The director shall supervise the maintenance, care, remodeling, repair, removal or demolition of all municipal buildings or structures; maintenance care and repair of all electrical motors and pumps in the water and sewer systems and electrical systems in recreational areas and traffic-signal controls. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-113. - Duties with respect to telephone services and communication. 
The director shall have charge of, and be responsible for the supervision of the city telephone switchboard, communications division and their operations and personnel. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, § 2, 4-2-74)  
Sec. 2-114. - Positions and classifications. 
(a)  There is hereby authorized and shall exist in the department of maintenance services the following positions and classifications to wit: 
Classification 	Number 	Grade 
(1) MAINTENANCE SERVICES ADMINISTRATION—610 
Director 	1 	24 
Secretary II 	1 	8 
(2) COMMUNICATIONS—611 
Supervisor 	1 	15 
Technician II 	2 	12 
Technician I 	1 	6 
Dispatcher 	5 	6 
(3) SWITCHBOARD—612 
Chief switchboard operator 	1 	7 
Switchboard operator 	2 	6 
(4) WAREHOUSE—631 
Warehouse superintendent 	1 	15 
Secretary I 	1 	6 
Receiving clerk 	1 	7 
Leaderman 	1 	7 
Storekeeper II 	4 	2 
(5) ELECTRICAL—642 
Superintendent 	1 	15 
Assistant superintendent 	1 	11 
Electrician II 	6 	10 
(6) GARAGE—654 
Superintendent 	1 	15 
Foreman 	4 	12 
Service writer 	1 	8 
Heavy equipment mechanic 	1 	9 
Welder 	1 	9 
Mechanic II 	9 	9 
Mechanic I 	5 	8 
Body repairman 	2 	6 
Semi-skilled laborer 	5 	5 
Laborer I 	8 	2 
Clerk II 	1 	3 
(7) BUILDING AND EQUIPMENT—655 
Superintendent 	1 	12 
Maintenance technician II 	4 	6 
Maintenance technician I 	4 	5 
(8) JANITORIAL—656 
Superintendent 	1 	11 
Maintenance mechanic II 	1 	10 
Chief custodian 	1 	8 
Custodian 	6 	6 
 
(b)  The holder of the position herein created shall have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to him by the director of the department of maintenance services and the mayor of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the charter and ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 74-68, §§ 3, 5, 4-2-74; Ord. No. 77-190, § 1, 10-11-77)  
Secs. 2-115—2-120. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PURCHASES[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Purchasing procedures, Art. IX, § 18. 
 
Sec. 2-121. - Department created. 
There is hereby created the department of purchases of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 2, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-122. - Department subject to control and direction of mayor. 
All operations of the department of purchases under this article shall be subject to the control and direction of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 13, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-123. - Office of director created; appointment and term of director. 
There is hereby created the office of director of purchases. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by the city council. The director shall serve for a term of one year or until his successor is appointed and qualified. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 3, 6-1-65) 
Cross reference— Bond of director of purchasing, § 2-5.  
Sec. 2-124. - General duties of director. 
(a)  Except as otherwise specifically provided by the Charter, or elsewhere in this article, or by other ordinances of the city, or as specifically otherwise required by law, the director of purchases shall make all purchases of materials, equipment, and supplies for the city. He shall be responsible for buying at the most favorable price for the city and shall see to it that the materials, equipment or supplies delivered are correct in number or amount and comply with the standards and specifications fixed for such purchases by the city council, through motion, resolution or ordinance, and under the supervision of the mayor. 
(b)  The director of purchases shall perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1679, §§ 5, 14, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-125. - Requisitions, purchase orders, etc.; coordination with mayor and controller. 
(a)  The requisitions prescribed by Article IX, section 18 of the Charter, may be for quantities of materials, equipment and supplies based on commitments or on estimates sufficient for one fiscal year. The director of purchases shall coordinate with the city controller for certification of purchases and with the city controller and the mayor for assurance of compliance with the purchase procedure of Article IX, Section 18, of the Charter. 
(b)  All requisitions, purchase orders and purchase contracts for materials, equipment and supplies of the city shall be initially submitted to the director of purchases for his handling and processing with the city controller and the mayor and with the city council, if required. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 6, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-126. - Standards and specifications. 
The director of purchases shall, where possible, establish sets of standards and specifications to control all purchases by the city, and he shall prepare and recommend to the city council such standards as to quality, size and variety of articles, equipment and supplies used by the offices and departments of municipal government as will make possible uniform purchasing for all city offices and departments, when consistent with efficiency. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 8, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-127. - Procedure when bids required. 
Where calling for bids is required by the Charter or ordinance, or by the laws of the state, or by motion of the city council or order of the mayor, the director of purchases shall prepare the specifications and notice to bidders and deliver the same to the city secretary, who shall see that the required notices are published. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 9, 6-1-65) 
Cross reference— When bids required, Art. IX, § 18.  
Sec. 2-128. - Advance and bulk purchases. 
(a)  The director of purchases shall advise the city council, through the mayor, as to the anticipated needs for purchases whenever possible, and shall ask authority to make purchases in advance of needs, or in bulk amounts, where such practices would result in economy or improved efficiency. 
(b)  Any commodity, equipment or supplies purchased in advance of actual need shall remain in the custody of the director of purchases for delivery to the officer, department or employee needing it at the time its use is required. 
(Ord. No. 1679, §§ 9, 10, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-129. - Records to be kept. 
The director of purchases shall keep records of all purchases made by him and of the destination or ultimate use of materials, equipment or supplies so purchased. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 10, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-130. - Inventory of municipal property. 
(a)  The director of purchases shall cause to be kept an inventory of all municipal property in his custody. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each officer or employee having municipal property in his custody to keep an inventory of such property and to furnish a copy thereof to the director of purchases on request. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 11, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-131. - Director's authority to transfer property from the department, officer or employee to another. 
The director of purchases shall have authority to transfer, from time to time, stocks of materials, equipment and supplies from one department, officer or employee to another in order to maintain balanced departmental inventories of appropriate items and to eliminate unnecessary stockpiling and relieve materials, equipment and supplies shortages. All such transfers shall be effected, only after approval by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1679, § 12, 6-1-65)  
Sec. 2-132. - Contracts and purchases by mayor. 
(a)  The mayor shall have general authority to contract for expenditures for all budgeted items, without notice or application to, or by advice or consent or approval of, the council so long as an expenditure shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per budgeted item. 
(b)  Whenever the mayor, under the contract authority granted to him in this section, elects to invite bids for a budgeted item, he shall have the right to reject any and all bids made therefor. The mayor, in affording the opportunity for competition required by Article IX, Section 18, of the Charter, shall provide the opportunity for competition by methods and procedures he deems reasonable, fair, and appropriate for the sale and purchase of the various budgeted items, giving due consideration to the quality, quantity and probable value of such items and the number and character of business suppliers he anticipates to be interested in and competent for the sale and purchase. 
(c)  The provisions of the other sections of this article shall not apply to purchases of budgeted items of not more than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), unless the mayor expressly authorizes the director of purchases to purchase, or standardize and specify, or test, or otherwise exercise control over such budgeted items. The mayor may fully or partially lend his purchasing authority to the director of purchases and he may specify the conditions of such authorization; provided, such authorization shall not constitute a delegation of the responsibility of the mayor and he shall remain answerable to the city council for the purchase of such budgeted items. Purchases made by the mayor are hereby assigned to his custody and he shall cause an inventory of such purchases to be regularly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1678, §§ 1, 2, 5-18-65; Ord. No. 1679, § 7, 6-1-65; Ord. No. 75-50, § 1, 4-1-75) 
Charter reference— Authority of council to authorize mayor to contract for expenditures for budgeted items, Art. IX, § 18.  
ARTICLE VI½. - DEPARTMENT OF TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION 
 
Sec. 2-133. - Department created. 
There is hereby created and recreated within the municipal government of the City of Pasadena a department to be known as the department of traffic and transportation. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-134. - Office created; appointment and term. 
There is hereby created and recreated in the department of traffic and transportation the office of traffic and transportation director. The traffic and transportation director shall be appointed by the mayor, confirmed and approved by the city council; and he shall serve subject to removal as provided by City Charter. He shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this article and in other traffic ordinances of the city, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-135. - Director to be head of department. 
The director shall be head of the traffic and transportation department and all officers and employees assigned thereto whose duties shall be performed subject to the supervision of the director. In addition to the specific powers and duties provided by this article, the director shall engage in such other executive functions and perform such other duties as are assigned by the mayor and the city council by ordinance to the department or one of its divisions. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-136. - General duties of traffic and transportation director. 
It shall be the general duty of the director to determine the installation, removal, and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct analyses of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct investigation of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-137. - Emergency and experimental regulations of traffic and transportation director. 
The director is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this article and the traffic ordinances of this city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulations shall remain in effect for more than ninety (90) days. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-138. - City traffic and transportation director orders, rules, etc., public record and public notice. 
Every order, rule, regulation, designation, delineation or determination promulgated by the director pursuant to the authority granted in this article shall, unless otherwise provided herein, be described in writing and filed with the city secretary. Such writing shall constitute a public record, and all persons shall be charged with notice of the contents of the same. Unless otherwise designated therein by the director, such order, rule, regulation, designation, delineation or determination promulgated shall be deemed permanent. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-139. - City traffic and transportation director further authority and presumptions. 
Whenever in this article the authority is given to the director to do acts as he deems or, [such acts], in his opinion, are advisable, necessary or desirable, such acts shall be based on his observations and studies, according to generally used, accepted traffic-control principles or techniques. 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 2-140. - Positions and classifications. 
There shall exist in the department of traffic and transportation the following positions and classifications: 
Department 	Classification 
Title 	Number 
Authorized 	Career 
Code 	Salary 
Grade 
Traffic and transportation (441) 	Traffic and transportation director 	1 	CS E 	24 
	Traffic programmer 	1 	CS E 	12 
	Traffic technician 	1 	CS 	11 
	Electrical technician 	1 	CS E 	09 
	Maintenance supervisor 	1 	CS E 	09 
	Crew foreman II 	3 	CS 	06 
	Semi-skilled laborer 	2 	CS 	05 
	Clerk II 	1 	CS 	03 
	Laborer I 	3 	CS 	02 
 
(Ord. No. 80-79, § 2, 4-22-80)  
Secs. 2-141—2-144. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CODE ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 2-145. - Code enforcement citations. 
(a)  Construction, administration and relation to related laws. The authority, responsibility and duties of peace officers to issue citations, pursuant to Article 14.06(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and/or Section 543.003 of the Transportation Code, is not obviated or in any way eliminated by the provisions of this section. 
A citation issued pursuant to this section does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer pursuant to Article 14.06(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or Section 543.003 of the Transportation Code. 
(b)  Authority to issue citations. Whenever there is a reference in this Code to violation of a Code provision being a misdemeanor, and/or whenever any provision of this Code provides that the city, certain city officials, or their designees, have the authority to enforce the provisions of this Code, or any applicable ordinance or other statutes, regulations or codes adopted by the city, that authority includes, but is not limited to, the ability to issue citations to be prosecuted in the municipal court or other appropriate court, depending on the type of offense and the location of the offense. The city reserves the right to exercise all of the appropriate enforcement remedies. 
Pursuant to this section, and the scope of their assigned duties and respective authority, the following departments/individuals listed herein may issue citations: 
(1)  Code compliance officer/code enforcement. 
(2)  Building official/inspector. 
(3)  Animal control/humane officer. 
(4)  Health official/inspector. 
(5)  Public works inspector. 
(6)  Fire marshal/deputies. 
(7)  Fire chief. 
(c)  Offenses. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with any individuals authorized under subsection (b) to issue citations in the performance of his/her duties. 
(d)  Warrants. Under Article 18.05 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, if any individual authorized under subsection (b) is refused access to a premises, building, facility or residence, or any part thereof, and said individual can demonstrate probable cause to believe that a fire or health hazard, code violation or unsafe building condition is present in the specified location sought to be inspected, the municipal court judge shall issue a search warrant for the purpose of allowing the inspection of the specified premises/location to determine the presence of the hazard, code violation, or unsafe building condition. 
(Ord. No. 15-136, § 2, 10-20-15)  
Secs. 2-146—2-167. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - CITIZEN'S ADVISORY BOARD[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 76-100, §§ 1—5, adopted June 8, 1976, did not specifically amend the Code, hence inclusion of Art. VIII, §§ 2-168—2-172, is at the discretion of the editors. 
 
Sec. 2-168. - Created. 
There is hereby created a citizen's advisory committee hereinafter known as the city board of development. 
(Ord. No. 76-100, § 1, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 2-169. - Purpose. 
The purpose of the city board of development shall be for the purpose of investigating the desirability of various methods of advertising and promoting the city, and to make appropriate recommendations to the city council as to the best method of spending funds already available, and as to the amount which should be appropriated for such purposes in the next budget. Such recommendation of the city board of development shall in no wise be binding on the city council of the City of Pasadena, but merely advisory only, and all such recommendations shall be acted upon by the city council in regular council session, as these recommendations are presented to the city council on the agenda. 
(Ord. No. 76-100, § 2, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 2-170. - Composition; appointment of members; length of term. 
The city board of development shall be composed of five (5) members who shall be appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. Members so appointed and approved will serve terms of two (2) years, at which time said members will be replaced and/or reappointed and approved as previously provided for. 
(Ord. No. 76-100, § 3, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 2-171. - Compensation; powers of board to be advisory. 
The members of the city board of development shall serve without compensation, have advisory powers only, and shall not be deemed to be public officers or agents of the city, for any purposes, and their service thereon shall not invalidate any contracts in which the city and any such members or all of them may have a mutual interest. 
(Ord. No. 76-100, § 4, 6-8-76)  
Sec. 2-172. - Appointment of ex officio secretary; duties. 
The mayor may appoint and the city council may approve the appointment of a person, who may or may not be an official of the City of Pasadena, to manage the promotion, development, tourism and convention activities of the City of Pasadena, and such persons so appointed or designated shall be in addition to the five (5) member board and shall serve ex officio as the secretary of the board of development. 
(Ord. No. 76-100, § 5, 6-8-76)  
Secs. 2-173—2-179. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - BEAUTIFICATION COMMISSION[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 24; trees and shrubs, Ch. 36½. 
 
Sec. 2-180. - Commission created; appointment and term. 
(a)  There is hereby created and established the Pasadena Beautification Commission, which shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. The members of the commission shall not, by virtue of their membership, be employees of or officers or agents of the city, and shall receive no compensation from the city for their services on such commission. Such commission shall not, except to the limited extent hereinafter expressly stated, be an agent or instrumentality of the city or authorized to in any way obligate or bind the city. 
(b)  The nine (9) members shall be appointed for a term to expire on December thirty-first of the second year after appointment. Before the expiration of one month after such expiration of the terms of office of members of such commission, successors shall be so appointed, subject to such confirmation, to serve terms expiring two (2) years after the expiration of such previous term. Vacancies occurring from death, resignation or removal shall be similarly filled by appointment and confirmation for the remaining unexpired term of the member deceased, resigned or removed. The mayor shall appoint the chairman and such other officers as he desires, and the commission shall adopt its own rules of procedure and organization except that one-half of its members at any time shall constitute a quorum. 
Two (2) additional ex officio members shall be appointed by the mayor, to wit: A representative of the beautification committee of the Pasadena Chamber of Commerce and a representative of Channel Industries Mutual Aid (CIMA). Their terms of appointment shall coincide with the terms of regular commission members. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the commission to examine ways and means to enhance the quality of the physical environment of the city. To this end, the commission shall conduct public hearings, hear reports from city officials and employees and sponsor or co-sponsor plans and programs approved by the city council for the purpose of fulfilling its responsibility. The commission shall make recommendations of policy to the city council and shall prepare an annual report of its activities. 
(d)  An official of the city designated by the mayor shall serve as coordinator for the commission and shall prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the commission as may be assigned. 
(e)  The city council declares its purpose and intention (but does not in any way obligate itself or attempt to obligate any future city council) to from time to time appropriate and cause to be paid over to the commission (or upon the commission's recommendation) such sums as the council may deem proper and appropriate to aid in defraying the expenses of operation, maintenance and development. 
(f)  By virtue of this section there shall not be vested in the commission or in the members of the commission any right except it be subject to termination by the city by repeal or amendment of this section or other appropriate action of its governing body. 
(Ord. No. 77-153, §§ 1—4, 8-17-77; Ord. No. 79-103, § 1, 8-28-79; Ord. No. 83-97, § 1, 4-5-83)  
Secs. 2-181—2-190. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE X. - SENIOR CITIZENS' COMMISSION[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-153, §§ 1—12, adopted Nov. 6, 1979, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been codified as Art. X, §§ 2-191—2-202, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 2-191. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created and established, within and for the city, the City of Pasadena Senior Citizens' Commission, composed of nine (9) members, appointed by the mayor, whose offices are hereby created and established as an advisory commission to assist and advise the city council on proper operation of all functions relating to the health, education and welfare of all senior citizens of Pasadena, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 1, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-192. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member of the commission shall be a resident citizen and a qualified voter of the city. Any member who ceases to hold all such qualifications shall, ipso facto upon each cessation, terminate his membership, subject only to written approval by the mayor filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 2, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-193. - Appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  All members of the senior citizens' commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  The chairman and vice-chairman of the senior citizens' commissioner who are first so appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of two (2) years; the remaining commissioners shall be designated to serve for terms of one year, respectively, from the date of their appointment, but thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed for a term of office of two (2) years, unless sooner terminated. 
(c)  All vacancies in membership of the commission for any reason shall be filed by the mayor for the unexpired terms as soon as practicable after the position becomes vacant (subject to confirmation by city council). 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 3, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-194. - Members to serve without compensation. 
The members of the senior citizens' commission, in the performance of their official duties, shall serve without compensation for office. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 4, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-195. - Officers designated. 
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The mayor is directed to appoint appropriate ex officio members of the commission. The directors of parks and recreation shall serve as the executive officers of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 5, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-196. - Election and terms of officers. 
The chairman and vice-chairman shall be appointed by the mayor; and the secretary of the commission shall be nominated by the members of the commission in such manner as the commission shall prescribe at its first meeting as a committee of the whole, and each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified and serving members of the commission. The terms of all elected offices shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's commission membership appointment. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 6, 11-6-79) 
Editor's note— The city has advised that the chairman and vice-chairman are to be construed as appointed officers; that the secretary is to be nominated by the commission and that "each other" offices shall be elected.  
Sec. 2-197. - Attendance at meetings. 
The commission may establish its own rules as to attendance of its members at meetings; and, in furtherance of such, the commission may, by a majority vote, expel any member who, in the opinion of the commission, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 7, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-198. - Procedure. 
The commission is hereby empowered to establish its own parliamentary procedure; provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law, or the following: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the commission, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those members present. The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 8, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-199. - Authority to advise the mayor. 
Said senior citizens' commission is hereby authorized to work with the mayor and make recommendations to the mayor about any matter that it deems beneficial to the administration; provided, that such functions shall not contravene the City Charter or any other law and such shall be considered advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 9, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-200. - General powers and duties. 
In the discharge of its duties and responsibilities, the senior citizens' commission shall be authorized to advise and make recommendations for final approval to the mayor and city council in areas including but not limited to the following: 
(a)  Housing for senior citizens. 
(b)  Tax relief for senior citizens. 
(c)  The availability and application of federal grants or funds designed to provide benefit to senior citizens generally. 
(d)  Social and recreational needs of senior citizens and how existing or proposed city development can be designed to accommodate these needs. 
(e)  Transportation needs of the city as they affect senior citizens generally and particularly how future or proposed transit systems will affect the senior citizen users. 
(f)  The publication and dissemination to the public of information on various senior citizen programs and activities. 
(g)  Methods by which the wealth of learning and experience possessed by Pasadena's senior citizenry can be made available to the betterment of the populace. 
(h)  The continued development of a historical appreciation and civic pride among the populace. 
(i)  The making, amending, and repeal of bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 10, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-201. - Coordinator. 
An official of the city designated by the mayor shall serve as coordinator for the commission and shall prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the commission as may be assigned. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 11, 11-6-79)  
Sec. 2-202. - Finances; construction of rights of commission. 
The city council declares its purpose and intention (but does not in any way obligate itself or attempt to obligate any future city council) to from time to time, appropriate and cause to be paid over to the commission (or upon the commission's recommendation) such sums as the council may deem proper and appropriate to aid in defraying the expenses of operation, maintenance and development. 
By virtue of this article, there shall not be vested in the commission or in the members of the commission any right except it be subject to termination by the city by repeal or amendment of this article or other appropriate action of its governing body. 
(Ord. No. 79-153, § 12, 11-6-79)  
Secs. 2-203—2-210. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE XI. - RECORDS MANAGEMENT[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 90-250, adopted Dec. 26, 1990, added a new Art. XI, §§ 1—22, pertaining to records management. Said provisions have been redesignated as §§ 2-211—2-232 at the discretion of the editor. 
 
Sec. 2-211. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
City means the City of Pasadena, Harris County, Texas. 
City record or record means all documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby declared to be the records of the city. The term does not include: 
(1)  Extra identical copies of documents created only for convenience of reference or research by officers or employees of the city. 
(2)  Notes, journals, diaries, and similar documents created by an officer or employee of the city for the officer's or employee's personal convenience. 
(3)  Blank forms. 
(4)  Stocks of publications. 
(5)  Library and museum materials acquired solely for the purpose of reference or display. 
(6)  Copies of documents in any media furnished to members of the public to which they are entitled under Chapter 424, Acts of the 63rd Legislature, Regular Session 1973 (Article 6252-17a), Vernon's Civil Statutes, or other state law. 
Commission means the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Department head means the officer who is authorized to be in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records. 
Director and librarian means the executive and administrative officer of the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
Essential record means any city record necessary to the resumption or continuation of the city's operations in an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the city. 
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission is given as permanent. 
Records assistant means any person designated under section 2-217 of this article. 
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require. 
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems. 
Records management committee means the committee established in section 2-215 of this article. 
Records management officer means the person designated under section 2-213 of this article. 
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-220 of this article. 
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 1), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-212. - City or municipal records declared public property. 
All city records as defined in section 2-111 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 2), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-213. - Designation of records management officer. 
The city secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the director and librarian within thirty (30) days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 3), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-214. - Duties of records management officer. 
(a)  In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall: 
(1)  Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation. 
(2)  Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures. 
(3)  Identify, in cooperation with department heads, essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense. 
(4)  Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city. 
(5)  Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies. 
(6)  Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city. 
(7)  Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by onsite consultation; 
(8)  Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations. 
(9)  Disseminate to the city council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records. 
(10)  Instruct records assistants and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and their duties in the records management program. 
(11)  Direct records assistants or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article. 
(12)  Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of city records is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirement of state law. 
(13)  Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition. 
(14)  Review schedules annually and update or amend as needed. 
(15)  Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city. 
(16)  Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 4), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-215. - Establishment of records management committee; duties. 
A records management committee consisting of the mayor, city attorney, city controller, chief of police, presiding municipal court judge, librarian, and director of personnel or their respective records assistants is hereby established. The committee shall: 
(1)  Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing the records management program. 
(2)  Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and improvements if needed. 
(3)  Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer. 
(4)  Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control schedules. 
(5)  Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 5), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-216. - Duties and responsibilities of department heads. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall: 
(1)  Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible. 
(3)  Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 6), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-217. - Designation of records assistants. 
Each department head may designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records assistant for the implementation of the records management program in that department. If the records management officer determines that in the best interests of the records management program more than one (1) records assistant should be designated for a department, the department head may designate the number of records assistants specified by the records management officer. Persons designated as records assistants should be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the department head of a person designated as a records assistant, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may serve as records assistant for his or her department. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 7), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-218. - Duties and responsibilities of records assistants. 
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records assistants shall: 
(1)  Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation for the development of records control schedules. 
(2)  In cooperation with the records management officer coordinate and implement the policies and procedures of the records management program in their department. 
(3)  Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 8), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-219. - Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state. 
(a)  The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records assistants, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record on or before January 2, 1995. Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of city records as the records management plan may require. 
(b)  Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city. 
(c)  Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and a majority vote of the members of the records management committee. 
(d)  Before its adoption the records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing by the director and librarian the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. 
(e)  When a records control schedule is adopted and accepted by the director and librarian, it shall thenceforth constitute full authority to destroy, transfer, microphotograph, or take other action, and the city council hereby directs that such action be taken by the records management officer or under his or her supervision. The records management officer shall comply with state law, no further notice to the city council or other city offices shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 9), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-220. - Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan. 
(a)  The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan should contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan shall be designed to enable the records management officer to effectively carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this article. 
(b)  Once approved by majority vote of the city council the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan. 
(c)  State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 10), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-221. - Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule. 
(a)  A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-219 must be implemented by department heads and records assistants according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan. 
(b)  A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless: 
(1)  An open records request is pending on the record; 
(2)  The subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit; or 
(3)  The department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for an additional period. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 11), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-222. - Destruction of records. 
(a)  City records may be destroyed if: 
(1)  The records are listed on a records control schedule accepted for filing by the director and librarian as provided by Subtitle C Title 6, Local Government Code, Section 203.041 (preparation and filing of records control schedules) and section 2-119 of this article and either its retention period has expired or it has been microfilmed or stored electronically in accordance with the requirements of Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code, Sections 204 and 205 (microfilming of records and electronic storage of records, respectively) and this article; 
(2)  The record appears on a list of obsolete records approved by the director and librarian as provided by Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code, Section 203.044 (initial destruction of obsolete records); or 
(3)  A destruction request is filed with and approved by the director and librarian as provided by Section 203.045 (destruction of unscheduled records) of Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code and section 2-223 of this article for a record not listed on an approved control schedule. 
(b)  The following records may be destroyed without meeting the conditions of this section: 
(1)  Records the destruction or obliteration of which is directed by an expunction order issued by a district court pursuant to state law. 
(2)  Records defined as exempt from schedule or filing requirements by rules adopted by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 12), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-223. - Destruction of unscheduled records. 
(a)  Before the filing of a records control schedule with the director and librarian, the city shall destroy records only with the prior approval of the director and librarian. 
(b)  After the filing of a records control schedule as provided by this article, a record that does not appear on a records control schedule or amended schedule accepted for filing may be destroyed only with the prior approval of the director and librarian. 
(c)  Requests for authorization to destroy unscheduled records shall be submitted to the director and librarian by the records management officer or under the officer's direction. If the director and librarian approves the request, the records listed on it may be destroyed. Should the request not be approved, the director and librarian's instruction on the records' further retention shall be followed. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 13), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-224. - Litigation and open records requests. 
(a)  Regardless of any other provision of this article or rules adopted under it, a city record, the subject matter of which is known by the custodian to be in litigation, may not be destroyed until the litigation is settled. 
(b)  Regardless of any other provisions of this article or rules adopted under it, a city record subject to an open records request under Chapter 424, Acts of the 63rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1973 (Article 6252-17a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), may not be destroyed until the request is resolved. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 14), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-225. - Method of destruction. 
(a)  A city record may be destroyed by burning, shredding, pulping, or burial in a landfill or by sale or donation for recycling purposes; however, those records to which public access is restricted under Chapter 414, Acts of the 63rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1973 (Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or other state law may be destroyed only by burning, pulping, or shredding. 
(b)  Should the city sell or donate records for recycling purposes, a procedure shall be established ensuring that the records are rendered unrecognizable as city records by the recycler. 
(c)  The director and librarian may approve other methods of destruction that render the records unrecognizable as city records. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 15), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-226. - Alienation of records prohibited. 
(a)  A city record may not be sold or donated (except for the purposes of recycling), loaned, transferred, or otherwise passed out of the custody of the city to any private college or university, private museum or library, private organization of any type, or any individual, except with the consent of the director and librarian and at the expiration of its retention period under the city's records control schedule. 
(b)  The above paragraph does not apply to the city temporarily transferring to a person for the purposes of microfilming, duplicating, converting to electronic media, restoring or similar records management and preservation procedures if the transfer is authorized by the records management officer. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 16), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-227. - Right of recovery. 
The city may demand and receive from any person any city records in private possession created or received by the city the removal of which was not authorized by law. Recovery under this section shall be pursuant to Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code, Chapter 201, Section 202.005. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 17), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-228. - Destruction of nonrecord material. 
(a)  Material that is not included in the definition of a city record and is described by Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code, Chapter 201, Section 201.003(8)(A), (B) or (c) and Subsection (1), (2) or (3) of Section 2-211 of this article may be disposed of at the discretion of the custodian or the creator of the document, as applicable, subject to any policies developed by the city regarding the destruction. 
(b)  Extra identical copies of a city record to which public access is restricted under Chapter 424, Acts of the 63rd Legislature, Regular Session, 1973 (Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), or other state law may be destroyed only by burning, pulping or shredding. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 18), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-229. - Recordkeeping requirements. 
The records management officer shall keep accurate lists of records destroyed, their volume, and other information of records management activities. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 19), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-230. - Records center. 
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 2-220 shall be under the direct control and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 2-220. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 20), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-231. - Micrographs. 
(a)  Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by order of the city council, all microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer. The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of city records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operation is, nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness, administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. 
(b)  Microfilm shall mean roll microfilm, microfiche and all other formats produced by any method of microphotography or other means of miniaturization on film. Microfilming shall mean the method, procedures and processes used to produce roll microfilm, microfiche or other microphotographic formats. 
(c)  Destruction of original records that have been microfilmed shall be in compliance with state laws. A list of originals of microfilmed records destroyed shall be filed with the records management officer and the microfilmed record shall be retained until the expiration of the retention period of the original record. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 21), 12-26-90)  
Sec. 2-232. - Personal liability. 
The custodian of city records, records management officer, records assistant, or other officer or employee of the city may not be held personally liable for the destruction of a city record if the destruction is in compliance with this article and state law. 
(Ord. No. 90-250, § 1(Exh. A, § 22), 12-26-90)  
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Purchase, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by minors at drive-in restaurants, § 20-56; taxes required to be paid prior to issuance of license or permit, § 26-1 et seq.; disposition of alcoholic beverages in possession of police department, § 30-67. 
 
Sec. 3-1. - License to manufacture, sell, distribute, etc. 
(a)  No person shall manufacture, sell, distribute, or store any intoxicating liquor, malt liquor or other alcoholic beverage, or engage in any other activity with relation to same for which a permit or license is required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, within the city, without first obtaining a license so to do from the city. The fee for such license shall be the maximum fee which the city is authorized, by state law, to collect. 
(b)  Terms of license. 
(1)  A license issued under the terms of this section shall terminate one year from the date issued, and no license shall be issued for a longer term than one year. 
(2)  The applicant shall present a valid and current State of Texas permit or license, as required by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code as a necessary prerequisite to obtaining a city license. 
(3)  A city license or permit issued under this section shall be dated so as to coincide with those dates on the state permit or license and must be renewed on or before ten (10) days following the expiration date. 
(c)  Any violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and any person, upon conviction of any such violation, shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and each and every day upon which a violation occurs or continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1964, § 3-1; Ord. No. 67-1911, 2-14-67; Ord. No. 67-2075, 12-12-67; Ord. No. 68-65, 4-23-68; Ord. No. 74-270, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 83-236, § 1, 9-6-83)  
Sec. 3-2. - License fees for liquor, distilled spirits, malt, and vinous liquors. 
The city building official is hereby authorized and directed to collect a fee from each person holding any license or permit issued by the State of Texas under the authority of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
The amount of such fee to be collected by the building official shall be the maximum fee permitted by the most current versions of §§ 11.38 and 61.36 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code or their statutory successors for the particular license or permit issued by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 71-356, § 1, 11-30-71; Ord. No. 83-236, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 06-013, § 1, 1-31-06)  
Sec. 3-3. - License fees for beer. 
The city building official is hereby authorized and directed to collect a fee from each person holding any license or permit issued by the State of Texas under the authority of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
The amount of such fee to be collected by the building official shall be the maximum fee permitted by the most current versions of §§ 11.38 and 61.36 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code or their statutory successors for the particular license or permit issued by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 71-356, § 1, 11-30-71; Ord. No. 83-236, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 06-013, § 2, 1-31-06)  
Sec. 3-4. - License issuance prohibited in certain areas. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages by a dealer whose place of business is within three hundred (300) feet of a church, public school, or public hospital is prohibited. 
(b)  The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the church or public hospital shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. The measurement of the distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and the public school shall be from the nearest property line of the public school to the nearest doorway by which the public may enter the place of business, along street lines and in direct line across intersections. For any permit or license covering a premises where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, the measurement of the distance between the premises and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. 
(c)  Every applicant for an original alcoholic beverage license or permit for a location with a door by which the public may enter the place of business of the applicant that is within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest property line of a public school, measuring along street lines and directly across intersections, must give written notice of the application to officials of the public school before filing the application with the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission. A copy of the notice must be submitted to the Commission with the application; provided however this subsection (c) does not apply to a permit or license covering a premise where minors are prohibited from entering the premises under Section 109.53 of the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(d)  As to any dealer who held a license or permit on September 1, 1983, in a location where a regulation under this section was in effect on that date, for the purposes of subsection (a), but not subsection (c), of this section, the measurement of the distance between the place of business of the dealer and a public school shall be along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections. This subsection applies only as long as the place of business is continuously in operation from that date, whether or not under the same license or permit. 
(e)  The city council may also allow variances to the regulation provided in subsection (a) if the city council determines that enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undo hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or for any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community. 
(f)  Any variances requested under subsection (e) of this section shall be filed with the city secretary and copies of the requested variance sent to city council. The petition for variance filed with the city secretary shall state the following: 
(1)  That a variance of subsection (a) of section 3-4 of the Code of Ordinances is requested. 
(2)  A general statement of the facts the petitioner will show that the enforcement of the regulation in a particular instance is not in the best interest of the public, constitutes waste or inefficient use of land or other resources, creates an undo hardship on an applicant for a license or permit, does not serve its intended purpose, is not effective or necessary, or any other reason the city council after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and equities of the situation should determine that the variance is in the best interest of the community. 
(g)  The city council shall set a hearing at a city council meeting, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the petition has been filed with the city secretary for the purpose of hearing the petitioner and determining whether a variance should be permitted. After hearing the evidence of the petitioner and any witnesses from the community at large, city council shall, by motion, determine whether or not to grant the variance. Approval of a variance requires a majority vote of the council as in other cases. 
(Ord. No. 77-237, § 1, 12-20-77; Ord. No. 83-198, § 1, 7-26-83)  
Chapter 4 - AMBULANCES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-54, § 1, adopted Feb. 15, 1983, repealed Ch. 4, Art. I, § 4-1 and Art. II, §§ 4-16—4-22, relative to ambulances, and § 2 enacted, in lieu thereof, new §§ 4-1—4-20 to read as herein set out. The former provisions derived from Ord. No. 67-1943, §§ 1—5, adopted April 25, 1967; Ord. No. 67-1982, §§ 2, 3, adopted Aug. 1, 1967 and Ord. No. 80-61, § 1, adopted April 8, 1980. 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 7; traffic, Ch. 36; certain ambulances defined as "authorized emergency vehicles" for traffic purposes, §§ 36-1, 36-13. 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specified, the term: 
Ambulance means any privately or publicly owned motor vehicle that is specially designed or constructed and equipped and is intended to be used for and is maintained or operated for the transportation of patients. 
Applicant means any person, partnership, corporation or other operator that makes application to obtain a certificate to operate within the city limits. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, this definition will include all officers or partners. 
Attendant means any person who has the duty of performing or assisting in the performance of an ambulance call and is certified at the minimal level as an emergency medical technician—ambulance by the Texas Department of Health. The same registration shall be current and valid. 
Board of health means the board of health, City of Pasadena, Texas. 
Certification means that which meets the requirements of the Texas Department of Health. 
Chief EMS officer means the chief of emergency medical services, department of public health of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
City means the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
City council means the Pasadena City Council. 
Director means the director of public health of the City of Pasadena or his duly authorized representative. 
Driver's license means the license issued by the department of public safety, State of Texas. 
Emergency means any circumstance that calls for immediate action and in which the element of time in transporting the sick, wounded or injured for medical treatment is essential to the health or life of the person. Said circumstances include, but are not limited to, accidents generally, traffic accidents, acts of violence resulting in personal injury and sudden illness. 
Emergency call means any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone or other means of communication in circumstances which are, or have been represented to be, an emergency requiring immediate ambulance service. 
Emergency medical technician means any person currently registered by the Texas Department of Health as an EMT—Ambulance, EMT—Special Skills, and/or EMT—Paramedic. 
Emergency run means the emergency ambulance trip to the place where the emergency exists or from the place of such emergency to the emergency room of a receiving hospital. 
License means a license or permit issued by the City of Pasadena Health Department pursuant to this chapter. 
Mayor means the mayor of Pasadena, Texas. 
Medical director means any licensed physician who serves in an advisory capacity to any ambulance for the purpose of providing medical direction under the terms of the Medical Practice Act (Article 4495b, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes) and rules promulgated by the Texas State Board of Medical Examiners pursuant to terms of the Medical Practice Act. 
Patient means any person desiring transportation to an appropriate medical facility either on an emergency or transfer basis. 
Person means an individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business, trust, partnership, association or any other legal entity. 
Police means any officer of the City of Pasadena, Texas, Police Department. 
Protocol means written medical orders signed by a licensed physician serving as medical director for an ambulance giving 
medical direction to provide treatment for certain emergencies or other pre-hospital situations requiring physician's orders. These orders must conform to all applicable laws. 
Street means any street, alley, avenue, boulevard, drive or highway commonly used for the purpose of travel within the corporate limits of the city. 
Subcommittee on ambulance services means all members who serve on the subcommittee on ambulance services, board of health, City of Pasadena. 
Transfer ambulance means any motor vehicle constructed, equipped and used for transferring the sick or injured under circumstances which do not constitute an emergency and which have not been represented as an emergency. 
Transfer call means any request for ambulance service that is made by telephone, or other means of communication in circumstances which are or have been represented to be, a nonemergency requiring nonemergency service. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87; Ord. No. 00-110, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 4-2. - Licenses required. 
(a)  No person, either as owner, agent or otherwise shall operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise be engaged in or profess to be engaged in the business of ambulance service upon the streets, alleys or any public way or place of Pasadena, Texas, unless he holds a currently valid license for an ambulance vehicle and an ambulance company issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(b)  Ambulance vehicle licenses, ambulance company licenses, and attendants' licenses shall be issued one (1) year or any part thereof during which an ambulance service is maintained, and the license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per company shall be due and payable at the time of application; provided, however, that a company shall not be charged a vehicle license fee for more than fifteen (15) vehicles. The licensure period shall be from October first of each year to the 30th day of September of the subsequent year. Any license issued for the period of March first, 2000 to the last day of February, 2001 shall be extended to the last day of September, 2001. 
(c)  No person shall act as an attendant on any ambulance operated under this chapter unless he or she holds a valid attendant's license issued pursuant to this chapter. A twenty-one-day temporary permit may be issued at the time application for permit is submitted to the health department. 
(d)  All licenses issued pursuant to this chapter are not assignable or transferrable and remain the property of the city. 
(e)  No official entry made upon a license may be defaced, removed or obliterated. 
(f)  All licenses shall be available for inspection by any officer of the city at all times. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87; Ord. No. 94-1, § 2, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 00-110, § 1, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 4-3. - Application for ambulance license. 
(a)  Application for an ambulance vehicle license and ambulance company license shall be made upon a form furnished by the chief EMS officer who shall issue such a license to an applicant only upon proof by the applicant that the applicant has satisfied all provisions and conditions provided for and has given complete and truthful information to all requirements stated herein. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant and of the owner of the ambulance; 
(2)  The trade or other fictitious name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business; 
(3)  A complete report on whether or not the applicant has any claims or judgments against him for damages resulting from the negligent operation of the applicant's ambulance(s); 
(4)  A report that the applicant business has paid all city taxes; 
(5)  Business address and medical license number of medical director; 
(6)  A description of each ambulance, including the make, model, year of manufacture, motor and chassis number, current state license number, the length of time the ambulance has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram, or other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate applicant's ambulance; 
(7)  Any such other information as may be applicable. 
(c)  No application will be considered before it is complete. 
(d)  Falsification of information on applications will be grounds for revocation of license. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 94-1, § 2, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 4-4. - Standards for ambulance license. 
(a)  Each ambulance shall, at all times when in use as such, be suitable for the transportation of patient from the standpoint of health, sanitation and safety. 
(b)  Minimum equipment requirements for each ambulance shall be those established by the Texas Department of Health. 
(c)  When an ambulance permit is issued or renewed under provisions of this chapter, the chief EMS officer will affix to each vehicle two (2) decals which indicate the vehicle meets all requirements established by this chapter. The color of such decals shall be changed annually. 
(d)  The chief EMS officer or his duly authorized representative shall cause all ambulances to be inspected before being placed in service and shall thereafter inspect such ambulances no less than once each year and at least two (2) times per year on a spot inspection basis. In the event an ambulance fails to pass inspection, the chief EMS officer shall notify the ambulance operator to correct the defects noted in the inspection and, after such notification, the chief shall cause such ambulance to be reinspected within forty-eight (48) hours. If upon such reinspection the defects noted in the original inspection have not been corrected, the vehicle decals shall be removed from the ambulance and shall only be replaced upon such ambulance after the defects have been corrected. The license fee shall be paid in full for the balance of current year of the original vehicle decal provided. 
(e)  No ambulance that has been substantially damaged or altered, or has received damage the repair cost of which exceeds five hundred dollars ($500.00), shall be again placed in service until it has been repaired and reinspected by the chief EMS officer. No charge for reinspection. 
(f)  Every ambulance must be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(g)  On any emergency call authorized by the city dispatcher, the operator shall not delay in dispatching personnel and equipment to the location authorized. 
(h)  Effective September 1, 2010, ambulance providers licensed to operate in the City of Pasadena shall provide to the city department of health, the licensing entity, a monthly activity report containing the number of calls of ambulance transports originating within the City of Pasadena 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87; Ord. No. 10-172, § 1, 8-10-10)  
Sec. 4-5. - Requirements for business location. 
If the business location of the ambulance service, firm or organization is located within the city limits, the building must be in compliance with all city ordinances, state and federal laws. Pursuant to this specific chapter, no such ambulance service, firm or organization can operate as its main place of business or a storage facility in a private residence. The chief EMS officer has the right to inspect such locations as often as he deems necessary to make sure all provisions of this chapter are in effect. Refusal of any ambulance provided with a business office located within the city limits to allow the chief EMS officer to inspect such premises shall be considered a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-6. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  No ambulance license shall be issued under this chapter, nor shall such license be valid after issuance, nor shall any ambulance be operated for any reason in the city, unless there is at all times in force and effect insurance coverage, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, for each and every ambulance owned and/or operated by or for the applicant for license providing for the payment of damages: 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals in accident resulting from any cause for which the owner of said vehicle would be liable on account of liability imposed on him by law, regardless of whether the ambulance was being driven by the owner or his agent. 
(2)  For the loss of or damages to the property of another, including personal property, under like circumstances, in the following sums: Not less that one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for each person, three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for each accident and ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for property damage. A written statement from an authorized agent of the ambulance operator(s) insurance carrier verifying the issuance of such insurance shall be filed with the chief EMS officer before any permit may be issued. All such verifications of insurance shall provide for a thirty-day cancellation notice to the chief EMS officer. 
(3)  Every insurance policy required hereunder shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereunder to the full amount thereof not withstanding any recovery thereon, that the liability of the insurer shall not be affected by the insolvency or the bankruptcy of the assured, in that until the policy is revoked the insurance company will not be relieved from liability on account of nonpayment of premium, failure to renew license at the end of the year, or any act or admission of the named assured. Such policy of insurance shall be further conditioned for the payment of any judgments up to the limits of said policy, recovered against any person other than the owner, by his agent or employee, who may operate the same with the consent or acquiescence of the owner. 
(b)  Each attendant involved in the operation of an ambulance within the city limits shall be required to carry at all times professional liability insurance. 
(1)  This coverage must be from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas for each and every person operating within the city limits of Pasadena. 
(2)  The limits of liability required are no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per claim and a one million dollar ($1,000,000.00) aggregate umbrella policy. 
(3)  It shall be the responsibility of each person to provide to the chief EMS officer proof of such insurance. 
(4)  Failure to provide proof of insurance will be justification to suspend and/or not issue any attendant, driver and/or ambulance permit. 
(5)  The City of Pasadena Health Department must be notified within twenty-four (24) hours of any cancellation of insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 4-7. - Application for attendant and driver's license. 
(a)  Applications for attendant and driver's licenses hereunder shall be made upon such form as may be prepared by the EMS division and shall contain the following information which is a requirement for the issuance of a license. 
(1)  The applicant's full name, current address, how long he has lived at current address, previous address, how long he lived at previous address, home telephone number, and social security number. 
(2)  The applicant's age, date of birth, height, weight, place of birth, hair and eye color. 
(3)  The applicant's Texas chauffeur's license number, and expiration date. 
(4)  The applicant's present EMS certification level, appropriate Texas Department of Health registration number and expiration date. 
(5)  Two (2) recent photographs of a size designated by the chief EMS officer which shall be attached to the license application. 
(6)  A report from a duly licensed physician of the State of Texas of a recent physical examination which attests that the person has vision in both eyes correctable to 20/20 and has no physical defects which would impair his or her ability to perform the duties of an ambulance attendant. 
(7)  Such other information as the chief EMS officer shall deem reasonably necessary to a fair determination of compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  The chief EMS officer shall within twenty-one (21) days of receipt of a completed application for an attendant's license investigate the application and issue the license or notify the applicant that the application is denied. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-8. - Standards for attendant and driver's license. 
(a)  All attendants and drivers must be able to read, write and speak the English language. 
(b)  All drivers must have a valid Texas driver's license. (Class A, B, or C). 
(c)  All attendants and drivers must hold current certification from the Texas Department of Health as an emergency medical technician. 
(d)  No attendant or driver shall have a final conviction for theft, robbery, state or federal controlled substances acts, rape, sexual abuse, indecency with a child, or abuse of a corpse. 
(e)  No attendant or driver shall have been convicted of three (3) or more moving violations within the preceding two-year period. 
(f)  All attendants and drivers shall have vision correctable to 20/20 in both eyes and shall have no physical limitations which would impair their ability to perform the duties of an ambulance attendant. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 4-9. - Renewal of license. 
Renewal of any license hereunder, upon expiration or after revocation, shall require conformance with all requirements of this chapter as upon original licensing. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-10. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  The chief EMS officer may, and is hereby authorized to, suspend or revoke a license issued hereunder for failure of a licensee to comply and to maintain compliance with, or for his violation of, any applicable provisions, standards or requirements of this chapter, or of regulations promulgated hereunder, or of any other applicable laws or ordinances, but only after warning and such reasonable time for compliance as may be set by the chief EMS officer. Any applicant denied a license or any licensee whose license is suspended or revoked shall have the right of appeal to the director, department of public health. Such appeal shall be submitted to the director in writing within ten (10) days of the action being appealed. The director shall, within ten (10) days after appeal is filed, consider all the evidence in support of or against the ruling appealed from and render a decision either sustaining, reversing, or modifying the determination of the chief EMS officer. 
(b)  If the director's, department of public health, decision is not acceptable to the applicant or licensee, he may, within ten (10) days of that decision, file an appeal in writing with the city secretary to the city council. Such a written appeal shall set forth the specific grounds therefor. The city secretary shall notify the appellant within ten (10) days after receipt of appeal as to the time and place of the hearing by the city council, which shall be within thirty (30) days of receipt of such appeal. The determination of the city council on any appeal pursuant to this chapter shall be final. 
(c)  Upon suspension, revocation or termination of an ambulance license hereunder, such ambulance shall cease operation as such and no person shall permit such ambulance to continue operations as such. Upon suspension, revocation or termination of attendant's or driver's license hereunder, such attendant or driver shall cease to drive or attend an ambulance and no person shall employ or permit such individual to drive or attend an ambulance. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-11. - Medical director to serve in an advisory capacity. 
(a)  Any ambulance whose attendant receives physicians' orders either by telemetry or written standing orders must have, in an advisory capacity, a physician, licensed in the State of Texas and registered in Harris County, to serve as medical director. 
(b)  Any ambulance licensed under this chapter must maintain with the chief EMS officer a statement of their current medical director including his or her name, business address, business telephone number, and Texas medical license number; and the federal narcotics license number if any drugs or supplies are prescribed by this physician. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-12. - Inspection of ambulances. 
(a)  Subsequent to issuance of any ambulance license hereunder, the chief EMS officer shall cause to be inspected each such licensed vehicle, its equipment, premises and personnel, whenever he deems such inspection to be necessary but in any event no less frequently than twice each year and shall promptly report his findings in a written report to the health director. The periodic inspection required hereunder shall be in addition to any other safety or motor vehicle inspection required to be made for ambulance or other motor vehicles in the State of Texas, or other inspections required to be made, under general laws and ordinances, and shall not excuse compliance with any requirements of law and ordinance to display any official certificate of motor vehicle inspection at all times. 
(b)  A copy of each initial, semiannual, spot or other ambulance, equipment, premises and personnel inspection report submitted by the chief EMS officer to the health director under the provisions of this section shall be promptly transmitted to the applicant or licensee to whom it refers. 
(c)  The chief EMS officer may immediately suspend any of the licenses issued under this chapter if an inspection reveals violations or deficiencies that might endanger a patient or the public. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-13. - Central emergency dispatching system. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any ambulance to respond to an emergency call without receiving permission from the city's central dispatching system. 
(b)  If any person receives any request for ambulance service on an emergency basis other than through the city's central dispatching system; it is the obligation of that person to immediately report the same to the city central dispatching system and not proceed until cleared by the same dispatcher. 
(c)  It shall not be unlawful for a person operating a licensed transfer ambulance in the city, upon responding to a direct call for nonemergency transfer ambulance service, to operate such ambulance under emergency conditions, using emergency equipment, after notifying the city central dispatching dispatcher and requesting permission to make an emergency run, when a determination is made by the senior ambulance attendant that a true emergency exists, as defined in this chapter, requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all practical speed to a hospital. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-14. - Triage: Multiple casualty emergency call. 
(a)  It shall be the duty and responsibility of the senior certified medical person to conduct medical triage at a scene involving the transport and pre-hospital care of patients requiring transport to an appropriate medical facility by more than one ambulance. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of all ambulances to follow all triage directives given by the senior certified medical person. 
(c)  The senior certified medical person shall not delegate this duty unless he is ordered to do so by a licensed physician who is willing to take responsibility for all patients at the scene of the triage. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 4-15. - Uniform emergency run records. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of each emergency ambulance operating within the city to use at all times run records that are approved by the subcommittee on ambulance services, board of health. 
(b)  A copy of the run record on any 911 calls made within the city must be submitted to the chief EMS officer. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Sec. 4-16. - Variances to chapter requirements. 
(a)  An affected person or organization may request a variance from the licensure requirements of this chapter if the person satisfies one (1) or more of the specific criteria listed in subsection (d). 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the subcommittee on ambulance services, board of health to grant such a variance. 
(c)  The variance must specify the specific licensure requirements and/or fees being waived. 
(d)  The criteria for variance are as follows: 
(1)  The person has transported a sick or injured person to medical care as an individual citizen not ordinarily engaged in that activity; 
(2)  The person transports a sick or injured person in a multiple casualty situation that exceeds the capacity of the emergency medical services available; 
(3)  The person is a member of an organization and the person's function is to transport members of that same organization to an appropriate medical facility at no charge to the individual being transferred; and that same organization does not solicit business outside itself or provide service to any other organization except in a multiple casualty situation; 
(4)  The vehicle or person is moving through the city on a call that neither originates nor ends within the city; 
(5)  The organization is principally an air transport system; 
(6)  The organization or vehicle is licensed by the state as a "specialized emergency medical services vehicle" and is designed to provide service patients with special needs not easily met by other transport services; 
(7)  The organization is an agency or designated provider of a municipal government. 
(e)  A variance shall not be granted unless it is necessary to assure the availability of quality care to the citizens of the city. 
(f)  A variance shall not be granted unless all ambulance units and personnel meet the minimum standards set by the state health department. 
(g)  The city council reserves the right to reserve the decision of the subcommittee on ambulance services in granting or refusing a variance. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 83-264, § 1, 9-27-83; Ord. No. 84-54, § 1, 3-20-84)  
Sec. 4-17. - Standards for emergency ambulance transfer rates. 
(a)  The city council shall set standards for the determination of all charges relating to the transport of patients on an emergency basis. Such standards shall include the following: 
(1)  A breakdown of the actual cost of providing emergency ambulance service by each transfer ambulance company licensed to operate in the city. 
(2)  Such financial evidence as needed by the subcommittee for ambulance services to determine an adequate percentage of profit to be included in the emergency ambulance transfer rate. 
(3)  Any other financial information as deemed necessary by the subcommittee for ambulance services. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the subcommittee for ambulance services to review all fees annually. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-18. - Standards for reimbursement for indigent emergency ambulance transfer service. 
(a)  The city agrees to reimburse private provider for the emergency transport of those persons who are unable to pay for emergency ambulance transportation. 
(b)  The city will only reimburse for those calls that are dispatched by the city's central dispatching system, and will reimburse at the rates provided in section 4-20 of this chapter. 
(c)  The provider shall make diligent effort to collect charges from customers for emergency back-up ambulance calls dispatched by the city to the provider. The procedure for collecting such accounts shall include the initial billing to the customer shortly after such service is rendered. A second billing no later than thirty (30) days following the rendition of such service shall be sent to the customer and a third billing no later than sixty (60) days after initial service is rendered. If unpaid balance still remains outstanding, at the end of ninety (90) days of the rendition of service, the provider will turn unpaid balance over to the division of emergency medical services, department of public health of the city for reimbursement. 
(d)  It is specifically understood and agreed by the parties hereto that the city will not make reimbursement to the provider for any delinquent accounts involving nonemergency transfer service. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-19. - Contractual agreement required. 
(a)  Each licensed transfer ambulance company who desires to provide back-up emergency service must have a written contractual agreement between the city and itself. 
(b)  If the licensed transfer ambulance company does not secure a contractual agreement; the name of said company will not be placed on the city's back-up emergency ambulance dispatching list. 
(c)  Ambulance companies currently in the city's central dispatching rotation list will be given first consideration to apply for a contractual agreement, as stated herein. Any additional companies who desire to secure a contractual agreement must show a public need and necessity. Each company must present their application for a contractual agreement to the subcommittee for ambulance services, board of health, and their recommendation will be made to city council for any additional companies to operate within the city limits. The subcommittee for ambulance services will develop criteria in order to determine an equable need and necessity for the city. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83)  
Sec. 4-20. - Fees for emergency transport. 
Each patient, attended or transported by a 911 call shall not be charged in excess of fees approved by city council. 
(Ord. No. 83-54, § 2, 2-15-83; Ord. No. 87-220, § 1, 11-3-87)  
Chapter 5 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Parks and recreation, Ch. 24; swimming pools, Ch. 33; authority of chief of police to close places of amusement, § 30-3. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 5-1—5-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - THEATERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of chief of police to close theaters, § 30-3. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-16. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein: 
Drive-in theater. The term "drive-in theater" means any premises in which motion pictures are projected upon a screen or theatrical performances are given for viewing by patrons seated in automobiles or other vehicles, and which is open to the public. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Theater. A "theater" is any premise in which motion pictures are projected upon a screen or a theatrical performance is given for viewing by patrons and which is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 1, 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 1, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-17. - Compliance with article. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to operate a theater in the city without complying with the requirements and standards prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9, 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-18. - Report of violations of article. 
The chief of police or the building official shall report all violations of this article, or the failure or refusal of any owner/operator to comply with any of the provisions of this article, to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 10, 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-19. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate, or allow or cause any person to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for such offense. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 11, 6-12-70; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-20. - Police officers' right of entry. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to enter the premises of any theater within the city, at any time, for the purpose of inspection and for the preservation of law and order, and to determine whether or not the provisions of this article are being complied with. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B10), 6-12-70)  
Sec. 5-21. - Access to public streets. 
The owner/operator shall provide access available from a theater to public streets or other public ways from at least two (2) points at all times. Such means of access shall be kept clear by the owner/operator at all times to facilitate departure of persons from the premises upon which the theater is operated and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or other emergency equipment in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B1), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-22. - Driveways at drive-in. 
Driveways on the premises of a drive-in theater shall be channelized by the owner/operator and limited to not more than four (4) lanes to control traffic. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B1), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-23. - Lighting of exits. 
Theater exits, and aisles and passageways leading to them, shall be kept adequately lighted by the owner/operator at all times when open to the public. The owner/operator shall provide artificial light whenever natural light is inadequate. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B2), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-24. - Electrical installations. 
Except as otherwise provided by law or city ordinance, the owner/operator shall provide, for the theater, electrical installations conforming to the requirements of the electrical code of the city. The electrical system shall be installed, maintained and operated in a safe and workmanlike manner. The electrical system and equipment shall be isolated from the public by proper elevation or guarding, and all electrical fuses and switches shall be enclosed in approved enclosures. Cables on the ground in areas traversed by the public shall be placed in trenches or protected by approved covers. The electrical installations shall be inspected and approved by the electrical inspector before the theater is opened to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the electrical inspector at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B3), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75) 
Cross reference— Electrical code, Ch. 12.  
Sec. 5-25. - Fire extinguishing equipment. 
Fire extinguishing equipment shall be furnished by the owner/operator for each theater, in such amount and in such locations as may be directed by the fire marshal. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be inspected and approved by the fire marshal before the theater is opened to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the fire marshal at all reasonable hours. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B4), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75) 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection generally, Ch. 13.  
Sec. 5-26. - Sanitary facilities. 
Adequate and proper sanitary facilities, approved by the department of health, shall be provided by the owner/operator for each theater. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B5), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-27. - Attendants. 
At all times when a theater is open to the public, the owner/operator shall provide an adequate number of qualified attendants on duty at all times, who shall patrol the aisles, exits, entrances and parking spaces to see that order is maintained, that disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the entrances and exits are kept free from congestion, and that this article and all other governing ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to theaters are observed. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B6), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-28. - Wall or fence for drive-ins. 
Should the owner/operator of any drive-in theater desire to provide a wall or fence of adequate height to screen the patrons and cars in attendance at the drive-in theater from the view of surrounding property, such wall or fence shall be of a design and structure complying with the building code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B7), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75) 
Cross reference— Permit to build or enlarge fence or wall, § 9-3; building code, § 9-62 et seq.  
Sec. 5-29. - Individual loudspeakers required at drive-ins. 
In drive-in theaters, individual loudspeakers for each car shall be provided and no central loudspeaker shall be permitted by the owner/operator. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B8), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-30. - Concessions. 
Any sale of soft drinks, confections or other articles of merchandise on the premises where any theater is operated shall be governed by the laws and ordinances governing such business and shall require the same license as if such sales were conducted elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(B9), 6-12-70)  
Sec. 5-31. - Maintenance of quiet and good order; loitering prohibited. 
The owner/operator shall maintain quiet and good order upon the premises where any theater is operated and shall not permit loitering of persons in or about the entrances to or exits from such theater. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(A1), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Sec. 5-32. - Nude scenes visible from street or highway. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator, ticket seller, ticket taker, usher, motion picture operator and any other person connected with or employed by any owner/operator to show or exhibit, at a theater in the city, or to aid or assist in such exhibition, any motion picture, slide, or other exhibit which is visible from any public street or highway in which the bare buttocks or the bare female breasts of the human body are shown or in which striptease, burlesque or nudist-type scenes constitute the main or primary material of such movie, slide or exhibit. 
(Ord. No. 70-123, § 9(A2), 6-12-70; Ord. No. 75-116, § 2, 7-1-75)  
Secs. 5-33—5-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED 
 
Secs. 5-41—5-61. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 75-116, § 3, adopted July 1, 1975, repealed Div. 2, §§ 5-41—5-50, which pertained to licenses. Said division had been derived from Ord. No. 70-123, §§ 2—8, 10, 11, adopted June 12, 1970.  
ARTICLE III. - BILLIARD HALLS AND DOMINO HALLS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate billiard halls, V.A.T.S. Tax.-Gen. art. 19.01 (10). 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-62. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Billiard hall. A "billiard hall," is any room, hall, building, or part of a building, tent or other enclosure, or any enclosed or partially enclosed space, in which is exhibited for hire, revenue, fee or gain of any kind any pool table or billiard table, stand or structure of any kind, on which may be played pool or billiards, or any game similar to pool or billiards, played with balls or cues, or both, or a similar device. 
Billiard hall and domino hall operator. A "billiard hall operator" or "domino hall operator" is any person owning, leasing, managing or in any manner controlling the operation of a billiard hall or domino hall, as the case may be. 
Billiard or pool table. The term "billiard table" or "pool table" shall mean and include any table surrounded by a ledge or cushion, with or without pockets, upon which balls are impelled by a stick or cue, or where the player thereon does not or is not required to make a coin deposit causing an electrical device of any kind or nature to be activated before such game may be actually commenced. 
Domino hall. A "domino hall" is any room, hall, building, or part of a building, tent, or enclosure of any kind, or any enclosed or partially enclosed space, in which the playing of dominoes is permitted, for a fee or gain of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 1, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-63. - Operators not to permit violations of article. 
The operator or person in charge of any billiard hall or domino table shall not permit a violation of any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 5, 11-14-69)  
Sec. 5-64. - Penalty for violations of article. 
Any person who shall violate, or allow or cause any person under his control to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. IV, § 2, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-65. - Police officers' right of entry. 
Officers of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to enter, at any time, for the purposes of inspection and for the preservation of law and order, any billiard hall or domino hall within the city. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 4, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-66. - Hours of operation. 
Billiard halls and/or domino halls shall not be open except during the following hours: 
(1)  Mondays through Fridays, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(2)  Saturdays, 8:00 a.m. to 2:00 a.m. 
(3)  Sundays, 1:00 p.m. to 2:00 a.m. No person shall play billiards therein except during such hours. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. III, § 1, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 71-212, § 1, 7-27-71; Ord. No. 74-76, § 1, 4-16-74)  
Sec. 5-67. - Unobstructed view to interior. 
Every billiard hall and domino hall shall have unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side, so that the area is open to view by members of the public passing by on a public street, or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public resorts and is admitted without charge. The operator of such hall shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens, partitions or other structures. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. III, § 2, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-68. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed § 5-68 which pertained to vagrants, prostitutes and known police characters and derived from Ord. No. 69-195, Art. III, § 3, adopted Nov. 4, 1969.  
Sec. 5-69. - Gambling prohibited. 
No person shall gamble, wager or bet or cause any person to gamble, wager or bet, on the outcome of billiard or domino games in a billiard or domino hall, nor shall any operator, employee, licensee or owner of such a hall allow any person to gamble, wager or bet on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. III, § 4, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-70. - Minors prohibited; exceptions. 
(a)  No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be allowed on the premises to play pool, billiards or dominoes in a billiard or domino hall, unless such minor is accompanied by his parent or his legal guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent himself to be either the parent or the legal guardian of a minor, for the purpose of evading the provisions of this section. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to a billiard hall or domino hall for which a Class C license has been issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 3, 11-4-69)  
Secs. 5-71—5-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5-77. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a billiard hall or domino hall having more than one (1) billiard table or domino table therein, unless the billiard hall or domino hall shall first have been licensed by the building official for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 1a, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to license billiard halls, V.A.T.S. Tax-Gen. art. 19.01 (10).  
Sec. 5-78. - Classification. 
Billiard hall and domino hall licenses shall be of four (4) classes as follows: 
(1)  A Class A license is intended for places having four (4) or more billiard tables or domino tables. 
(2)  A Class B license is intended for places in which only coin-operated pool tables or billiard tables are supplied and their use resembles that of other coin-operated amusement devices. A Class B license shall be issued for coin-operated billiard tables only and the licensee may operate no more than ten (10) billiard tables on the premises. 
(3)  A Class C license is intended for those places certified as suitable for minors in accord with section 5-83. 
(4)  A Class D license is intended for those places having three (3) or less pool or billiard tables. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, §§ 1b, 1c, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-79. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license to operate a billiard hall or domino hall shall file with the building official a written sworn application, upon forms furnished by the building official, for such license, which application shall state the following: 
(1)  The location, by street and number, of the place or building. 
(2)  The name, age, residence address and citizenship of the applicant. 
(3)  If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all the information required of an individual applicant shall be required of each individual member of the firm, association or partnership. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, that it is organized and chartered under the corporate laws of this state applicable to such corporation, or, if a foreign corporation, that it has complied with the laws of this state applicable to such corporation, and the same information with reference to the operator or person in charge of the operation of the billiard hall or domino hall to be licensed as is prescribed for an individual applicant. Such information shall also be given as to each person owning twenty per cent (20%) or more of the capital stock. The application shall give the state of incorporation and the address of the principal office and the corporation's agent for service of citation. 
(5)  Each individual named on the application shall swear that he is a law-abiding citizen and shall state whether he has ever been convicted of a felony or an offense involving moral turpitude, and if he has, shall list the same on the application. 
(6)  Previous occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five (5) years preceding the filing of his application. 
(7)  Such other and additional information as the chief of police may, from time to time, deem proper and necessary. 
(b)  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the building official and shall accompany each application for a license under this division. Such fee is nonreturnable if the application for a license is refused. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 1d, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-80. - List of employees to accompany application; fingerprinting and investigation of applicant and employees. 
The applicant for a billiard or domino hall license shall file, along with his application for a license, a sworn list of the persons to be employed by him, giving the name, age, citizenship, residence, and information as to convictions required by an applicant. Each proposed employee and the applicant shall be fingerprinted by the police department, and the chief of police shall determine whether each of the proposed employees and the applicant meet the qualifications required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2a, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-81. - Not to issue in violation of deed restrictions; duty of applicant with respect to deed restrictions. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under the terms of this division for the location of any billiard hall or domino hall where it is prohibited by any deed restrictions recorded in the office of the County Clerk of Harris County. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the applicant for a billiard hall or domino hall license to search the records of the county clerk's office to insure that this type of business is not prohibited by any deed restrictions, and the applicant must file a verified affidavit that the location of the premises for which he is applying for a license is not prohibited by deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2e, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-82. - Fees. 
(a)  Class A. The fee for a Class A license under this division shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) per year per billiard table or domino table. Each such license shall state the number of tables licensed. The licensee may operate more tables by paying an additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each additional table per year. 
(b)  Class B. The fee for a Class B license under this division shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year per coin-operated billiard table. Each such license shall state the number of tables licensed. The licensee may operate more tables by paying an additional fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each additional table per year. 
(c)  Class C. The annual fee for a Class C license under this division shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), except that, where a licensee previously holds a Class A or Class B license, the annual fee for a Class C license shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(d)  Class D. The annual fee for a Class D license under this division shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(e)  Not prorated. No license fee provided for herein shall be prorated. 
(f)  Not refundable. No refund of any license fee paid in accordance with this section shall be made by the city for any cause whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, §§ 1c, 2c, 2g, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-83. - Special provisions relative to Class C licenses. 
(a)  The building official shall not issue a Class C license under this division, unless the chief of police has certified that the billiard or domino hall for which it is to be issued is suitable for minors. The chief of police shall, after a reasonable time for investigation, certify that the establishment is suitable for minors, if the following standards are met: 
(1)  That the applicant has never been guilty of a violation of any provision of this article. 
(2)  That no alcoholic beverages of any kind shall ever be permitted, sold or consumed on the premises. 
(3)  That three (3) signs, at least one (1) foot by three (3) feet in size, stating "No alcoholic beverages allowed on premises," are prominently displayed on the premises. 
(4)  That such billiard hall or domino hall is at least three hundred (300) feet away from any bar or business selling alcoholic beverages of any kind, the measurement to be along the property line of the street front and from front door to front door, and in a direct line across intersections where they occur. 
(5)  That the applicant will operate an orderly place of business, where no unruly behavior is permitted, and that no person under the influence of alcoholic beverages will be allowed on the premises. 
(b)  A Class C license, when issued, shall be for a specified licensee at a specified location. 
(c)  After reasonable notice and opportunity to be heard, the chief of police may revoke or suspend a certificate issued under this section for failure to maintain the standards herein required or any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 3, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-84. - Appeal from refusal. 
In the event the building official shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under this division, such action shall be final, unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal to grant such license, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted. In the event such appeal is filed, the building official and the chief of police shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application, including the written application, together with the action of the building official and the chief of police and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the building official and the chief of police, at which hearing, the council may make such investigation as it may see fit, whether all the pertinent facts appear in the application or not. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written deduction of its judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2f, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-85. - Posting. 
A license issued under this division shall be posted in a prominent place in the billiard hall or domino hall for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 3, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-86. - Transfer. 
A license issued under this division may be transferred to a different lawful location, upon sworn application and payment of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Such a license shall not be transferred to a different licensee. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2b, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-87. - Term; renewal. 
All licenses issued under this division shall be valid from January first through December thirty-first of each calendar year, unless sooner suspended or revoked, and the same must be renewed by January first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2c, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-88. - Change of employees after issuance. 
After a license is issued under this division, the licensee shall obtain authorization for the employment of any person whom he intends to employ and who has not been previously so authorized for employment. The licensee shall notify the chief of police of the termination of an employee. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2a, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-89. - Changes in members of partnership or corporate officers or stockholders after issuance. 
(a)  A license issued under this division to a partnership is not voided by withdrawal of one or more partners, so long as one of the original partners remains. If a new partner becomes a member of such partnership, a new license is required, unless he already holds a license, and a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) will be charged for the issuance of such new license. 
(b)  A license issued under this division to a corporation is voided if an unqualified person becomes the principal officer or acquires twenty per cent (20%) or more of the capital stock. 
(c)  All changes in the membership of a partnership holding a license under this division, and all changes in the identity of the principal officer of a corporation so licensed or the ownership of twenty per cent (20%) or more of its stock, shall be reported to the chief of police within ten (10) days after they occur, accompanied with a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for the issuance of a new license. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2b, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-90. - Does not grant vested rights. 
No license granted under the terms of this division shall be deemed the granting of a vested right, but such license shall remain subject to the terms and provisions of this article and subject to such future regulations as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. II, § 2h, 11-4-69)  
Sec. 5-91. - Revocation. 
If a person holding a license issued under this division violates any provision of this article, this Code or the laws of the state, or if a billiard hall or domino hall licensed under this division is not being conducted in accordance with this article, this Code and the laws of the state, or is being conducted in violation thereof, the building official may at any time give notice in writing to the operator, licensee, manager, or other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such billiard hall or domino hall that the license issued for the operation and maintenance of such hall has been revoked, stating therein the reason or reasons for such revocation. Such notice of revocation shall become a final revocation after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the service of same upon the operator, licensee, manager or other person in charge of the billiard hall or domino hall, unless, on or before the expiration of such ten (10) days, the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge of the hall shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city council, in which it is requested that the city council grant him a hearing upon the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed herein, shall operate as a stay or postponement of the revocation, until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make final adjudication upon the question of whether or not the license should be revoked. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the appeal. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written deduction of its judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. Such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties, and shall be, in all cases, by a majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 69-195, Art. I, § 5; Art. II, § 2d; Art. IV, § 2, 11-4-69; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Secs. 5-92—5-102. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DANCE HALLS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Authority of chief of police to close ballrooms, § 30-3; prostitutes, vagrants, drunks, etc., not to attend public dance or dance hall, § 20-40. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-103. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Cabaret or nightclub. The term "cabaret" or "nightclub" shall mean any space, structure, building or resort open to the public, enclosed or unenclosed, where food, beer or wine or other alcoholic beverage is served on the premises, including restaurants and cafes, and where patrons are provided with a space for dancing, or are permitted to dance. 
Club. The term "club" shall mean any bona fide nonprofit society, association of persons or corporation, organized for civic, fraternal, social or charitable purposes, or for any purpose not a business or commercial purpose, which owns, rents or operates a place or building for the accommodation of its members, when such place or premises or any part thereof is used for dancing by members of the club, or is rented to others for such purpose. 
Dancing school. The term "dancing school" shall mean any room, place, space or academy in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for hire. 
Incidental to the main business; principal business. The terms "incidental to the main business" and "principal business" shall be construed as being used in the common and ordinary understanding of such terms; provided, however, that any operator or licensee, to be considered as coming within the exceptions provided for in this article, shall show, by a written, sworn statement, that the revenues or money received from the patrons of the dance hall involved, for admission charges, sales of food, beer or wine, or any other charges made within the licensed premises, amounts in dollars and cents to less than fifty-one per cent (51%) of the revenue of money received from all other sources in connection with the operation of the business as a whole, and from any bona fide cabaret or nightclub having an actual seating capacity, including tables and chairs, for three hundred (300) patrons, or more, where vaudeville acts are offered and where food, beer and wine are served. 
Operator or dance hall operator. The term "operator" or "dance hall operator" shall mean the person who conducts, manages, maintains or controls, either directly or indirectly, any dance hall as defined and designated in this article. 
Premises. The term "premises" shall be construed to include all the rooms, spaces, places or buildings which are joined by connecting doors or other openings, or which are so constructed that either or all of such rooms or spaces serve each of the other such rooms or spaces. 
Private dance. The term "private dance" shall mean and include any dance given at any home or any dance given or held and officially sponsored by a bona fide club, admission to which is granted to members and their respective relatives of consanguinity or affinity, or both, or to such members and relatives and one (1) invited guest per member, accompanied by such host-member, and from which the general public is excluded. 
Public dance or public ball. The term "public dance" or "public ball" shall mean any dance or ball to which admission can be had by payment of a fee, or by the purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or in which a charge is made for caring for clothing, or any other dance to which the public generally may gain admission with the payment of a fee, directly or indirectly, or without payment of a fee. 
Public dance hall. The term "public dance hall" shall mean any one or more rooms, places, spaces or buildings where a public dance is held or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-1), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 78-98, § 4, 7-5-78)  
Sec. 5-104. - Classification. 
For the purposes of this article, dance halls are hereby designated and rated according to the following classes: 
(1)  Class A. Cabarets and nightclubs are designated and rated as Class A dance halls. 
(2)  Class B. All dance halls not otherwise specifically classified are designated and rated as Class B dance halls. 
(3)  Class C. Dancing schools are designated and rated as Class C dance halls. 
(4)  Class D. Places or buildings owned, rented or operated by a club and used for dancing by members of the club or rented to others for such purpose are designated and rated as Class D dance halls. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-1), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-105. - Designation of inspectors. 
City employees shall be designated as dance hall inspectors, from time to time by directive of the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-7), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-106. - Permit for single dances. 
(a)  When any person or club shall hold a single dance in a dance hall licensed under this article, a single dance permit shall be secured from the building official for the holding of such dance, and a fee of three dollars ($3.00) shall be paid therefor. A verified application for such permit shall be made not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time such dance is to be held. Such application shall be signed by the person applying for such permit. The applicant shall present a letter of authority for securing the permit from the organization applying for the permit. The verified application for such permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person or club under whose auspices the dance is to be conducted. 
(2)  A statement in detail as to whether the dance is to be conducted for any special benefit or in behalf of any particular organization or group of individuals. 
(3)  A statement as to whether the sale of admissions to members or the general public is contemplated by telephone solicitation. 
(4)  A statement as to whether the sale of admissions to members or to the general public is contemplated by personal solicitation. 
(5)  A statement as to whether commissions are to be paid individual solicitors for the sale of admissions and the amount of any such commissions. 
(6)  A statement that the applicant agrees that the issuance of the permit is based on the declarations and statements contained in the application, and that the representations made therein are true and that misrepresentations of any fact or statement and any misrepresentation for the purposes of avoiding the provisions of this article shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for the revocation and cancellation of the license issued under this article for the dance hall. 
(b)  In the event it appears to the building official that any dance is to be conducted on behalf of or for the benefit of any organization or group of individuals, then, before issuing a permit under this section, he shall refer the application for the permit to the city council. 
(c)  In lieu of the single-dance permit required by subsection (a), an annual continuous permit for single dances may be secured upon the payment of a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Such continuous permit shall authorize not to exceed twenty-four (24) dances during any twelve (12) consecutive calendar months. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-19, 20, 27), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-107. - General construction requirements. 
(a)  The construction of dance halls shall meet all applicable requirements of the building code and other applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  No dance hall shall be permitted above the ground floor level in any wood frame building. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to dance halls in operation on April 12, 1966, so long as they are in continuous operation. 
(c)  Class A, Class B or Class D dance halls which were in operation on April 12, 1966 and which are operating in wood frame constructed buildings shall not be added to, enlarged, extended, remodeled or rebuilt, and there shall be a clearance of at least ten (10) feet from any building or structure adjacent to any such wood frame constructed dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-22), 4-12-66) 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 5-108. - Minimum dancing space. 
Every Class A or Class B dance hall shall have at least three hundred (300) square feet of floor space for dancing, if the seating capacity of such hall is under two hundred (200) patrons seated at tables. Every such dance hall shall have at least four hundred (400) square feet of floor space for dancing, if the seating capacity of such hall is over two hundred (200) patrons seated at tables. This section shall not apply to any public dance hall where the operation and maintenance of the dance hall is merely incidental to the main business, and is not the principal business of such establishment. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-21), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-109. - Partitions separating kitchens and other occupancies. 
Partitions separating kitchens from the public portions of a Class A, Class B or Class D dance hall shall be of not less than one (1) hour fire resistive construction in all types of construction. Partitions, walls and floors separating dance halls from all other occupancies in the same building shall be as otherwise required by the building code. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-22), 4-12-66) 
Cross reference— Building code, § 9-62 et seq.  
Sec. 5-110. - Sleeping rooms prohibited; exception. 
No dance hall shall have connected with it in any way, any room equipped or fitted in any way as a sleeping room which is open to or let to the patrons of such dance hall or to the public, with or without a charge being made therefor, except bona fide hotels, motels, or motor hotels having more than twenty-five (25) rooms. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(1a-5), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-111. - Toilet facilities. 
Each dance hall shall be supplied with separate and convenient toilet facilities for the male and female sex. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-6), 4-12-66) 
Cross reference— Plumbing, Ch. 29.  
Sec. 5-112. - Exits generally. 
Every Class A, Class B or Class D dance hall shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Exit passageways shall be not less than six (6) feet, eight (8) inches in height. 
(2)  Stages shall have not less than one (1) exit on each side and such exits shall be not less than two (2) feet, six (6) inches in width. 
(3)  Doors shall swing in the direction of exit travel, and if provided with latches, such latches shall be of a self-releasing type, such as panic bolts or similar devices which will permit the door to open when pressed against. No revolving door shall be permitted in any dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-11), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-113. - Exits, aisles, etc., not to be obstructed. 
No persons or obstructions of any kind, either permanent or movable, shall be placed in any exit, aisle, passageway or corridor of any dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-22), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-114. - Decorations, draperies, etc., to be fire resistant. 
All decorations, draperies and acoustical materials used in a dance hall shall be fire resistant. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-22), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-115. - Fire extinguishers. 
Fire extinguishers shall be provided in the following locations at every Class A, Class B or Class D dance hall: 
(1)  One (1) eight (8) pound CO 2 extinguisher in the kitchen. 
(2)  One (1) two and three-quarter (2¾) gallon soda and acid extinguisher, or other water-type extinguisher approved by the American Insurance Association, for each two thousand (2,000) square feet or fraction thereof of gross floor space. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-22), 4-12-66)  
Secs. 5-116, 5-117. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-98, §§ 1, 2, enacted July 5, 1978, repealed §§ 5-116, 5-117, derived from Ord. No. 1796, § 1 (10A-9—10A-11), enacted April 12, 1966, pertaining to guards and their access to telephones in dance halls.  
Sec. 5-118. - Minors under seventeen years of age prohibited after midnight; exception. 
No person under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be permitted to attend any public dance at a dance hall after 12:00 midnight, unless such person is accompanied by his parent or guardian. It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent himself to be either the parent or guardian of any such minor for the purpose of gaining his admittance into a dance hall. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-4), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-119. - Dancing prohibited between certain hours in Class A and B halls. 
Dancing shall not be permitted and it shall be unlawful for any person to dance between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. in any Class A or Class B dance hall; provided, however, that the chief of police may grant special permits for dancing until a later hour, upon special occasions. Application for such special permits shall be made not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-3), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-120. - Smoking on dance floor prohibited. 
Smoking by a dancer, or other person, while on the dance floor of a dance hall is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-8A), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-121. - Free access for city officers on duty. 
Free access and entrance into all dance halls shall at all times be accorded and granted to city dance hall inspectors and police and fire officers when on official duty. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-7), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-122. - Operators not to permit violation of article. 
The operator of any dance hall shall not permit the violation of any of the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-8), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-123. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 78-98, § 3, passed July 5, 1978, repealed § 5-123, pertaining to compliance with dance hall regulations and derived from Ord. No. 1796, § 1 (10A-8), enacted April 12, 1966.  
Secs. 5-124—5-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5-131. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to hold or conduct any public dance, public ball or any dancing school within the city, unless and until the dance hall in which the same is held has been licensed for such purposes; provided, that this section shall not apply where instruction is given to members of a family in their own home, or where community facilities of the city are used for community dances sponsored and supervised by the city, or are rented or engaged by private individuals or organizations for the purpose of private parties from which are excluded members of the general public, or where property of the Pasadena Independent School District or of the Deer Park Independent School District is used for public school dances supervised by public school officials. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dance at any place except at a place licensed as required by this section. The owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any establishment not licensed as required by this section, who permits any person to dance therein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-12, 15), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-132. - Special license required where public dancing not permitted but facilities are leased for private dances. 
When any person operates, conducts or maintains a restaurant, cafe or other similar business on or at premises where no public dancing is permitted or conducted, but where the physical facilities and premises are capable of being used for private dances, and where such premises are leased, rented or engaged periodically on particular occasions by private individuals or organizations for the purpose of dining and private dancing by such individuals or organizations and their invited guests and members, a special license shall be secured by the person operating, conducting and maintaining such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-20), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-133. - Filing and contents of application. 
Any person desiring a license to operate a dance hall shall file, with the building official, a written, sworn application, for such license, on a form provided for that purpose. Such application shall state: 
(1)  The location, by street and number, of the place, space or building and room or floor, and the size of such room or space which is proposed to be used for such purpose, and the name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  If the applicant is an individual, that he is a law-abiding tax-paying citizen of the state; that he has not been convicted of a felony, or if he has, the nature of the offense; and the length of his residence in the city. 
(3)  If the applicant is a firm, association or partnership, all of the information prescribed in paragraph (2) of this section as to each individual composing the firm, association or partnership. 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, that the applicant is organized and chartered under the corporation laws of this state applicable to such corporation, or, if a foreign corporation, that such corporation has complied with the laws of this state applicable to such corporation, and the same information with reference to the operator or person in charge of the operation of the dance hall desired to be licensed as is prescribed in paragraph (2) of this section; and in addition thereto, a statement as to the names of the incorporators or shareholders, and the amount of interest owned by each. 
(5)  Previous occupation or employment of the applicant for a period of five (5) years preceding the filing of his application. 
(6)  If the application is for a license to operate a dancing school, or Class C dance hall, such application shall give the name and address of each person who is to instruct in such school. 
(7)  Whether a hotel, rooming house or lodging house is conducted in any part of the premises for which a license is sought, and if so, the number of rooms contained in such hotel, rooming house or lodging house; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuance of a license to any public dance hall having connected with it any sleeping rooms which are not open to nor let to the patrons of such dance hall or to the public. 
(8)  The hours and days of operation when the dance hall is open to the public or guests; a description of beverages or food to be served, if any; the number and size of doors and distances from outside edges of any other doors opening into a given room or space to be used for a dance floor; type of music source; and frequency of availability and general description of entertainment, if any. 
(9)  Such other and additional information as the city council may deem proper and necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-17), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-134. - Purpose of information required in application; misrepresentations. 
The information required to be given in an application for a license under this division is for the purpose of determining whether or not the applicant is a fit and proper person to operate a dance hall, and whether or not the premises are a proper and safe place for licensed dancing. It shall be unlawful for any person to misrepresent the kind and character of dance hall to be operated, or any other fact or statement made in such application. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-18), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-135. - Payment of taxes, liens, etc., prerequisite to issuance. 
No dance hall license shall be issued unless all ad valorem taxes and other taxes, fees, liens, assessments, or charges on property, real, personal or mixed, situated at the proposed license address or location, including interest and penalty, which are due and owing the city are fully and proved to be so paid by valid, lawful receipt. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-14), 4-12-66) 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 5-136. - Applicant's insurance. 
(a)  No dance hall license shall be issued under this division, unless the applicant has in force and effect a public liability insurance policy covering all premises employed in the conduct of dancing and issued by an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas, or by a surplus line insurance company which is not legally prohibited from doing business in the State of Texas. Such insurance policy shall provide liability insurance in the amount of not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) per person injured in an accident and not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) total per accident. 
(b)  Certificates or certified copies of such policies shall be filed with the building official prior to issue of a dance hall license. All such insurance policies, certificates, or certified copies thereof shall provide for a written 30-day cancellation notice to the building official. 
(c)  In lieu of the insurance required by subsections (a) and (b), surety bonds issued by solvent and responsible corporate sureties authorized to do business in the State of Texas may be accepted by the building official for all or any part of such insurance; provided, that each bond shall be conditioned for the payment and satisfaction of any financial judgment in conformity with the provisions of any insurance policy required herein. Such surety bonds shall be filed with the building official before a license can be issued under this division. All such bonds, certificates thereof, or certified copies thereof shall provide for a 30-day cancellation notice to the building official. 
(d)  The cancellation or other termination of any such policy or bond shall automatically revoke the license issued for the dance hall covered by such policy or bond, unless another insurance policy or bond complying with this section is provided and in effect at the time of such cancellation or termination. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-28), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-137. - Inspection of premises and approval or disapproval of application. 
No license shall be granted pursuant to this division unless it shall appear, upon investigation by or under the direction of the chief of police, the director of public health, the fire marshal, and the building official, that the premises desired to be used for the purpose of conducting a dance hall complies with the laws of the state and the ordinances of the city regulating health and sanitation, the fire regulations, and the building code. Such officers shall, in their respective capacities, note their approval or disapproval upon the application. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-15), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-138. - Fees. 
(a)  The following fees shall be charged for each license issued under the terms of this division and shall be collected for the city by the building official: 
(1)  For a Class A dance hall, the license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00); provided, however, that where such dance hall is not operated more than three (3) nights per week, the license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  For a Class B dance hall, the license fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00); provided, however, that where such dance hall is not operated more than three (3) nights per week, the license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00). 
(3)  For a Class C dance hall, the license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00); provided, however, that where such dance hall is used for the holding of public or private dances in addition to the classes and instruction in dancing, the fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(4)  For a Class D dance hall, the license fee shall be five dollars ($5.00); provided, however, that where such dance hall is rented to other operators for the holding of a public or private dance, the license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
(5)  For a special license required by section 5-132, the fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(b)  No refund of any license fee paid in accord with this section shall be made by the city for any cause whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-20, 26), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-139. - Issuance. 
A license applied for under this division shall be issued by the building official when the conditions of this article have been complied with and the application has been approved in accord with this division. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-14), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-140. - Contents; signing and sealing. 
A license issued under this division shall state on its face to whom it is issued, the date it will expire, the address and location of the dance hall for which issued, and whether the licensee is authorized to operate and conduct a Class A, B, C or D dance hall. It shall be signed and sealed by the building official. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-16), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-141. - Posting. 
A license issued under this division shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place, at or near the entrance to the dance hall, and in such a place and position that it may be easily read at any time of the day or night. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-16), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-142. - Does not grant vested rights. 
The granting of any license under the terms of this division shall in no event be construed as the granting or conferring of any vested right to the licensee or operator, and such license shall be subject to suspension, revocation and cancellation as provided for in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-23), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-143. - Not assignable; transfer from one location to another. 
Licenses issued pursuant to this division shall be deemed personal to the licensee and shall not be assignable. A license issued hereunder may be transferred from one location or place of business to another location, after the chief of police shall have been given five (5) days notice of such proposed transfer for investigation, and the chief of police has given consent thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-26), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-144. - Continuation after reorganization or change in management of corporate licensee. 
If any corporation having a license under this division is reorganized or has a change in management, such license shall not continue in force until the chief of police shall have been given five (5) days notice of such reorganization or change in management, and until he shall have made an investigation of such reorganization and change in management and given his consent for the continuation of the license after determining that the personnel of the new management is fit and proper to operate a dance hall under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-26), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-145. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued under the provisions of this division shall terminate one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-27), 4-12-66)  
Sec. 5-146. - Appeal from denial. 
In the event the building official shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under this division, his action shall be final, unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal to grant such license, file a written appeal with the city secretary, addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing by the city council upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted. In the event such appeal is filed, the building official shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application in question, including the written application, together with the action of the building official and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the building official, at which hearing, the city council may make such investigation as it may see fit, whether or not all the pertinent facts appear in the application. It shall be discretionary with the city council as to whether or not a license shall be granted, and such action as the city council determines shall be administratively final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-24), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-147. - Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The building official may revoke or suspend the license of any dance hall at any time for failure to keep the licensed premises in compliance with this article and all applicable state laws and ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(b)  Any misrepresentation by the applicant for the purpose of avoiding the provisions of this article shall, in addition to the other penalties prescribed by law, be cause for revocation of the license. 
(c)  Every revocation or suspension under this section, and every appeal therefrom, shall be made in compliance with the procedures for revocation and suspension and appeal provided in Article II of Chapter 33 of this Code. The word "procedures," as used herein, refers to the order of and time limits for notices and hearings, as well as the method and effect of notice. 
(Ord. No. 1796, § 1(10A-18, 25), 4-12-66; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Secs. 5-148—5-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - COMMERCIALLY OPERATED TRANSIENT AMUSEMENTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-171, adopted June 15, 1971, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1—11 and 14 herein as Art. V, §§ 5-151—5-162 was at the discretion of the editors. The substantive provisions of said ordinance are included herein as enacted, however "ordinance" was changed to "article" where necessary and §§ 12, 13 and 15, severability, repealer, publication and effective date provisions, were omitted. 
 
Sec. 5-151. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(a)  City is the City of Pasadena. 
(b)  Building official is the license officer or permit officer of the City of Pasadena. 
(c)  Transient amusement is any circus, carnival, concession, game, ride, exhibit or any other type of public amusement device which is of a type generally considered to be of a transient nature, but shall not include such amusements where they are operated by a school or a church and all of the persons engaged in the operation are members of the school or church organization which is operating such amusement. 
(d)  Licensee is any person having a city license in full force and effect issued hereunder for a transient amusement. 
(e)  Person is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 1, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-152. - License required. 
No person shall install, construct, operate or maintain a transient amusement within the city without having a valid license therefor in force and effect under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 2, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-153. - Application procedure. 
Applications for licenses issued hereunder for a transient amusement shall be made upon blank forms to be prepared and made available by the building official and shall state: 
(a)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the applicant; 
(b)  The hours of operation for said transient amusement; 
(c)  The names, addresses and number of employees, exhibitors and other persons to be engaged in the operation of the transient amusement; and 
(d)  If the applicant is a firm, association, partnership or corporation, then all of the information required of an individual shall be required of each individual of the said firm, association, partnership or corporation; and 
(e)  If a corporation, the application shall state: 
(1)  That the applicant is either a domestic corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of Texas, or, if a foreign corporation, the state of its incorporation and that it is duly authorized to transact business in the State of Texas; 
(2)  The name of its registered agent and the address of its registered office in the State of Texas; 
(3)  The name, home address and proposed business address of the operator or person in charge of the operation of the transient amusement to be licensed hereunder; and 
(4)  The name, home address and business address of the president and of each member of the board of directors of such corporation. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 3, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-154. - Application fee. 
An application hereunder shall be accompanied by an application fee of twenty-five and no/100 dollars ($25.00) to defray the expense of investigation of the application and said fee is nonreturnable if the application for a license is refused or not issued after an investigation has been made. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 4, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-155. - License fee. 
After investigation of an application is completed and a license is to be issued, the building official shall notify applicant and, upon payment of a license fee in the amount of one hundred and no/100 dollars ($100.00), for each day or part thereof that the transient amusement is to be operated, the building official shall issue the license for the operation of the transient amusement for the period set forth in the application and covered by the license fee paid. Any license issued by the building official shall be to the applicant named at the location designated in the application. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 5, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-156. - Transfer of licenses; changes in partnerships or corporations. 
A license may be transferred to a different location upon application and payment of a transfer fee of twenty-five and no/100 dollars ($25.00). 
(a)  A license issued to a partnership is not voided by withdrawal of one or more partners so long as one of the original partners remain. 
(b)  All changes in the membership of the partnership and all changes in the identity of the principal officers of the corporation shall be reported to the building official within ten (10) days after they occur. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 6, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-157. - Investigation of application. 
The building official shall forward a copy of each application filed under section 5-153 hereof to the chief of police for investigation. The building official and chief of police shall complete their investigation within two (2) days from date of filing of the application. The report of the chief of police shall include the number of special police that applicant shall, at its own expense, have on duty at the location during the operation of the transient amusement and the building official, when an application is approved, shall give written notice, with the license issued, of such requirements. Every special policeman to be employed by a licensee must be approved of the chief of police prior to his employment. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 7, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-158. - Standards for issuance. 
The building official shall issue a license hereunder when he finds that the requirements of this article and of all other governing laws and ordinances have been met. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 8, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-159. - Duties of licensee. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate a transient amusement in the city without complying with the following requirements and standards of operation: 
(a)  Conduct and operation. The licensee shall maintain good order upon the premises where any transient amusement is operated. 
(b)  Standards for maintenance of premises. 
(1)  Access. The licensee shall provide access available to public streets or other public ways at all times to facilitate departure of persons from the premises where the transient amusement is operated and to permit entrance of fire apparatus or other emergency equipment in case of emergency. 
(2)  Lighting. Licensee shall provide artificial light whenever natural light is inadequate. 
(3)  Electrical installations. The electrical system shall be installed, maintained and operated in a safe and workmanlike manner. All electrical equipment must meet the requirements of the electrical code of the city. Cables on the ground in areas traversed by the public shall be protected by approved covers. The electrical installations shall be inspected and approved by the city electrical inspector before the transient amusement is opened to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the electrical inspector at all reasonable hours. 
(4)  Fire extinguishing equipment. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be furnished by the licensee in such amount and in such locations as may be directed by the city fire marshal. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be inspected and approved by the city fire marshal before the transient amusement is open to the public and shall thereafter be open to inspection by the city fire marshal at all reasonable hours. 
(5)  Sanitary facilities. When sanitary facilities are to be made available to the public they shall be inspected and approved by the department of health. 
(6)  Attendants. At all times when a transient amusement is open to the public, the licensee shall provide an adequate number of attendants and special police who shall be responsible for seeing that order is maintained, that disorderly or immoral conduct is prevented, that the entrances and exits are kept free from congestion and that this ordinance and all other governing ordinances, rules and regulations pertaining to transient amusements are observed. 
(7)  Noise. The transient amusement shall be operated in such manner as to comply with section 20-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(8)  Concessions. Any sales of items covered by Chapter 15, Article II of the Code of Ordinances shall be strictly in compliance with such article and licensee shall see that the required permits and health certificates are obtained prior to the making of such sales to the public. 
(9)  Inspection. Officers of the police department are hereby authorized and empowered to enter upon the premises where any transient amusement is being operated within the city, at any time, for the purpose of inspection, for preservation of law and order and to determine whether or not the provisions of this article are being complied with. 
(c)  Standard for vacated premises. 
(1)  Licensee shall, upon removal of a transient amusement licensed hereunder, clean the premises of any trash, rubbish and other unsightly or unsanitary matter which has accumulated thereon within twenty-four (24) hours after removal of the transient amusement. 
(2)  Licensee shall, to guarantee compliance with the foregoing subsection (1), prior to the time a license is issued for the operation of a transient amusement, post with the building official a bond in the minimum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be issued by a company doing business in the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 9, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-160. - Suspension of license; appeal. 
The building official, chief of police, fire marshal or fire chief shall, upon discovery of a transient amusement being operated in violation of the terms of this article, immediately suspend the license to operate such transient amusement until such violations are removed. Suspension shall be by notice to the licensee or to the person in charge of the operation of such transient amusement. The one who acts to suspend a license under the terms of this section shall, within twenty-four (24) hours following such action file a written report with the building official setting forth the exact violation, the date and hour of suspension and whether the violation has been removed by the licensee. Where a license has been suspended hereunder and not thereafter reinstated, the licensee may appeal such action by appropriate action in the proper court at law; provided, however, that such proceedings shall be commenced within fifteen (15) days and not thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 10, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-161. - Penalty. 
Any person, persons, operator, owner, owners, partners, licensee, or the agents of a corporation, or whoever is in charge or control of a transient amusement, or any part thereof, who shall violate or allow or cause any person or persons to violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than fifty and no/100 dollars ($50.00) nor more than two hundred and no/100 dollars ($200.00) for such offense; and the license or licenses shall be subject to revocation or suspension for a violation of any provision of this article or of any other provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena or any violation of the laws of the State of Texas. Any remedy prescribed by this article shall be merely cumulative and shall not preclude resort to any other remedy provided by law. Each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 11, 6-15-71)  
Sec. 5-162. - Accrued rights and remedies preserved for benefit of city. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this article and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-171, § 14, 6-15-71)  
Secs. 5-163—5-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - COIN-OPERATED MACHINES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 83-84, adopted March 22, 1983, repealed Art. VI, Div. 1, §§ 5-175—5-181, and Div. 2, §§ 5-193—5-203, relative to game rooms and § 2 enacted, in place thereof, new §§ 5-175—5-215 to read as herein set out in Arts. VI and VII, with minor, nonsubstantive changes made by the editor in order to facilitate reference and maintain Code format. The repealed sections derived from Ord. No. 77-203, §§ 1—18, adopted Oct. 14, 1977. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-175. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this division, the following definitions shall apply: 
Coin-operated machines shall mean every machine or device of any kind or character which is operated by or with coins, metal slugs, tokens, checks or similar objects. Music coin-operated machines and skill and pleasure coin-operated machines, as those terms are hereafter defined, shall be included in such term. 
Music coin-operated machine shall mean and include every coin-operated machine of any kind or character which dispenses or vends, or which is used or operated for dispensing or vending music and which is operated by or with coins, metal slugs, tokens, checks or similar objects. The following are expressly included within such term: Coin-operated phonographs, pianos, gramophones, radios and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or vend music. 
Operator shall mean and include any person, firm, company, association or corporation who exhibits, displays or permits to be exhibited or displayed, in his or its place of business or upon premises under his or its control, any coin-operated machine in the city. 
Owner shall mean and include any person, firm, company, association or corporation owning or having the care, control, management or possession of any coin-operated machine in the city. Owner is solely responsible for paying to the city the occupation tax on each coin-operated machine exhibited or displayed within the city and for securing the city decal evidencing payment of such tax on each coin-operated machine. 
Service coin-operated machine shall mean pay toilets, pay telephones and all other machines or devices which dispense service only and not merchandise, music, skill or pleasure. 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machine shall mean every coin-operated machine of any kind or character whatsoever, when such machine dispenses or is used or is capable of being used or operated for amusement or pleasure, or when such machine is operated for the purpose of dispensing or affording skill or pleasure or for any other purpose other than the dispensing or vending of merchandise, music or service exclusively, as those terms are defined herein. The following are expressly included within such term: Marble machines, marble table machines, marble-shooting machines, miniature race track machines, miniature football machines, miniature golf machines, miniature bowling machines, billiard tables and all other coin-operated machines which dispense or afford skill or pleasure. Every machine or device of any kind or character which dispenses or vends merchandise, commodities or confections or plays music in connection with or in addition to such games or dispensing of skill or pleasure shall be considered a skill or pleasure coin-operated machine. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-176. - Tax imposed; amount; registration. 
(a)  Every "owner," save an owner holding an import license and holding coin-operated machines solely for resale, who owns, controls, possesses, displays or who permits to be exhibited or displayed in the city any coin-operated machine, except those that are exempt under section 5-181, an annual occupation tax in the amount of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). All occupation taxes for coin-operated machines are payable annually in advance. Upon payment of the tax, every owner shall register each machine by make, model and serial number with the city building official or his designated agents. 
(b)  Whenever an owner shall exhibit or display, or permit to be exhibited or displayed, any coin-operated machine for commercial use, there shall be securely attached thereto a decal issued by the city building official evidencing payment of the tax applicable thereto. Each coin-operated machine is subject to the occupation tax when exhibited or displayed for commercial use within the city. Since the tax is payable in advance on an annual calendar year basis, the following pro rata tax rate schedule will be applicable to a coin-operated machine which is first exhibited or displayed for commercial use within the city during any quarter of the calendar year. 
(1)  First quarter—January first to March thirty-first: An amount equal to the applicable annual occupation tax; 
(2)  Second quarter—April first to June thirtieth: An amount equal to three-quarters of the applicable annual occupation tax; 
(3)  Third quarter—July first to September thirtieth: An amount equal to one-half of the applicable annual occupation tax; and 
(4)  Fourth quarter—October first to December thirty-first: An amount equal to one-quarter of the applicable annual occupation tax. 
In computing any tax payable under the aforesaid pro rata tax rate schedule, amounts calculated thereunder shall be rounded to the next higher full cent amount as required. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-177. - Display and issuance of decal evidencing payment; penalties for noncompliance. 
(a)  The decal issued by the city building official to evidence payment of the tax levied herein shall be securely attached with its own adhesive to be a fixed, noninterchangeable part of the coin-operated machine so as to be easily seen by the public and in such a manner that continued application of steam and water be required to remove the same. 
(b)  During the period commencing on December fifteenth and ending on December thirty-first of each year, owners shall pay the occupation tax, register the machines taxed, and thereby receive a decal for each coin-operated machine to be within the city as of January first. At the same time, owners may also pay taxes and receive decals for unregistered machines, up to ten (10) per cent over the number registered. As a decal is placed on an additional machine, the owner shall notify the city assessor and collector of taxes of each machine's make, model and serial number, thereby registering it. 
(c)  If, during each calendar year, an owner desires to secure more decals than the additional ten (10) per cent which may be obtained during the period from December fifteenth through December thirty-first, such decals shall be issued upon payment of the tax applicable to the calendar quarter in which such decals are obtained. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to permit to be exhibited or displayed for commercial use any coin-operated machine which does not have properly attached thereto a decal evidencing payment of the applicable occupation tax. The owner of a coin-operated machine on which the tax has not been paid or which does not have a decal thereon evidencing payment shall forfeit to the city as a penalty the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The penalty, if not paid, shall be recovered in a suit by the city attorney in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-178. - Sealing machine for nonpayment, generally. 
After January thirty-first of each year, the city building official or his departmental employees will seal, in a manner that will prevent further operation, any coin-operated machine upon which the decal is not properly displayed. Any owner subject to this division shall be required to pay a fee of five dollars ($5.00) for the release of any machine sealed as provided herein for nonpayment of the tax or for failure to properly display the decal evidencing the payment of the tax. Upon proof of payment of the occupation tax provided for in the division, the penalties provided for in section 5-177 and the five dollars ($5.00) release fee, the city building official or his departmental employees will remove the seal. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-179. - Penalty for removal of sealed machine. 
It shall be unlawful to remove from the premises any machine that has been sealed pursuant to section 5-178. Whoever shall remove a machine that is sealed shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-180. - Penalty for breaking seal. 
Whoever shall break the seal affixed pursuant to section 5-178, or exhibit, display or remove any machine on which such seal has been broken, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-181. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Gas meters, pay telephones, pay toilets, food vending machines, confection vending machines, beverage vending machines, merchandise vending machines, and cigarette vending machines which are now subject to an occupation or gross receipts tax, stamp vending machines, and "service coin-operated machines," as that term is defined, are expressly exempt from the tax levied herein, and the other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Coin-operated machines that have been remanufactured or altered not to accept coins are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this division unless they are opened by payment of a fee. 
(c)  Coin-operated machines operated solely in a private residence and not available to the general public are expressly exempt from the tax levied in this division. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-182. - Division does not authorize illegal machines. 
Nothing contained in this division shall be construed or have the effect to license, permit, authorize or legalize any machine, device, table or coin-operated machine, the keeping, exhibition, operation, displaying or maintenance of which is illegal or in violation of any article of the Penal Code of this state, or the constitution of this state. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-242, § 1, adopted Dec. 26, 1989, repealed Div. 2, §§ 5-183—5-197, which pertained to music and skill or pleasure coin-operated machines and derived from Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, adopted March 22, 1983. 
 
Secs. 5-183—5-197. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - SPECIAL REGULATIONS AFFECTING SKILL OR PLEASURE COIN-OPERATED MACHINES 
 
Sec. 5-198. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this division, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Skill or pleasure coin-operated machines shall mean and have the same definition as is set forth in section 5-175. 
Video game shall mean any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine which is a computer-based console equipped with color screen providing special effects wherein the player participates in the action upon the screen. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-199. - Hours. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person owning or having control of premises upon which there is located one or more skill or pleasure coin-operated machines to permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to play at any skill or pleasure coin-operated machine before 3:30 p.m. on any day in which the public schools located within the city are in session unless such minor is accompanied by his or her parent or managing or possessory conservator. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-200. - Spacing requirements. 
No skill or pleasure coin-operated machine, either taxable or licensed under this article, shall be placed in an area not providing a minimum of one foot of area on each side of said machine, plus an area of four (4) feet in front of the device. In no event shall more than three (3) persons ever occupy at one time the area around a video game detailed by the foregoing description. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
ARTICLE VII. - GAME ROOMS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Note— See the editor's footnote to Art. VI of this chapter. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 5-201. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Game room shall mean any building, room, hall, part of a building or other enclosure or any enclosed or partially enclosed space where more than four (4) skill or pleasure coin-operated machines are available to the public and which derives more than fifty (50) per cent of its gross revenues in the city from skill or pleasure coin-operated machines or dedicates more than fifty (50) per cent of its usable floor area to the placement of and provision for skill coin-operated machines. Provided, however, that premises which have been licensed by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission or under the billiard hall ordinance or bowling alley ordinance of the City of Pasadena shall not be construed to be game rooms within the meaning of this article. 
Game room operator shall mean any person who owns or leases or rents or manages or is in any way responsible for controlling the operation of a game room. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-202. - Game room operator responsible for violation. 
Any game room operator who permits, allows or in any manner condones a violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-203. - Game room employees subject to penalties. 
Any employee of a game room who violates or permits patrons or customers of said game room to violate any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 5-204. - Unobstructed view to interior. 
Every amusement hall shall have unobstructed windows or open space on at least one side, so that the area is open to view by members of the public passing by on a public street, or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public resorts and is admitted without charge. The operator of such game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by the use of drawn shades, blinds, screens, partitions or other structures. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-205. - Operator's responsibility. 
(a)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall, knowingly or recklessly, permit any person to illegally possess, use or sell any controlled substance on the premises. 
(b)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall, knowingly or recklessly, permit any person to possess, consume or sell any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume or sell any alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(d)  No operator, owner, manager or employee shall permit any gambling, wagering or betting to be conducted on said premises. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 5-206. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity to engage in the business of operating a game room unless said game room shall have been first licensed by the city in accordance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-207. - License not to issue in violation of deed restrictions; duty of applicant with respect to deed restrictions. 
(a)  No license shall be granted under the terms of this division for the location of any game room where it is prohibited by any deed restrictions recorded in the office of the county clerk of Harris County. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the applicant for a game room license to search the records of the county clerk's office to ensure that this type of business is not prohibited by any deed restrictions, and the applicant must file an affidavit that the location of the premises for which he is applying for a license is not prohibited by deed restrictions. 
(c)  No license shall issue nor be renewed to any game room located within three hundred (300) feet of any school, public or private, or any hospital, home for the aged or infirm or any funeral parlor. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-208. - Fees. 
The fee to be collected by the city for the issuance or renewal of a license to operate a game room shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). All ad valorem taxes on any and all property, personal or real, necessary to the operation of any game room must be paid prior to the issuance of any license or permit for said operation. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 89-242, § 2, 12-26-89)  
Sec. 5-209. - Application. 
Any person, corporation, partnership or other business entity desiring a license to operate a game room shall present to the city, through the city permit department, a duplicate copy of the application submitted to the Texas Amusement Machine Commission required by said commission for license or registration certificate issued pursuant to Tax-General Article 13.17 Section 12(1). After investigation of the application, the director of the issuing department will make a determination to approve or deny the license. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83; Ord. No. 89-242, § 2, 12-26-89; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 5-210. - Appeal from refusal. 
In the event the city shall refuse to grant a license to any applicant under this division, such action shall be final, unless the applicant shall, within ten (10) days after the refusal to grant such license, file a written appeal with the city secretary addressed to the city council, requesting a hearing upon the question as to whether or not his application shall be granted. In the event such appeal is filed, the city shall provide the city council with a record of all proceedings theretofore had with reference to the application, including the written application, together with the action of the city and the reasons for such action. The city council shall, within thirty (30) days, grant a hearing thereon to determine the correctness of the action of the city, at which hearing, the council may make such investigation as it may deem fit, whether all the pertinent facts appear in the application or not. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written deduction of its judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-211. - Posting. 
A license issued under this division shall be posted in a prominent place in the game room for which it is issued. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-212. - Transfer. 
A license issued under this division may be transferred to a different lawful location, upon sworn application and payment of a transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00), so long as the new location violates no deed restrictions or other location provisions of this division. Such a license shall not be transferred to a different licensee. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-213. - Renewal. 
A license issued under this division shall be valid from January first through December thirty-first of each calendar year, unless sooner suspended or revoked, and the same must be renewed by January first of each year. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-214. - Does not grant vested rights. 
No license granted under the terms of this division shall be deemed the granting of a vested right, but such license shall remain subject to the terms and provisions of this article and subject to such future regulations as shall be promulgated by the city council by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Sec. 5-215. - Revocation. 
If a person holding a license issued under the terms of this division violates any provision of this article, Article VI, this Code or the laws of the state, or if a game room licensed under this division is not being conducted in accordance with this article, Article VI, this Code and the laws of the state, or is being conducted in violation thereof, the city may at any time give notice in writing to the operator, licensee, manager, or other person in control of the operation and maintenance of such game room that the license issued for the operation and maintenance of such game room has been revoked, stating therein the reason or reasons for such revocation. Such notice of revocation shall become a final revocation after the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of the service of same upon the operator, licensee, manager or other person in charge of the game room, unless, on or before the expiration of such ten (10) days, the licensee, operator, manager or other person in charge of the hall shall file with the city secretary a written appeal addressed to the city council, in which it is requested that the city council grant him a hearing upon the question of whether or not the license shall be revoked. Such appeal, if made and filed as prescribed herein, shall operate as a stay or postponement of the revocation, until such time as the city council shall grant a hearing and make final adjudication upon the question of whether or not the license should be revoked. Such hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date of the filing of the appeal. Within seven (7) days after final adjournment of the hearing, the city council shall cause a written judgment thereon to be filed with the city secretary. Such action and judgment of the city council, after hearing all the evidence and facts, shall be final and conclusive as to all parties, and shall be, in all cases, by a majority vote. 
(Ord. No. 83-84, § 2, 3-22-83)  
Chapter 6 - ANIMALS AND FOWL, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Application of traffic regulations to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn vehicles, § 36-11; dogs and other animals not to interfere with water meter readers and inspectors, § 37-19. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Keeping of livestock generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or occupant of any lot or premises, whether enclosed by a fence or not, situated within the corporate limits of the city to pen or to keep any cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, mules, horses or other livestock upon such lot or premises; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply where the owner, lessee or occupant has premises of ten (10) acres or more, nor shall this section prohibit the keeping of such animals for domestic or family use or purposes; provided, however, that no animal shall be confined or kept within fifty (50) feet of any adjoining residence or occupied building. 
(b)  Where any animals are kept as permitted in subsection (a), the pens or stalls in which such animals are kept and the entire premises shall be kept clean and free from accumulations of refuse, and shall be well drained to prevent unsanitary conditions. Failure to keep such pens, stalls or premises clean and in a sanitary condition shall constitute a nuisance and a violation of this section. 
(c)  The director of public health shall make regular inspections of the pens, lots and stalls where any animals are being kept under the provisions of this section and make report thereof to the city council and, in case any person is found by the director to be maintaining a nuisance as defined in this section, the director shall give such person two (2) days notice in writing to clean up and abate the nuisance and, in case of failure on the part of such person to clean up and restore his premises to a sanitary condition, the director shall file in the municipal court of the city a complaint charging a violation of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 4-1)  
Sec. 6-2. - Swine not to be kept near residence, church or school. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any hogs or pigs within three hundred (300) feet of any residence not occupied by such keeper or within three hundred (300) feet of any church or school within the city. Such three hundred (300) feet shall be measured in a direct line. 
(Code 1964, § 4-2)  
Sec. 6-3. - Livestock running at large—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently permit any cattle, horses, sheep, goats or hogs owned, kept or maintained by him to run at large within the city limits. 
(Code 1964, § 4-3)  
Sec. 6-4. - Same—Impoundment—Generally. 
If any animal referred to in section 6-3 shall enter the enclosed lands of any person other than the owner or keeper of such animal, or shall roam about the streets, alleys, residences, lots or cultivated lands within the city, other than the residence, lots or lands of the owner or keeper of such animal, such animal shall be impounded at a place designated by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 4-4)  
Sec. 6-5. - Same—Same—Fees. 
The city shall be entitled to charge a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for impounding an animal under section 6-4 and a further fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day such animal is held by the city. 
(Code 1964, § 4-5; Ord. No. 81-221, § 1, 11-17-81)  
Sec. 6-6. - Same—Same—Sale if not redeemed. 
If an animal impounded under section 6-4 is not redeemed by its owner within fifteen (15) days from the date it was so impounded, the director of public health shall give five (5) days' notice of sale of such animal by posting a notice at the police station, City Hall and city library describing such animal and giving the time and place of sale. On the date named in such notice, the director of public health shall sell such animal at public auction for cash and shall apply the proceeds of such sale to the satisfaction of the fees and cost of impounding prescribed by section 6-5, and shall pay the balance, if any remains, to the city controller, who shall hold the same for a period of three (3) months for the owner of such animal. In the event the owner fails to claim the proceeds as aforesaid, then such money so held by the city controller shall be placed in the general fund of the city to be used by the city in the same manner as other funds of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 4-6; Ord. No. 80-37, § 1, 3-11-80)  
Sec. 6-6.1. - Disposal of dead livestock. 
Whenever livestock is found dead on any property in the city, in order to safeguard the public health, welfare, well-being, and the physical property of the people, the owner or caretaker of the animal or the owner of the property or who controls the land on which the livestock died or on which the carcass or carcasses are found shall bury or dispose of the carcass or carcasses within twenty-four (24) hours after the carcass or carcasses are found, or the humane officer shall have the carcass or carcasses disposed of by the city and a charge of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be made. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-7. - Fowl not to run at large. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any chicken, duck, goose, guinea or other domesticated fowl owned or kept by him to run at large within the city limits. Any domesticated fowl not confined in an enclosure, but permitted to stray or roam at pleasure on property other than the premises of the owner, shall be deemed "at large" in violation of this section. 
(Code 1964, § 4-7)  
Sec. 6-8. - Keeping of fowl or rabbits near residences. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor or maintain any poultry, fowl or rabbits within fifty (50) feet of any residence within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 4-7.1)  
Sec. 6-9. - Maintenance of premises where fowl or rabbits kept. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, maintain or permit the presence of any poultry, fowl or rabbits on any lot or parcel of land in the city in any unsanitary condition. The floors of any room, coop, box or compartment in which poultry, fowl or rabbits are kept shall be scraped and thoroughly cleaned at least once in every twenty-four (24) hours and so maintained that no odors are emitted therefrom. 
(b)  The interior of any structure in which poultry, fowl or rabbits are kept shall be whitewashed at least once every six (6) months and sprayed with an effective disinfectant on the roosting places at least once in each calendar month, and kept covered with deep dry litter to discourage insects, fleas, mites and flies. 
(c)  Any premises not maintained in accord with this section is hereby declared to constitute a nuisance and any police officer or the director of public health shall order the owner or occupant of such premises to remove and abate such nuisance, at his own expense, within a time not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. Such order shall be sufficient if delivered orally to such owner or occupant or to his representative, if such owner or occupant cannot be found within the city, or such order may be in writing. When such order is written, it shall be served by a police officer or the director of public health by delivering a copy thereof to the owner, occupant or agent of such property. If the owner or agent of the property is unknown or absent, with no known representative or agent upon whom the notice can be served, the police officer or the director of public health shall post a written or printed notice upon the property or premises setting forth that, unless the nuisance is removed or abated within twenty-four (24) hours, at the expense of the owner or occupant, the nuisance will be abated by the city at the expense of the owner. 
(d)  If the nuisance provided for in this section is not abated within twenty-four (24) hours after the above order or notice is given, all poultry, fowl and rabbits found on the premises shall be removed by the city and impounded at the city pound. If, within forty-eight (48) hours after any poultry, fowl or rabbits are so impounded, the owner thereof pays the cost of abating the nuisance and agrees that, upon the return of such poultry, fowl or rabbits, he will forthwith maintain or dispose of such poultry, fowl or rabbits in a manner which does not violate any ordinance of the city, such poultry, fowl or rabbits shall be released to him. 
(e)  If the owner of poultry, fowl or rabbits impounded under this section shall fail, neglect or refuse to call at the city pound within forty-eight (48) hours after the impounding to pay the cost of abating such nuisance and agree to maintain or dispose of such poultry, fowl or rabbits in a manner which does not violate any ordinance of the city, the director of public health shall sell the poultry, fowl or rabbits to a poultry dealer and immediately turn the proceeds over to the city controller, who will credit the amount against the cost of abating the nuisance and pay over the excess, if any, to the owner of such poultry, fowl or rabbits. 
(Code 1964, § 4-8)  
Sec. 6-10. - Keeping of fowl for commercial purposes—Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the keeping of birds or fowl for commercial purposes without first obtaining a permit from the city to engage in such enterprise, which permit shall be issued by the city when the applicant therefor has satisfied a majority of the members of the city council that the place for the conduct of such business will be constructed in accordance with the specifications set forth in section 6-11 and that such business will be operated in such a manner as not to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the citizens of the city. For the purposes of this and the following section, the term "commercial purposes" shall mean any purpose other than for home consumption. 
(b)  Upon the conviction of any permit holder for a violation of section 6-11, he shall, in addition to any penalty assessed for such violation, be subject to having such permit suspended or revoked. However, no such suspension or revocation shall be effective until the following action has been taken by the city: 
(1)  A committee of five (5) members has been appointed by a majority vote of the city council to inspect the premises of the person found guilty of such violation. 
(2)  A written report embodying the findings and conclusions of the committee and recommendation by the majority of such members for such suspension or revocation has been submitted at a regular session of the city council. 
(3)  A resolution is adopted by a majority vote of all members of the city council to suspend or revoke such permit. 
(Code 1964, § 4-9)  
Sec. 6-11. - Same—Enclosures. 
It shall be unlawful for any person holding a permit to keep fowl for commercial purposes to keep such fowl in open pens on the ground and they shall be kept in enclosures elevated at least one (1) foot above the ground, the flooring of which shall be of such construction, or shall be covered on the surface by a coating of masonry or other material, so as not to permit the absorption of any refuse, and all necessary openings of such enclosure shall be covered with No. 16 mesh screen wire, and all roosts shall be removable and constructed of a material that will not absorb refuse and shall be taken from the enclosure each day and thoroughly washed, disinfected and deodorized. Each enclosure shall contain a drain located and built in such a manner so as to permit a thorough washing thereof and drainage into city sewer lines or into a portable receptacle that can be closed with an airtight lid, and in the event a portable receptacle is used, it must be removed immediately after each washing of the enclosure and the refuse therein contained and delivered to the city garbage disposal grounds and there treated by such person in such a manner as to prevent a health hazard. Each of such enclosures shall be thoroughly washed at least once each day and disinfected and deodorized at least once each day by the use of accepted and standard disinfectants and deodorants designed for such purpose. 
(Code 1964, § 4-10)  
Sec. 6-12. - Keeping of bees. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot within the city to keep or allow bees, or their hives within the corporate limits, except that honey bees may be kept providing one of the following sets of conditions ((a) or (b)) is met: 
(a)  Honey bees may be kept if: 
(1)  All hives are at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from any church, school or occupied residence except the owner's residence, such one hundred fifty (150) feet to be measured in a straight line; and 
(2)  An adequate source of water is present on the property within twenty (20) feet of the hives; or 
(b)  Honey bees may be kept if: 
(1)  All hives are a minimum of thirty (30) feet from the property line in every direction; and 
(2)  All hives are in an approved Langstroth Box; and 
(3)  There is a maximum of four (4) boxes; and 
(4)  There is an adequate source of water within the apiary, and 
(5)  There is a barrier a minimum of six (6) feet high around at least three (3) sides of the hives which is adequate to direct the flight of the bees and which obscures the hives from view. Such barrier may be a building, house, fence, foliage or other structure. 
(Ord. No. 85-173, § 1, 5-6-85)  
Secs. 6-13—6-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - RESCUE AND ASSISTANCE OF DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS; IMPOUNDMENT, VACCINATION-REGISTRATION PROCEDURES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 1972, included herein as Art. II, §§ 6-25—6-40.3, is codified as superseding former Art. II, §§ 6-25—6-29, requiring that dogs be licensed and inoculated against rabies, prohibiting dogs from running at large and providing for impoundment procedures and sale of unclaimed dogs. Said former Art. II, §§ 6-25—6-29, was derived from Code 1964, §§ 4-18—4-21, and Ord. No. 1789, §§ 1—4, adopted April 5, 1966. 
 
Sec. 6-25. - Definitions. 
As used in this article the following terms mean: 
(a)  Department. The department of health. 
(b)  Director. The director of the department of health. 
(c)  Animal rescue and assistance center or center. Facilities in which the department of health is housed. 
(d)  Officer. Any animal warden or animal quarantine investigator employed by the department, or city policeman. 
(e)  Veterinarian. A doctor of veterinary medicine who holds a valid license to practice his profession. 
(f)  Animal. Mammal. 
(g)  Owner. Any person who owns, harbors, keeps or causes or permits to be harbored or kept, or has in his care an animal or bird on or about his premises. 
(h)  Collar. A band, chain, harness, or other suitable device worn around the neck of an animal to which a current rabies vaccination-registration tag can be affixed. 
(i)  Vaccination. Inoculation of an animal with a vaccine that is licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, and which is administered by a veterinarian for the purpose of immunizing the animal against rabies. 
(j)  Exposed to rabies. An animal has been exposed to rabies if it has been bitten by any other animal or if it has been in contact with any animal known to be, or suspected of being infected with rabies. 
(k)  Bite. Any abrasion, scratch, puncture, tear, or piercing of the skin actually or suspected of being caused by an animal. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 98-156, § 1, 9-22-98)  
Sec. 6-26. - Enforcement; right of entry of officers; interference with officer. 
(a)  Enforcing officer. Provisions of this article shall be enforced by the director of the department of health. 
(b)  Right of entry. For the purpose of discharging the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, any officer is hereby empowered to enter upon any private property for the purpose of ascertaining whether any animal is present, kept or harbored thereon; or whether an animal present, kept or harbored thereon is afflicted with rabies; or whether or not a vaccination-registration certificate and tag have been secured for any dog; or to ascertain if compliance under any other sections of this article has been performed. 
(c)  Interference with officer. No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any officer in the performance of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-27. - Reporting animal bite, animal under quarantine, rabies suspect. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every physician or other medical practitioner to report to the department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by animals, together with such other information as is pertinent to rabies control. It shall be the duty of any person having knowledge of an animal bite incident to notify the department of said incident and to provide such information upon request of the director or any officer, as is pertinent to rabies control. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian having an animal quarantined for a bite incident to submit a written report to the department as to the condition of said quarantined animal on the initial day of observation and on the fifth and the tenth day immediately following the date of said bite incident. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every veterinarian to report immediately to the department his diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies suspect. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-28. - Abandonment of animals prohibited; reporting violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or drop any animals in the city. 
(b)  Any animal found to be restrained in such a way that it does not have access to air, food, water and shelter adequate to maintain life and health shall be considered to be abandoned and shall be impounded. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of every person to report immediately to the department the location and description of any animal which is in violation of this section or sections 6-30 and 6-31 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-29. - City sponsored rabies vaccination; registration clinics. 
The director is authorized to arrange for city-sponsored rabies vaccination-registration clinics when and where deemed necessary. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-30. - Physical restraint—Dogs. 
Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon his own premises by means of physical restraint; provided, however, that such dog may be off such premises if it is under direct control of said person by means of a secure leash not over six (6) feet in length or by some other equivalent means of physical control. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-31. - Same—Other domestic animals and birds. 
Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any domestic animal or bird shall keep such animal or bird exclusively upon his own premises by means of physical restraint; provided, however, that such animal or bird may be off such premises if it is under direct physical control of said person. 
Any domestic animal or bird in violation of this section may be seized or impounded by the department. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-32. - Impoundment—Dogs; notification. 
(a)  Dogs not vaccinated or registered pursuant to the provisions of this article, and dogs in violation of section 6-30 of this article, shall be seized and impounded at the center. 
(b)  Reasonable effort shall be made by the department to promptly notify the owner of any impounded animal or the holder of the vaccination-registration certificate of any vaccinated or registered animal by telephone, personal service, or ordinary mail addressed to the owner of such animal at the place listed on the vaccination-registration certificate. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-33. - Same—Redemption; disposition; diseased animals other than rabies cases. 
(a)  The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog upon payment of the impoundment and daily board fees and compliance with vaccination-registration requirements; provided application for such possession, with payment of all required fees, is made within seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment. 
(b)  Any other animal impounded may be reclaimed by the owner upon payment of impoundment and daily board fees and compliance with other legal requirements for keeping of such animal. 
(c)  If any dog or other animal is being held under quarantine or observation for rabies, the owner shall not be entitled to possession until it has been released from such quarantine or observation by a veterinarian, and after payment of all fees necessary for such release. The payment of fees may be deferred until the animal is eligible for such release. 
(d)  Any dog impounded and not reclaimed by the owner as set forth in subsection (a) above may be humanely destroyed after being held for at least seventy-two (72) hours after impoundment. If the director determines that any unclaimed dog is reasonably healthy, currently vaccinated against rabies, and should not constitute a threat to public or animal health of the community, the director may, after the seventy-two-hour holding period, offer such dog to the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, an animal shelter, or other institution for adoption, or may sell the dog. If the dog is not accepted for adoption or sold, it may be humanely destroyed. 
(e)  If any impounded animal, other than a dog, is not reclaimed by the owner as set forth in subsection (b) above, the animal shall be held for such time as the director deems reasonable, considering the animal's probable value, condition of health, and suitability for use. Upon expiration of such reasonable time the director may offer the animal, if suitable, to the city zoo or the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals or the animal shelter, and if not accepted by them, it may be sold or humanely destroyed. 
(f)  Any animal impounded and suffering from serious injuries, in great pain with probability of recovery remote; or having a communicable or infectious disease which would endanger the health of people or other animals, may be humanely destroyed after reasonable efforts to determine ownership have failed. However, no animal under quarantine or observation for a bite incident or under suspicion of having rabies shall be destroyed until it has been released from said quarantine or observation by a veterinarian. 
(g)  Animals may be disposed of under seventy-two (72) hours from the time of impoundment if upon notification of impoundment of said animal the owner states he does not wish to redeem the animal and subsequently in writing releases the animal to the sole jurisdiction of the department. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 81-221, § 1, 11-17-81)  
Sec. 6-34. - Same—Fees; daily board, pickup, vaccination-registration. 
(a)  The impoundment fee shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for the first offense, thirty dollars ($30.00) for the second offense, and fifty dollars ($50.00) for all subsequent offenses for the same owner or person. 
(b)  A daily board fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for every day or fraction thereof that an animal shall be confined in the center. 
(c)  A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) may be charged for animal pickup service requested by the owner of the animal. 
(d)  Any dog redeemed by or released from quarantine to an owner shall be required to meet the vaccination-registration requirements of this article prior to release. If vaccination-registration is performed at the center the current fee for such services shall be paid prior to said release. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 81-221, § 1, 11-17-81; Ord. No. 94-1, § 3, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 6-35. - Dangerous dogs to be confined; disposition. 
(a)  The owner shall confine within an approved enclosure every dog declared dangerous as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code Section 822.041(2). An approved enclosure must meet the following requirements: 
• The enclosure must be constructed within a securely fenced area. 
• The pen must be no less than one hundred forty four (144) square feet per dog and no less than six (6) feet in height with nine-gauge heavy duty cyclone fencing with posts set in concrete and constructed in a manner which will prevent the dog(s) from digging out of the pen. 
• There must be a top on the pen of sufficient construction and strength to prevent the dog(s) from climbing out of the pen. 
• There must be two locked entry gates to the pen constructed to allow a person to close the outer gate before opening the inner gate. 
• There must be heavy-duty steel or brass, two-inch body width, three-eighths-inch shackle diameter and one-inch shackle length locks on both entries to the pen and one for each gate or other entry to the outer fencing. 
• There must be a 5' × 8' concrete slab per dog within the enclosure, graded to allow for proper drainage. A dog house, sufficient to protect the dog(s) from the elements and large enough for the dog(s) to lie stretched out, stand up and turn around in shall be placed on the concrete pad. 
• Signs warning the public of a dangerous dog(s) shall be placed such that they are visible from each street that provides access to the premises upon which the dog(s) is kept. These signs must be child friendly to sufficiently warn a person who cannot read that a dangerous dog is on the premises. Signage shall be clear and easily read. 
• A dangerous dog may not be chained to any object either on or off the property of the owner. 
• The dog's owner shall notify the animal control department any time the dog(s) is removed from the City of Pasadena. 
Confinement shall be in such a manner that the dog(s) cannot come in contact with any person or other animal. A dog that has been declared dangerous: 
(1)  Must wear a muzzle at all times when not inside an approved enclosure, 
(2)  Must be spayed or neutered at the expense of the owner by the 30 th day after which the dog has been declared dangerous, 
(3)  Must receive a microchip at the expense of the owner by the 30 th day after which the dog has been declared dangerous, and 
(4)  Must at all times wear a city issued dangerous dog tag which must be renewed annually at the office of animal control. The yearly fee for a dangerous dog tag is one hundred dollars ($100.00). Late registration will be cause for permanent removal of the dog(s) from the owner's custody. 
(b)  The director of health or his designee may cause the muzzling, secure confinement, or humane destruction of any dog determined to be dangerous under § 822.0421 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Whenever a dangerous dog has committed an unprovoked attack upon any person or other animal. 
(2)  Whenever any lawful patron or visitor of a business is jeopardized by a guard dog which is not securely confined during hours said business is open to the public. 
(3)  Whenever an animal has attacked and killed any person or animal. 
(4)  Whenever an animal has committed an attack on any person which resulted in injuries sufficient to endanger the life or permanent health of the person. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 07-337, § 1, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 6-35.1. - Reporting of dangerous dog. 
(a)  A person may report an incident described by Section 822.041(2) of the Texas Health and Safety Code to a municipal court, a justice court, or a county court. The owner of the dog shall deliver the dog to the animal control authority not later than the fifth day after the date on which the owner receives notice that the report has been filed. The authority may provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. 
(b)  If the owner fails to deliver the dog as required by subsection (a), the court shall order the animal control authority to seize the dog and shall issue a warrant authorizing the seizure. The authority shall seize the dog or order its seizure and shall provide for the impoundment of the dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders the disposition of the dog. The owner shall pay any cost incurred in seizing the dog. 
(c)  The court shall determine, after notice and hearing as provided in Section 822.0423 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, whether the dog is a dangerous dog. 
(d)  The court, after determining that the dog is a dangerous dog, may order the animal control authority to continue to impound the dangerous dog in secure and humane conditions until the court orders disposition of the dog under Section 822.042 of the Texas Health and Safety Code and the dog is returned to the owner or destroyed. 
(e)  The owner shall pay a cost or fee assessed under Section 822.042(d) of the Texas Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-337, § 2, 11-27-07)  
Sec. 6-36. - Authority of director to order quarantine. 
The director or other officer designated by the director, upon receiving notification from the owner, victim, a physician or other complainant that an animal is involved in a bite incident, shall order the quarantining of said animal causing the bite. Upon issuing an order for quarantine, the rules provided for in this article for quarantine shall be enforced and every person to whom such order is shown or has actual knowledge thereof, shall obey all requirements of said quarantine. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-37. - Rabies—Quarantine, confinement, disposition. 
(a)  Every animal that bites a human or other animal, or has rabies or is under suspicion of having rabies, shall be immediately confined by the owner, who shall promptly notify the department, or a police officer who shall notify the department of the place where such animal is confined and the reason thereof. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any other person or animal. The owner shall surrender possession of such animal to the department on demand for supervised quarantine. Supervised quarantine shall be in the center or a veterinary hospital; or, by any other method of adequate confinement approved by the director. The quarantine period shall be for not less than ten (10) days immediately following the time of the bite incident and shall be under the supervision of a veterinarian who shall submit to the department written reports as to the animal's health on the initial day of observation and on the fifth and the tenth day immediately following the date of said bite incident. A release from quarantine may be issued if no signs of rabies have been observed during the quarantine period. 
Any animal quarantined other than at the center shall be observed by the same veterinarian throughout the entire required quarantine period in the same manner as outlined above, and the owner shall immediately notify the department as to the veterinarian supervising the quarantine. 
If the director orders quarantine other than in the center or a veterinary hospital, the owner shall be responsible for confining the animal as designated by the director so as to prevent further exposure to humans or animals during the quarantine period. He shall also be required to obtain the same veterinary supervision of the animal and release from quarantine as required in a veterinary hospital or at the center. 
(b)  Any guard or police dog currently vaccinated and registered that is involved in a bite incident while in the expressed performance of his guard or police duties, shall be allowed to continue on duty under quarantine. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to have the dog observed during, and released from, quarantine by a veterinarian as under (a) of this section. 
(c)  The violation of quarantine by any person shall be just cause for seizure and impoundment of the quarantined animal by the department. 
(d)  All animal bite reports shall be investigated by personnel of the department. Without permission of the director it shall be unlawful for any person to kill or remove from the city limits any animal that has bitten a human or other animal; or that has been placed under quarantine, except when it is necessary to kill such animal to protect any person or other animal. 
(e)  The director shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be suspected of being rabid. 
(f)  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies shall, upon demand, be surrendered to the department. 
(g)  Every animal that has been bitten by another animal shall be immediately confined by the owner who shall promptly notify the department of the place where such animal is confined and the reason therefor. The owner shall not permit such animal to come in contact with any other person or animal. 
Any animal exposed to rabies shall be handled in one of the following manners: 
(1)  Humane destruction with notifications to, or under supervision of the department. 
(2)  If not currently vaccinated, quarantined in a veterinary hospital or at the center for at least six (6) months immediately following the date of the exposure. 
(3)  If currently vaccinated, immediate revaccination and quarantine for at least thirty (30) days immediately following the date of exposure. 
(h)  No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine or humane destruction as required herein for rabies control when demand therefor is made by the department. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72) 
(i)  Rabies vaccination records shall be maintained at the site of vaccination and be readily available to local health officials in the event of possible exposure to rabies. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 90-66, § 1, 4-3-90)  
Sec. 6-38. - Same—Vaccination of dogs and cats required; exception. 
(a)  No person shall own, keep or harbor within the city any dog or cat four (4) months of age or older unless such animal has a current vaccination. An animal will have a current vaccination for the remainder of the month during which it was vaccinated and for the following twelve (12) calendar months. The animal must be revaccinated before the expiration of the first and each subsequent current vaccination period. 
(b)  Vaccination will not be required of any animal when both of the following documents, to be filed at the center, are approved and accepted by the director: 
(1)  A certificate from a veterinarian that such animal should not be inoculated with rabies vaccine and the valid medical reasons therefor. 
(2)  An affidavit from the owner that such animal is kept so that it cannot come in contact with other animals or constitute a threat to public health and the method of keeping. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-39. - Registration—Application; procedure, fee duration, conditions to issuance, transfer, fee exemption. 
(a)  No owner shall have within the city any dog four (4) months of age or older unless such dog is currently registered with the department. No dog shall be registered unless it has a current vaccination or an exemption under section 6-38(b). A registration shall be considered as being current for the period of the current vaccination for which it was issued. A vaccination-registration certificate and tag may be obtained at the time of vaccination from veterinarians who have obtained authority from the center to issue them; or from an employee at the center upon presentation of a certificate of current vaccination. 
(b)  Upon application by a veterinarian the department shall furnish said veterinarian with a supply of prenumbered vaccination-registration certificates and corresponding tags. The veterinarian shall be authorized to receive applications and issue certificates and tags for animals at the time of vaccination. Copies of all certificates issued shall be distributed and transmitted to various city agencies in accordance with arrangements made by the director with the veterinarian. When applying for additional certificates and tags the veterinarian shall account to the department for all those previously supplied to him. At that time the veterinarian shall remit to the center all fees collected. He shall be held financially responsible for any other certificates and tags no longer in his possession that have not been issued or voided and returned to the center. The department shall not supply additional certificates and tags to any veterinarian who fails to account for all those previously furnished him by the center. All fees collected by any veterinarians are payable to the city upon demand. 
(c)  Application for initial issuance or renewal of each registration must be made by the owner in writing or in person, and be accompanied by a fee of ten dollars ($10.00); provided, however, that the fee for an animal that has been spayed or neutered shall be a one-time fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) valid for the life of the animal; and, provided, however, that when the mayor of the City of Pasadena files with the city secretary a statement that there exists a case of rabies in Harris or any adjoining county, the registration fee shall automatically be suspended for a period of sixty (60) days. 
(d)  A registration shall be renewed no later than the date of expiration of the current vaccination period for which it was issued, as defined in section 6-38(a) of this article. 
(e)  No person shall use a certificate or tag for any animal other than the one for which it was issued. 
(f)  If there is a change in ownership of a registered dog, the new owner shall have the registration transferred to his name. Application for such transfer shall be made at the center in writing or in person, and be accompanied by a fee of twenty-five cents ($0.25). 
(g)  Fee exempt registration may be issued for the following: 
(1)  Police or sheriff department's dog. 
(2)  Dogs trained to lead the blind. 
(3)  Dogs vaccinated in city-sponsored clinics. However, only one of these fee exempt registrations shall be issued for any one household. 
(4)  Animals other than dogs that are vaccinated against rabies. 
Eligibility for fee exempt registration does not relieve the owner of this responsibility under other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72; Ord. No. 79-198, § 1, 12-26-79; Ord. No. 94-1, § 3, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 6-40. - Same—Collar and tag required; exception; duplication fee. 
(a)  Upon registration there shall be delivered to the owner a metallic tag stamped with the vaccination-registration certificate number and the year in which issued. 
(b)  The owner shall see that the dog wears at all times a collar to which such tag shall be attached, except as in (c) below. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove said tag from the collar without the owner's consent. 
(c)  Dogs being used for hunting, on exhibition at American Kennel Club approved shows, engaged in a specific "dog club" sponsored race or trial, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events need not wear their collars nor their tags. 
(d)  If such tag is lost or destroyed, the owner shall apply at the center in writing or in person for a new tag by presentation of the applicable vaccination-registration certificate accompanied by a fee of fifty cents ($0.50). 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-40.1. - Records and reports; audit. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the director to keep or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all vaccination-registrations, the impoundment of animals, all bite incidents reported to the department and investigation of same. The report of a bite case involving a rabid or suspected rabid animal shall be immediately communicated to the director of the Harris County Health Unit. 
(b)  The aforesaid records shall be audited annually in the same manner as other city records are audited, and shall be opened to inspection as public records at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-40.2. - Dogs trained to guide the blind may accompany master. 
It shall be unlawful for any dog trained to guide any blind person to be admitted when actually accompanying such blind person to any public place or vehicle which such blind person may have the lawful right to enter, if the dog is currently vaccinated and registered. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
Sec. 6-40.3. - Penalty for violations. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required in this article and any violations are punishable as provided in section 1-7 of the Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 72-20, § 1, 2-8-72)  
ARTICLE III. - KENNELS AND PET ESTABLISHMENTS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 1985, amended Art. III, §§ 6-41, 6-42, 6-51—6-63, to read as herein set out. Former Div. 1, §§ 6-41 and 6-42, contained similar provisions, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 4-29 and 4-30, respectively. Former Div. 2, §§ 6-51—6-60, contained similar provisions, and derived from Code 1964, §§ 4-38—4-47; Ord. No. 1789, §§ 4—7, adopted Apr. 5, 1966; and Ord. No. 81-221, § 1, adopted Nov. 17, 1981. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-41. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions and meanings shall apply: 
Kennel. The term "kennel" means any lot, enclosure, premises, structure or building whereon three (3) or more dogs or three (3) or more cats over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for any purpose whatever, except a veterinary hospital operated by a graduate veterinarian duly licensed by the state board of veterinary examiners. 
Pet animal. The term "pet animal" shall mean any mammal, bird, amphibian, reptile or other animal commonly kept as a household pet and not governed under Article I of this chapter as livestock or Article IV as a wild animal. 
Pet establishment. The term "pet establishment" shall mean any shed, building, store, lot or other place within the city where pet animals are sold, offered for sale or bred for sale or distribution. 
Veterinary hospital. The term "veterinary hospital" means a place where pet animals or livestock are treated for disease or injury, or pet animals are boarded under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian. 
(Code 19694, § 4-29; Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-42. - Location near residence, school, church or hospital. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, possess or maintain in the city a kennel or pet establishment within one hundred (100) feet of any actual residence or habitation for human beings other than the keeper, possessor or owner of such kennel or pet establishment or within one hundred (100) feet of any church, school or hospital. Such distance of one hundred (100) feet shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point of any kennel, pet establishment, pen, enclosure or other structure in which animals are kept to the nearest point of such actual residence, place of human habitation, church, school or hospital. 
(Code 1964, § 4-30; Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Secs. 6-43—6-50. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Note— See the editor's note at Art. III. 
 
Sec. 6-51. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, keep or possess a kennel or pet establishment without first obtaining a license under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-52. - Application. 
Application for a kennel or pet establishment license shall be filed with the chief humane officer and shall contain all information reasonably necessary to determine the size, number, type and arrangement of the facilities, as well as the identity and business history of the applicant. Such application shall be upon a form furnished by the chief humane officer. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-53. - Fee. 
The fee for a kennel or pet establishment license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
Such license fee shall be for the calendar year or any part thereof during which a kennel or pet establishment is maintained, and shall be due and payable in advance on or before January first of each year. 
Nonprofit or charitable organizations may be exempted from this fee. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 86-33, § 1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 87-230, § 1, 11-24-87)  
Sec. 6-54. - Inspection prerequisite to issuance. 
No kennel or pet establishment license shall be issued until an inspection of the premises is made by the chief humane officer and the premises are found to be sanitary, and that the kennel or pet establishment complies with all city ordinances and state laws governing possession or sale of animals. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-55. - Issuance; contents. 
Upon payment of the prescribed fee and compliance with all other requirements, the chief humane officer shall issue a kennel or pet establishment license to the applicant. Such license shall contain the name and address of the licensee and of the kennel or pet establishment, the number of the license, the date issued and the amount paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-56. - Posting. 
A license issued under this division shall be posted at all times in a prominent place in the kennel or pet establishment for which it was issued. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-57. - Not transferable. 
A license issued under this division shall not be transferable and shall not authorize any person other than the person to whom it is issued to keep, possess or maintain a kennel or pet establishment and shall not be transferable to any location other than the one shown on the face thereof. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-58. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each license issued under this division shall expire on December thirty-first of each year in which issued and shall be renewed by paying the prescribed fee and complying with all other provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-59. - Records to be kept. 
The chief humane officer shall keep a permanent record of all kennel and pet establishment licenses issued under the terms of this division, which record shall show the name and address of all persons issued a kennel or pet establishment license, the name and address of the kennel or pet establishment, the number of the kennel or pet establishment license, the date issued, and the amount paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-60. - Revocation or suspension. 
The chief humane officer may revoke or suspend the license of any kennel or pet establishment at any time for failure to keep the licensed premises in a sanitary condition, or for failure to comply with any city ordinance or state law governing possession or sale of animals. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-61. - Appeal from suspension or revocation. 
After the suspension or revocation or denial of a license under this division has been in effect for three (3) consecutive days, the licensee may file written notice of appeal with the city council of the City of Pasadena and the city council shall investigate and sustain or overrule such suspension or revocation. Such notice shall be filed within ten (10) days after the posting of notice of the suspension or revocation and the council shall sustain or overrule the appealed action within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. Conclusive notice of the council's action on such appeal shall be the posting of written notice thereof by the city secretary of the City of Pasadena on any corridor bulletin board in the city hall. Failure of the council to act on the appeal within ten (10) days shall constitute a sustaining and affirmance of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-62. - Reinstatement after suspension. 
Every suspended kennel or pet establishment license shall be reinstated promptly upon correction or removal of the violation or violations specified in the notice of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-63. - Removal of animals after revocation. 
All animals must be removed from a kennel or pet establishment whose license has been revoked or suspended or denied within ten (10) days of the date of revocation or suspension or denial unless the license has been reissued. No kennel or pet establishment license will be issued to a licensee whose license has been revoked within one calendar year of the date of revocation. Any animal remaining shall be impounded and disposed of as provided in section 6-33(d) and (e) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-64. - Fees and charges. 
The director of health is authorized, subject to approval by the mayor, to set all fees and charges required or permitted by this chapter. A list of fees and charges shall be posted at the Pasadena animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 00-115, § 1, 8-8-00)  
Secs. 6-65, 6-66. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - KEEPING OF WILD ANIMALS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 1985, amended the Code by adding a new Art. IV, §§ 6-67—6-75, to read as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 6-67. - Prohibited within city boundaries. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, possess, keep, permit, suffer, cause or allow any wild animal within the corporate boundaries of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, keep, capture or kill any animal within the corporate boundaries of the City of Pasadena, Texas which is of a protected or endangered species or possession of which requires a special license from a state or federal agency, unless such license has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-68. - "Wild animal" defined. 
A "wild animal" shall mean and include any mammal, amphibian, reptile or bird which is of a species which is wild by nature, and of a species which, due to size, vicious nature or other characteristics is dangerous to human beings. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to, lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, cougars, bob cats, bears, wolves, raccoons, skunks (whether deodorized or not), apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult weight is twenty (20) pounds or more, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles, caymans, pythons or boa constrictors larger than six (6) feet in length, and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The term "wild animal" as used in this article shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice or rabbits. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 98-41, § 1, 3-11-98)  
Sec. 6-69. - Seizure, impoundment of animals found in violation of this article. 
The director shall seize all animals found in violation of this article and impound all such animals at the city animal shelter or other suitable place. The director, any humane officer, or any police officer of the City of Pasadena may enter any building to seize an animal which is therein in violation of this article upon the consent of an adult occupant of such building or one having the right of possession of such building, or under a warrant issued by a magistrate. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-70. - Redemption of impounded wild animal; failure to redeem. 
Upon showing to the director or his authorized representative of clear and convincing proof of right of possession of any such impounded animal, such person may redeem such animal within seven (7) days of the date of impoundment upon payment of the fees set out below; provided, that the animal will be promptly removed from the city and that such person submits to the director a sworn affidavit setting out the location where the animal will be kept in accordance with local ordinances and state laws. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-71. - Disposal of animal upon second violation. 
In the event that an individual redeems any such animal upon providing the sworn affidavit required above, and such animal thereafter is found within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena in violation of this article, said animal shall be seized and impounded as hereinabove described in section 6-69 and disposed of as provided in section 6-33(e). 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-72. - Fees for impoundment and boarding. 
The following fees shall be charged for impoundment and boarding of wild animals: 
(1)  Impoundment fee for each animal impounded: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(2)  A boarding fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-73. - Exceptions to article provisions. 
The provisions of section 6-67 shall not apply to animals kept for treatment in a facility operated by a veterinarian licensed by the State of Texas, animals kept in publicly owned zoos, animals used for research or teaching purposes by a medical school, licensed hospital or nonprofit university or college providing a degree program, and animals used for display at festivals and special events as may be approved by the director of health of the City of Pasadena, so long as these animals are kept in compliance with all federal, state, and local laws governing possession and use of wild animals and, prior to such display, the owner or possessor thereof wishing to display such animal or animals, complies with the following: 
(1)  Obtains a permit at least two (2) weeks prior to the event and continue through the entire term of the event from the animal control division of the City of Pasadena, Texas on completion of such form containing all information and compliance with all conditions as may be prescribed by the city. The permit fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per event. 
(2)  Providing to the City of Pasadena animal rescue and assistance division a proof of liability insurance for any injuries caused by such animal(s) in minimum amounts as follows: 
Coverage 	Limits of Liability 
Comprehensive general liability including specified contractual liability 	Bodily injury and property damage combined limits of $1,000,000.00 each occurrence and $1,000,000.00 aggregate 
Comprehensive general liability including premises operation, contractors protective liability completed operations and products, contractual liability coverage 	Bodily injury: $500,000.00 per person; $1,000,000.00 per occurrence 
 
The City of Pasadena shall be named as additional insured on all such insurance policies. 
(3)  Completion of an agreement fully indemnifying the City of Pasadena; and 
(4)  Full compliance with all other requirements as may be promulgated by the director of health. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85; Ord. No. 98-41, § 2, 3-11-98; Ord. No. 98-72, § 1, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 98-156, § 1, 9-22-98)  
Sec. 6-74. - Use of live or killed vaccine prohibited; keeping of animals vaccinated by same prohibited; exception. 
(a)  No person shall vaccinate, or attempt to vaccinate, any wild animal as defined in section 6-68 against rabies by use of live or killed vaccine. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (c), no person shall possess, keep, permit, or allow any wild animal as defined in section 6-68 within the city if such animal has been vaccinated against rabies with the use of live or killed vaccine. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the use of live rabies vaccine for research purposes when such research is conducted by a medical school, licensed hospital or nonprofit university providing a degree program. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Sec. 6-75. - Penalty for violations. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden, or fail to perform any act required, in this article and any violations are punishable as provided in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 85-228, § 1, 11-19-85)  
Chapter 7 - AUTO WRECKERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, adopted May 21, 1996, repealed Ch. 7, §§ 7-1—7-45 in its entirety and adopted similar provisions as herein set out. Former §§ 7-1—7-45 derived from Ord. No. 88-47, § 2, adopted March 22, 1988, and Ord. No. 92-191, § 1, adopted Oct. 20, 1992. 
Cross reference— Ambulances, Ch. 4; motor vehicle dealers, Ch. 22; police, Ch. 30; traffic, Ch. 36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
[For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:] 
Auto wrecker. The term "auto wrecker" shall mean any truck or other motor vehicle which is used for the purpose of towing or carrying any motor vehicle which has collided with another motor vehicle or other object; or which has been abandoned or otherwise disabled in any manner, or required to be towed as the consequence of an arrest, to an authorized storage facility, or other destination that may be designated by the owner, or the police officer at the scene. 
Chief of police. The term "chief of police" shall mean the chief of police of the Pasadena Police Department or his appointed representative. 
City. The term "city" shall mean the City of Pasadena. 
Consent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
Contract. The term "contract" shall mean the contract between the city and a wrecker owner. The contract shall be for one year beginning January 1, 1996 through December 31, 1996 and renewable thereafter by its own provisions for police authorized towing from the scene of an accident. 
Contract wrecker. The term "contract wrecker" shall mean an auto wrecker which holds a safety permit issued through the city department of fleet maintenance, and has a contract with the city. 
Director. The term "director" means the director of the City of Pasadena Fleet Maintenance, or his duly authorized representative who shall be responsible for administering the auto wrecker ordinance as passed by the city council. 
Heavy duty wrecker. The term "heavy duty wrecker" shall mean an auto wrecker which is not less than five (5) tons in size. 
Nonconsent tow means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow. 
Owner. The term "owner" shall be construed to mean any person engaged in the business of towing motor vehicles for hire or engaged in the business of storing, wrecking or repairing motor vehicles for hire and who owns any auto wrecker, and who uses same in the conduct of his business or any part thereof. 
Parking facility means public or private property used, wholly or partly, for restricted or paid vehicle parking. The term includes: 
(a)  A restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility; and 
(b)  A commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home, apartment complex, property governed by a property owners association, or government-owned property leased to a private person, including: 
(c)  A portion of the right-of-way of a public roadway that is leased by a governmental entity to the parking facility owner; and 
(d)  The area between the facility's property line abutting a county or municipal public roadway and the centerline of the roadway's drainage way or the curb of the roadway, whichever is farther from the facility's property line. 
Parking facility owner means: 
(a)  An owner or operator of a parking facility, including a lessee, employee, or agent of an owner or operator; 
(b)  A property owners' association having control under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Section 202.001 of the Texas Property Code, as amended, over assigned or unassigned parking areas; or 
(c)  A property owner having an exclusive right under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Section 202.001 of the Texas Property Code, as amended, to use a parking space. 
Police department. The term "police department" shall mean the City of Pasadena Police Department. 
Private wrecker. The term "private wrecker" shall mean an auto wrecker which is used to tow, carry, or transport motor vehicles without the consent of the vehicle owner, but is not used to tow a vehicle from the scene of an accident on any public street where one or more vehicles have collided with another vehicle or other object except as specifically permitted in this chapter. A private wrecker may also operate as a transfer wrecker. 
Property owners' association has the meaning assigned by Section 202.001 of the Texas Property Code, as amended. 
Public roadway means a public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way. 
Tow. The term "tow" shall mean a vehicle transported or carried a reasonable distance by an auto wrecker from point "A" by raising no less than two (2) wheels off the ground and setting all wheels on the ground at point "B." 
Tow truck means a motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
Towing company means an individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
Transfer wrecker. The term "transfer wrecker" shall mean an auto wrecker which is used only to tow, carry, or transport motor vehicles with the consent of the vehicle owner. A transfer wrecker may not tow any motor vehicle with or without the consent of the vehicle owner from the scene of an accident. 
Unauthorized vehicle means a vehicle parked, stored, or located on a parking facility without the consent of the parking facility owner. 
Vehicle means a device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
Vehicle owner means a person: 
(a)  Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under Chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended; 
(b)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under Chapter 502 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(c)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(d)  Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel mortgage; or 
(e)  Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
Vehicle storage facility means a vehicle storage facility, as defined by Section 2303.002 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended, that is operated by a person who holds a license issued under Chapter 2303 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended, to operate the facility. 
Wrecker driver. The term "wrecker driver" means any individual who actually operates and drives an auto wrecker on the street of the city, either for his own benefit or as an employee of another. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 09-222, § 2, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-2. - Permit required; exception. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any auto wrecker upon any public street in the city for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled vehicles, either for hire, not for hire, or incident to obtaining the business of storing, wrecking or repairing such wrecked or disabled vehicles, without having first obtained a transfer or private wrecker permit from the city, duly issued to such person to operate a transfer or private wrecker on the streets of the city under the terms and provisions of this chapter. Provided, however, this section shall not apply to transfer wreckers required to be registered with the proper state regulating agency under state law unless the owner of such vehicle has a place of business located within the boundaries of the city. 
(b)  The holder of a contract safety permit issued in accordance with the wrecker contract authorized by this chapter shall not be required to obtain a transfer or private wrecker permit under this section. 
(c)  Notification of police. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any auto wrecker owner or wrecker driver to tow or haul or cause to be towed or hauled any vehicle within the city, except by request of the owner of the vehicle, without having notified the Pasadena Police Department within one hour after such tow. 
(2)  In any prosecution charging violation of this section, proof that the owner of the vehicle did not consent to the removal of the vehicle, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint had possession of the vehicle on the date charged, shall constitute evidence of a prima facie presumption that the possessor of the vehicle was the person or company who towed, hauled, or caused to be towed or hauled the vehicle found in his or its possession on the date of possession. The defendant shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that the vehicle was not towed or hauled as alleged in the complaint. 
(d)  A violation of this section shall be a Class C misdemeanor and is punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 09-222, § 3, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-3. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any owner, other than a transfer owner, whose transfer wrecker is registered with the proper state regulatory agency pursuant to state law and who has no place of business within the boundaries of the city, desiring to operate a transfer or private wrecker in the city shall apply in writing for a permit to the director, and shall state the following in his application: 
(1)  The name and address of the true owner. If an individual, the application shall so state. If a partnership, the partnership name and address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of all partners. If a corporation, the corporate name and office address shall be given, together with the names and addresses of the president and secretary. 
(2)  The number of wreckers the owner desires to operate, listing the make, model, motor number and correct state license number of each auto wrecker. 
(3)  That the owner will obey the provisions of this chapter and all other ordinances and statutes applicable to motor vehicles and agrees that upon his failure to so obey such laws, his permit may be revoked or suspended. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the true owner. If a partnership, it shall be signed by a member of the firm. If a corporation, it shall be signed by the president and attested by the secretary and the corporate seal affixed. In all cases, the persons signing shall execute an affidavit, on the application form, that the statements contained in such affidavit are true and correct. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-4. - Permit fee. 
The annual fee for a transfer or private wrecker permit required by this article shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each wrecker. Such fee shall be paid to the director at the time the permit application is filed and it shall not be prorated or refunded for any reason. The fee is twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for issuance of a duplicate license if a license is lost, stolen, destroyed or mutilated. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-5. - Permit issuance; contents. 
After the true owner has filed his application for a transfer or private wrecker permit, paid the permit fee, and filed the insurance policy required by this chapter, and the director has examined same and found them to be in compliance with the terms of this chapter, the director shall issue to the owner a permit to operate a transfer or private wrecker or wreckers in the city. The permits shall bear upon their face "City of Pasadena Transfer Wrecker," and shall be numbered consecutively #1 through #50 with the expiration date of December 31 of the year issued prominent on the face of each permit. All information pertaining to the individual vehicle shall be placed on its individual permit, a copy of which shall be kept in the records of the director. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-6. - Display of sign showing issuance of permit. 
(a)  A medallion shall be issued by the director or his representative at the time a permit is issued for the operation of the auto wrecker. The medallion shall be affixed to the upper right portion of the windshield of the wrecker so that it is visible to oncoming traffic. 
(b)  Upon issuance, the true owner shall display the permit in the inside of the cab of the truck at all times. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-7. - Expiration and renewal of permit. 
All transfer and private wrecker permits issued under this article shall expire on the thirty-first of December each year. Such permits may be renewed in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-8. - Supplemental permit for additional wreckers. 
(a)  Where an owner has obtained a transfer or private wrecker permit and thereafter desires to increase the number of wreckers to be operated, he shall file a supplemental application with the director setting forth his permit number(s) and the fact that he desires to operate additional wreckers, giving the make, model, motor number and state license number of each additional wrecker. He shall also pay a permit fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) for each additional wrecker and file a new insurance policy meeting the requirements of this chapter, covering the new auto wrecker(s). 
(b)  The director shall examine such supplemental auto wrecker application, fee and policy, and if the same are in order the director shall issue a supplemental permit covering the new auto wrecker(s). 
(c)  Upon the sale of the wrecker to which a wrecker permit, or supplemental permit, has been issued the owner shall return such permit to the director. Wrecker permits are not transferable or assignable. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-9. - Supplemental permit for substitute wrecker. 
Whenever an owner wishes to discontinue the use of a transfer or private wrecker during the period covered by his permit and replace it with another, he shall file an affidavit stating that he has discontinued using the wrecker covered by his permit and desires to use another wrecker in its place. He shall attach a certificate from his insurer that such insurer has been notified thereof and agrees thereto. The director shall then issue the owner a supplemental permit at a cost of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) which will cover the new transfer or private wrecker and cause the description of the old wrecker to be eliminated from the original permit. In the affidavit, certificate from the insurer, and supplemental permit, the old and new wrecker shall be described by make, model, motor number and state license number. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-10. - suspension or revocation of transfer or private wrecker permit. 
(a)  Upon complaint being filed by any person with the director or chief of police of a violation by the holder of a transfer or private wrecker permit of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or the violation of any applicable laws of the state, federal government or other ordinances of the city, or upon his own motion, the director or chief of police, after three (3) days written notice to the wrecker permit holder of the grounds of such complaint or his own motion, conduct a hearing to hear evidence with reference to such complaint or motion. Should such hearing reveal a violation of any of the laws of the federal government, the state or ordinances of the city relevant to the subject matter of this chapter, the director or chief of police may suspend or revoke the transfer or private wrecker permit. 
(b)  After the director or chief of police has conducted the hearing and investigation upon the complaint or motion for the suspension, or revocation of the permit of any owner of an auto wrecker permit, he shall make his findings and declare the same in writing to the owner or operator of such auto wrecker permit within ten (10) days after such hearing. The owner of such wrecker permit shall have the right to appeal a suspension which is imposed by the director or chief of police in the manner provided in section 7-21 of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon the suspension or revocation of a transfer or private wrecker permit issued under this chapter, no portion of the fee paid therefor shall be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-11. - Reserved.  
Sec. 7-12. - Liability and property damage insurance requirements. 
Before any permit shall be issued under this chapter to a transfer, private or contract wrecker owner, or before any renewal of such permit shall be granted, such owner shall procure and keep in full force and effect and shall keep on file with the director a policy of public liability and property damage insurance or a certificate of insurance in the name of the owner or company by a casualty insurance company which is authorized to do business in the state and in standard form approved by the board of insurance commissioners of the state, and the coverage provisions insuring the public from any loss or damage that may arise to any person or property by reason of the operation of a wrecker of such owner and providing that the amount of recovering on each wrecker shall be in limits of not less than the following sums: 
(1)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of one person in any one accident ..... $250,000.00 
(2)  For damages arising out of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons in any one accident ..... 500,000.00 
(3)  For injury to or destruction of property in any one accident ..... 150,000.00 
(4)  The insurance policies mentioned in this section shall contain an endorsement which provides for thirty (30) days' notice to the director in the event of any material change or cancellation of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-13. - Equipment requirements for auto wreckers. 
(a)  All transfer and private wreckers which are not also contract wreckers shall be provided with the following equipment, which shall be adequate for the purpose it is designed, shall be carried and kept in useable condition at all time. 
(1)  Each wrecker shall be not less than one ton in size with dual rear wheels with a GVW rating of no less than ten thousand (10,000) pounds equipped with booster brakes. 
(2)  Tow bars or wheel lifts. Such tow bars being that piece of equipment sometimes known as an A-frame which is a part of the wrecker and is used to hold a vehicle which has been elevated for towing rigid and to prevent swinging of such raised vehicle as it is being towed. When a vehicle is being towed, the tow bar shall be in place to prevent swinging. A wheel lift being the piece of equipment replacing the A-frame system using hydraulic means which enables a wrecker to lift at least two (2) wheels off the ground for towing purposes. 
(3)  One fire extinguisher that is properly filled and located so that it is readily accessible for use. Such fire extinguisher shall meet the requirements of the National Fire Protection Association, for a 10 BC fire extinguisher and shall be so labeled by a national testing laboratory. 
(4)  No person shall drive or operate any transfer or private wrecker, or allow, permit or cause any person to drive or operate any transfer or private wrecker unless the following information is clearly and legibly painted in colors which contrast with the color of the doors, on the outside of both entrance doors of the vehicle in letters of at least three (3) inches in height and one-half (½) inch in stroke width: 
a.  The name of the company under which the permit holder is doing business. 
b.  The telephone number, which shall be obtainable through directory assistance, and the address of the permit holder or his agent where persons can call at any hour the wrecker is in operation to obtain information as to the storage lot to which a vehicle was towed. 
(b)  Each heavy duty wrecker must comply with the requirements in subsection (a) of this section as well as the following: 
(1)  Each heavy duty wrecker must not be less than five (5) tons in size. 
(2)  Each heavy duty wrecker shall be equipped with a power operated winch, winch line and boom, with a factory rated lifting capacity of not less than thirty-two thousand (32,000) pounds, single- or double-line capacity. 
(3)  Each heavy duty wrecker shall have one broom of a type designed for pushing with an eighteen-inch head, and a handle of not less than thirty-six (36) inches. 
(4)  Each heavy duty wrecker shall have a box or bucket to carry any glass and debris cleared from the street when picking up a damaged vehicle. 
(5)  Each heavy duty wrecker shall have one flat-edged shovel of at least nine (9) inches, with a handle of not less than thirty-six (36) inches. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-14. - Penalty for violation. 
An owner, driver or any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed in violation of said chapter and will be punished by a fine (Class C misdemeanor) not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 09-222, § 4, 10-27-09)  
ARTICLE II. - CONTRACT WRECKER SERVICE 
 
Sec. 7-15. - Contract wrecker service. 
(a)  No person shall operate a wrecker so as to perform tows at the request of the city or the police department or a police officer without a contract and safety permit issued by the city applicable to such wrecker. Such contract and safety permit shall not be issued except upon such need as determined by the city. 
(b)  No more than one safety permit and contract shall be issued to any person or business enterprise whether that enterprise be a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation or other entity. In determining whether a business enterprise already has a safety permit and contract, among the factors that may be considered are: Telephone numbers used by the business, office location, storage lot location, articles of incorporation, partnership agreements, and tax records. These factors are by way of example and should not be construed to limit the city's inquiry. This section does not affect the city's right not to issue a contract and safety permit to any person or business entity. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or cause to be performed, tows, at or from the scene of an accident where vehicles have collided with other vehicles or objects or have been wrecked, in order to remove or haul away the wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle unless the wrecker operated by such person has been issued a valid safety permit by the city. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or cause to be performed, tows, at or from the scene of an accident where vehicles have collided with other vehicles or objects or have been wrecked, in order to remove or haul away the wrecked, disabled or abandoned vehicle unless the wrecker operated by such person has been issued a valid safety permit by the city, and the owner or operator of such wrecker has obtained a contract from the city to perform such tows. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-16. - Duties of contractor. 
(a)  It shall be the obligation of the contractor to operate his wrecker business so as to provide safe and prompt removal of wrecked or disabled vehicles from the public streets of the city when properly called upon to do so in accordance with the provisions of his contract and this chapter. 
(b)  The duty to provide safe and prompt wrecker service includes, but is not limited, to the following specific duties: 
(1)  The contractor on the wrecker rotation list must tow or have towed the damaged vehicle to a repair shop or to a place designated by the owner or to a place designated by the police officer, unless the owner of the vehicle is disabled by physical injury and is, therefore, unable to designate a location for the vehicle to be towed. The contractor shall then store the vehicle at an authorized state licensed storage facility until released to the vehicle owner or agent. The selling of such right to tow any disabled vehicle is prohibited. The wrecker operator shall sign the form (#319) provided by the police department prior to leaving the scene and shall accept the responsibility of removing the vehicle until relieved of this responsibility. 
(2)  In the event the tow is not the consequence of a collision, the contractor shall tow or have the vehicle towed to the city's storage lot. Suspected stolen vehicles, however, even if involved in an accident or collision, shall also be towed to the city storage facility. 
(3)  The contractor shall not store any vehicles or wreckers on the public streets or rights-of-way. The contractor will use reasonable care in the storage of property not belonging to said contractor, so as to minimize the risk of theft or damage. 
(4)  The contractor shall comply with all ordinances of the city, including but not limited to the fire prevention code, traffic ordinances, and all criminal ordinances. 
(5)  The contractor shall haul all police or city requested tows of vehicles not involved in an accident to the city storage facility. 
(c)  The contractor shall not charge a towing fee in excess of one hundred forty dollars ($140.00) for a regular tow and one hundred eighty-five dollars ($185.00) per hour for a heavy duty wrecker tow. Fee includes use of wrecker and any or all of the equipment required on the wrecker as provided in section 7-13. No added towing or equipment use fee is allowed except as provided herein under section 7-16(e). 
(d)  When requested by a towing company, the rates referred to in subsection (c) above, shall be established in accordance with the following process: 
(1)  A towing company may request that the city conduct a towing fee study by filing with the city maintenance services director a written request for such study. 
(2)  The director may require verified operating costs and financial accounting information. 
(3)  In conducting a study, the city may consider operating costs, the effect of inflation on existing fees, comparable fees, and other appropriate factors. 
(4)  No more than one (1) towing fee study shall be conducted in any twelve-month period. 
(e)  Additional charges may be approved by the director of maintenance services by submitting in writing attached to the wrecker ticket detailing the justification for additional charges only for extraordinary circumstances including but not limited to: 
(1)  Towing to or from a location outside of Pasadena's city limits; 
(2)  Required additional wreckers; 
(3)  Winching requiring more than seventy-five (75) feet of cable; or 
(4)  Wrecker being held at accident scene at request of police officer. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96; Ord. No. 01-125, § 1, 9-18-01; Ord. No. 05-43, §§ 1—3, 2-22-05; Ord. No. 07-329, § 2, 11-20-07; Ord. No. 09-222, § 5, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-17. - Storage lot requirements. 
(a)  The contract wrecker safety permit holder shall maintain or have access to vehicle depositories located within the corporation city limits of the city. These storage facilities must meet the requirements of all applicable local, state, and federal laws. 
(b)  Except for suspected stolen vehicles, any vehicle involved in an accident and hauled or towed without the owner's consent must be taken to a storage facility within the corporate limits of the city. Notification of a storage lot change must be made known to the director or his representative in writing seventy-two (72) hours prior to such change. 
(c)  The fee for storing a vehicle at a depository maintained by or for a safety permit holder under this contract shall not exceed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for automobiles and light trucks and fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for vehicles requiring a heavy duty wrecker excluding the first four (4) hours. 
(d)  Notice shall be given no earlier than the completion of the first twenty-four (24) hours of the date and time the operator receives the vehicle and no later than the fifth day after taking the motor vehicle into custody, by certified mail, to the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lien holders of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, Article 6687-1, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, that the vehicle has been taken into custody. 
(e)  The notice shall describe the year, make, model, and vehicle identification number of the stored vehicle, set forth the location of the facility where the motor vehicle is being held, the date and time the vehicle was taken into custody, and inform the owner and any lien holders of their rights to reclaim the motor vehicle not later than thirty (30) days from the date the vehicle was taken into custody by the operator. 
(f)  The notice shall also state that failure of the owner or lien holders to exercise their right to reclaim the vehicle within the time provided constitutes a waiver by the owner and lien holders of all rights, title, and interest in the vehicle and their consent to the sale of the abandoned motor vehicle at a public auction as per Texas Litter Abatement Act, Article 4477-9a. 
(g)  If the garage or storage lot owner/operator fails to notify by certified mail the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle and all lien holders of the record within the prescribed time allotted, the garage or storage lot owner shall be removed from the contract wrecker rotation list. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-18. - Police officer not to influence selection of wrecker service. 
A police officer investigating an accident or present at the scene of any wreck or collision shall not directly or indirectly recommend to any person involved in the wreck or collision, the name of a wrecker safety permit holder and shall not directly or indirectly recommend or attempt to influence in any manner the decision of any persons in choosing or selecting a permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-19. - Driving wrecker to collision scene prohibited, exceptions. 
No person, agent or representative of a firm shall drive, or cause to be driven, a wrecker to or near the scene of a collision on a street in this city unless such person has been called to the scene by the city police communications center or its authorized agent, or by a party involved in the collision; provided, that in an emergency when it appears necessary to prevent death or bodily injury to any person involved in a collision, the prohibition of this section shall be inapplicable. A violation of this section shall be a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-20. - Soliciting business at the scene of an accident. 
All wrecker drivers, owners, agencies, or individuals representing individual wrecker or paint and body companies are prohibited from soliciting the business of towing, removing or repairing any wrecked or disabled vehicle at the place where the accident has occurred by words, cards, circulars, or gestures. A violation of this section shall be a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
Sec. 7-21. - Hearing; appeals. 
(a)  Wrecker appeals board. 
(1)  There is hereby created a wrecker appeals board consisting of three (3) members. 
(2)  There shall be three (3) positions on the board to be filled as follows: 
a.  Position 1 shall be filled by the director of fleet maintenance for the city or one of his agents. 
b.  Position 2 shall be filled by the chief of police for the city or by one of his representatives. 
c.  Position 3 shall be filled by the present of the Pasadena wrecker association or a person appointed by the president to represent the association. Any person named in a complaint shall not sit on the appeals board hearing concerning that particular complaint. 
(3)  The board shall provide a hearing and appeal procedure as hereafter provided from an order of the director or chief of police as follows: 
a.  Granting or denying the initial or renewal application for a permit or license under this chapter. 
b.  Suspending, revoking or cancelling a permit or license under this chapter; or 
c.  Otherwise prohibiting the continued operation of the wrecker business under this chapter. 
(4)  Procedure. 
a.  A person desiring a hearing or appeal to the board shall file a written notice requesting same with the director or chief of police within ten (10) days after the action or order complained of. 
b.  The director or chief of police shall thereafter set a hearing by the board within ten (10) days of the receipt of the request and shall notify in writing the person requesting same of the time and place. 
c.  The board shall: 
1.  Conduct the hearing; 
2.  Take the evidence; 
3.  Issue notices, request the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
4.  Give the person or persons requesting the hearing and all other interested parties or persons an opportunity to be heard; 
5.  Hear all evidence and consider all applicable laws, ordinances or requirements. 
d.  The board shall make a decision by majority vote based on a preponderance of the evidence. The decision shall be reduced to writing and mailed to the person requesting the hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested within a reasonable time and not later than seven (7) days from the date of hearing. 
(b)  Appeal to city council. 
(1)  An appeal to the city council shall be granted from the decision of the appeals board that upholds the order or action of the director or chief of police in the following circumstances: 
a.  Granting or denial of the initial or renewal application for a permit or license under this chapter. 
b.  Revocation or cancellation of a license or permit under this chapter. 
c.  Suspension of a license or permit under this chapter for a period of time exceeding ten (10) days. In cases of suspension for a period of ten (10) days or less the decision of the appeals board is final. 
d.  Action that otherwise prohibits the continual operation of the wrecker business in excess of ten (10) days. 
(2)  The person requesting an appeal to council shall file with the city secretary written demand for same within ten (10) days of the receipt of the decision of the appeals board, stating that an appeal is desired and containing a brief statement of the reasons therefor and an address for notification purposes. 
(3)  The council shall, within fifteen (15) days of the actual receipt by the city secretary of the request set a time and place for the hearing to be held no later than fifteen (15) days thereafter and shall direct the city secretary to advise the person so requesting by certified mail, return receipt requested at the address given in the request for hearing. 
(4)  The council shall: 
a.  Conduct the hearing; 
b.  Take the evidence; 
c.  Issue notices, request the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearing; 
d.  Give the person or persons requesting the hearing and all other interested parties or persons an opportunity to be heard; 
e.  Hear all the evidence and consider all applicable laws, ordinances or requirements; 
f.  Make its decision by majority vote based on a preponderance of the evidence. 
(5)  Council may act within fifteen (15) days following the date of the hearing. A copy of the decision shall be sent by the city secretary by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant within three (3) days of the decision. Failure of the city council to act within the fifteen (15) days shall constitute a rejection of the appeal. Action or inaction of the city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 96-73, § 1, 5-21-96)  
ARTICLE III. - NONCONSENT PARKING FACILITY TOW 
 
Sec. 7-22. - Authority. 
These rules are adopted under the authority of the Texas Occupations Code, Title 14, Subtitle A, Chapter 2308, as amended, a copy of which is attached to this Code of Ordinances Chapter 7 as Appendix "A". 
(Ord. No. 09-222, § 6, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-23. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate or cause to be driven or operated any auto wrecker upon any public street in the city for the purpose of performing nonconsent private property tows from a parking facility as defined in this chapter, without having first obtained a private property towing permit duly issued to such person under the provisions of this article. A permit is required under this section whether or not the owner of such wrecker has a place of business located within the boundaries of the city. Otherwise, the procedures and requirements, except permit fee, of this chapter for issuing a transfer wrecker permit shall govern nonconsent private property tow permits under this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any auto wrecker owner or wrecker driver to perform nonconsent tows under this article of any vehicle within the City of Pasadena, without having notified the Pasadena Police Department dispatcher of their intent to tow the vehicle. The auto wrecker owner or wrecker driver must notify the Pasadena Police Department dispatcher of their possession of such vehicle within one hour after taking possession of the vehicle. 
(c)  A towing company that makes a nonconsent tow shall tow the vehicle to a vehicle storage facility that is operated by a person who holds a license to operate the facility under Chapter 2303 of the Texas Occupations Code, as amended, unless the towing company agrees to take the vehicle to a location designated by the vehicle's owner. 
(Ord. No. 09-222, § 6, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-24. - Permit fee. 
The annual fee for a nonconsent private property towing permit required by this article shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each wrecker. Such fee shall be paid at the time the permit application is filed and it shall not be prorated or refunded for any reason. The fee is fifteen dollars ($15.00) for issuance of a duplicate permit if a permit is lost, stolen, destroyed or mutilated. 
(Ord. No. 09-222, § 6, 10-27-09)  
Sec. 7-25. - Towing fees. 
Towing fees for nonconsent parking facility tows shall not exceed the amounts specified in section 7-16(c) of this chapter, as amended. The procedures by which a towing company may request that a towing fee study be performed shall conform to the requirements of section 7-16(d) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-222, § 6, 10-27-09)  
APPENDIX A. - TEXAS TOWING ACT  
SUBCHAPTER A. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 2308.001. - Short title. 
This chapter may be cited as the Texas Towing Act.  
Sec. 2308.002. - Definitions. 
In this chapter: 
(1)  "Advisory board" means the Towing and Storage Advisory Board. 
(2)  "Commission" means the Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation. 
(3)  "Consent tow" means any tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession, custody, or control of the vehicle. The term does not include a tow of a motor vehicle initiated by a peace officer investigating a traffic accident or a traffic incident that involves the vehicle. 
(4)  "Department" means the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. 
(5)  "Driver's license" has the meaning assigned by Section 521.001, Transportation Code. 
(6)  "Nonconsent tow" means any tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow. 
(7)  "Parking facility" means public or private property used, wholly or partly) for restricted or paid vehicle parking. The term includes: 
(A)  A restricted space on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility; and 
(B)  A commercial parking lot, a parking garage, and a parking area serving or adjacent to a business, church, school, home, apartment complex, property governed by a properly owners' association, or government-owned property leased to a private person, including: 
(i)  A portion of the right-of-way of a public roadway that is leased by a governmental entity to the parking facility owner; and 
(ii)  The area between the facility's property line abutting a county or municipal public roadway and the centerline of the roadway's drainage way or the curb of the roadway, whichever is farther from the facility's property line. 
(8)  "Parking facility owner" means: 
(A)  An owner or operator of a parking facility, including a lessee, employee, or agent of an owner or operator; 
(B)  A property owners' association having control under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Section 202.001, Property Code, over assigned or unassigned parking areas; or 
(C)  A property owner having an exclusive right under a dedicatory instrument, as that term is defined in Section 202.001, Property Code, to use a parking space. 
(9)  "Property owners' association" has the meaning assigned by Section 202.001, Property Code. 
(10)  "Public roadway" means a public street, alley, road, right-of-way, or other public way, including paved and unpaved portions of the right-of-way. 
(11)  "Tow truck" means a motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move another motor vehicle. 
(12)  "Towing company" means an individual, association, corporation, or other legal entity that controls, operates, or directs the operation of one or more tow trucks over a public roadway in this state but does not include a political subdivision of the state. 
(13)  "Unauthorized vehicle" means a vehicle parked, stored, or located on a parking facility without the consent of the parking facility owner. 
(14)  "Vehicle" means a device in, on, or by which a person or property may be transported on a public roadway. The term includes an operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle, or trailer but does not include a device moved by human power or used exclusively on a stationary rail or track. 
(15)  "Vehicle owner" means a person: 
(A)  Named as the purchaser or transferee in the certificate of title issued for the vehicle under Chapter 501, Transportation Code: 
(B)  In whose name the vehicle is registered under Chapter 502, Transportation Code, or a member of the person's immediate family; 
(C)  Who holds the vehicle through a lease agreement; 
(D)  Who is an unrecorded lienholder entitled to possess the vehicle under the terms of a chattel mortgage; or 
(E)  Who is a lienholder holding an affidavit of repossession and entitled to repossess the vehicle. 
(16)  "Vehicle storage facility" means a vehicle storage facility, as defined by Section 2303.002, that is operated by a person who holds a license issued under Chapter 2303 to operate the facility.  
Sec. 2308.003. - Study of nonconsent towing fees. 
(a)  The department shall study the fees charged by license and permit holders for nonconsent tows, compliance of license and permit holders with local regulations governing towing fees, and consumer complaints related to fees for nonconsent tows. Not later than January 1, 2009, the department shall report to the legislature the findings of the study, including any recommendations for state regulation of towing fees. 
(b)  This section expires September 1, 2009.  
SUBCHAPTER B. - ADVISORY BOARD 
 
Sec. 2308.051. - Towing and storage advisory board. 
(a)  The advisory board consists of the following members appointed by the presiding officer of the commission with the approval of the commission: 
(1)  One representative of a towing company operating in a county with a population of less than one million; 
(2)  One representative of a towing company operating in a county with a population of one million or more; 
(3)  One owner of a vehicle storage facility located in a county with a population of less than one million; 
(4)  One owner of a vehicle storage facility located in a county with a population of one million or more; 
(5)  One parking facility owner; 
(6)  One law enforcement officer from a county with a population of less than one million; 
(7)  One law enforcement officer from a county with a population of one million or more; and 
(8)  One representative of property and casualty insurers who write automobile insurance in this state. 
(b)  The advisory board must include representation for each classification of towing. 
(c)  An appointment to the advisory board shall be made without regard to the race, color, disability, sex, religion, age, or national origin of the appointee.  
Sec. 2308.052. - Terms; vacancies. 
(a)  Advisory board members serve terms of six years, with the terms of two or three members, as appropriate, expiring on February 1 of each odd-numbered year. 
(b)  A member may not serve more than two full consecutive terms. 
(c)  If a vacancy occurs during a term, the presiding officer of the commission shall appoint a replacement who meets the qualifications of the vacated position to serve for the remainder of the term.  
Sec. 2308.053. - Presiding officer. 
The presiding officer of the commission shall appoint one of the advisory board members to serve as presiding officer of the advisory board for a term of one year. The presiding officer of the advisory board may vote on any matter before the advisory board.  
Sec. 2308.054. - Compensation; reimbursement of expenses. 
Advisory board members may not receive compensation but are entitled to reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in performing the functions of the advisory board, subject to the General Appropriations Act.  
Sec. 2308.055. - Meetings. 
The advisory board shall meet twice annually and may meet at other times at the call of the presiding officer of the commission or the executive director.  
Sec. 2308.056. - General powers and duties. 
The executive director or commission, as appropriate, may take action as necessary to administer and enforce this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.057. - Rules. 
(a)  The commission shall adopt rules for permitting tow trucks and licensing towing operators and towing companies. 
(b)  The commission by rule shall adopt standards of conduct for license and permit holders under this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.058. - Fees. 
The commission shall establish and collect reasonable and necessary fees in amounts sufficient to cover the costs of administering this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.059. - Periodic and risk-based inspections. 
(a)  The department may enter and inspect at any time during business hours: 
(1)  The place of business of any person regulated under this chapter; or 
(2)  Any place in which the department has reasonable cause to believe that a license or permit holder is in violation of this chapter or in violation of a rule or order of the commission or executive director. 
(b)  The department shall conduct additional inspections based on a schedule of risk-based inspections using the following criteria: 
(1)  The type and nature of the towing company or operator; 
(2)  The inspection history; 
(3)  Any history of complaints involving the towing company or operator; and 
(4)  Any other factor determined by the commission by rule. 
(c)  The towing company shall pay a fee for each risk-based inspection performed under this section. The commission by rule shall set the amount of the fee. 
(d)  In conducting an inspection under this section, the department may inspect a vehicle, a facility, business records, or any other place or thing reasonably required to enforce this chapter or a rule or order adopted under this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.060. - Powers and duties of advisory board. 
The advisory board shall provide advice and recommendations to the department on technical matters relevant to the administration and enforcement of this chapter, including examination content, licensing standards, and continuing education requirements.  
Sec. 2308.061. - Personnel. 
The department may employ personnel necessary to administer and enforce this chapter.  
SUBCHAPTER C. - TOW TRUCK PERMIT REQUIREMENTS 
This subchapter takes effect September 1, 2008 (See H.B. 2094, Sec. 5.05 as added by Acts of the 80th Legislature.) 
 
Sec. 2308.101. - Permit required. 
A tow truck may not be used for consent towing or nonconsent towing on a public roadway in this state unless an appropriate permit has been issued for the tow truck under this subchapter. Each tow truck requires a separate permit.  
Sec. 2308.102. - Application requirements. 
(a)  An applicant for a permit under this subchapter must submit to the department: 
(1)  A completed application on a form prescribed by the executive director; 
(2)  Evidence of insurance or financial responsibility required under this subchapter: 
(3)  The required fees; and 
(4)  Any other information required by the executive director. 
(b)  The department may conduct an examination of any criminal conviction of an applicant, including by obtaining any criminal history record information permitted by law.  
Sec. 2308.103. - Requirements for incident management towing permit. 
(a)  An incident management towing permit is required for a tow truck used to perform any nonconsent tow initiated by a peace officer, including a tow authorized under Section 545.3051, Transportation Code. 
(b)  To be eligible for an incident management towing permit, an applicant must submit evidence that: 
(1)  The tow truck is equipped to tow light-duty or heavy-duty vehicles according to the manufacturer's towing guidelines; 
(2)  The applicant has at least $500,000 of liability insurance for the tow truck; and 
(3)  The applicant has at least $50,000 of cargo insurance for the tow truck, 
(c)  A tow truck permitted under this section may also be used for private property towing and consent towing. 
(d)  When a tow truck is used for a nonconsent tow initiated by a peace officer under Section 545.3051, Transportation Code, the permit holder is an agent of law enforcement and is subject to Section 545.3051(e), Transportation Code.  
Sec. 2308.104. - Requirements for private property towing permit. 
(a)  A private property towing permit is required for a tow truck used to perform a nonconsent tow authorized by a parking facility owner under this chapter. 
(b)  To be eligible for a private property towing permit, an applicant must submit evidence that: 
(1)  The tow truck is equipped to tow light-duty or heavy-duty vehicles according to the manufacturer's towing guidelines; 
(2)  The applicant has at least $300,000 of liability insurance for the tow truck; and 
(3)  The applicant has at least $50,000 of cargo insurance for the tow truck. 
(c)  A tow truck permitted under this section may also be used for consent towing but not for incident management towing.  
Sec. 2308.105. - Requirements for consent towing permit. 
(a)  A consent towing permit is required for a tow truck used to perform a consent tow authorized by the vehicle owner. 
(b)  To be eligible for a consent towing permit, an applicant must submit evidence that: 
(1)  The tow truck is equipped to tow light-duty or heavy-duty vehicles according to the manufacturer's towing guidelines; and 
(2)  The applicant has at least $300,000 of liability insurance for the tow truck. 
(c)  A tow truck permitted under this section may not be used for nonconsent towing, including incident management towing and private property towing.  
Sec. 2308.106. - Department approval; issuance of permit. 
(a)  The department shall issue a permit under this subchapter to an applicant who meets the requirements for a permit. The department may deny an application if the applicant has had a permit revoked under this chapter. 
(b)  The department shall issue a certificate containing a single unique permit number for each tow truck, regardless of whether the permit holder holds more than one permit.  
Sec. 2308.107. - Permit renewal. 
(a)  A permit issued under this chapter is valid for one year. The department may adopt a system under which permits expire at different times during the year. 
(b)  The department shall notify the permit holder at least 30 days before the date a permit expires. The notice must be in writing and sent to the permit holder's last known address according to the records of the department. 
(c)  A permit holder may renew a permit under this chapter by: 
(1)  Paying a fee for each tow truck; and 
(2)  Providing to the department evidence of continuing insurance or financial responsibility in an amount required by this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.108. - Cab cards. 
(a)  The department shall issue a cab card for each tow truck issued a permit. The cab card must: 
(1)  Show the permit number of the certificate issued under Section 2308.106(b); 
(2)  Show the type of permit issued; 
(3)  Show the vehicle unit number; 
(4)  Show the vehicle identification number; and 
(5)  Contain a statement that the vehicle has been issued a permit under this subchapter. 
(b)  The department shall issue a cab card when the department issues or renews a permit under this subchapter. 
(c)  A permit holder must keep the cab card in the cab of each permitted tow truck. 
(d)  The department may order a permit holder to surrender a cab card if the permit is suspended or revoked under this chapter. 
(e)  If the department determines that the cab card system described by Subsections (a) through (c) is not an efficient means of enforcing this subchapter, the executive director by rule may adopt an alternative method that is accessible by law enforcement personnel in the field and provides for the enforcement of the permit requirements of this subchapter. 
(f)  A cab card or a permit issued under the alternative method described in Subsection (e) must be valid for the same duration as a certificate issued under Section 2308.106.  
Sec. 2308.109. - Display of information on tow truck. 
(a)  A permit holder shall display on each permitted tow truck: 
(1)  The permit holder's name; 
(2)  The permit holder's telephone number; 
(3)  The city and state where the permit holder is located; and 
(4)  The permit number for the tow truck. 
(b)  The information required to be displayed must be: 
(1)  Printed in letters and numbers that are at least two inches high and in a color that contrasts with the color of the background surface; and 
(2)  Permanently affixed in conspicuous places on both sides of the tow truck.  
Sec. 2308.110. - Financial responsibility. 
(a)  A permit holder shall maintain liability insurance for each tow truck according to the requirements under this subchapter. 
(b)  Unless state law permits a tow truck to be self-insured, any insurance required for a tow truck must be obtained from an insurer authorized to do business in this state. 
(c)  An applicant or permit holder must file with the department evidence of insurance as required by this subchapter. 
(d)  A permit holder shall keep evidence of insurance in a form approved by the department in the cab of each permitted tow truck.  
SUBCHAPTER D. - LICENSE REQUIREMENTS 
This subchapter takes effect September 1, 2008 (See H. B. 2094, Sec. 5.05 as added by Acts of the 80th Legislature.) 
 
Sec. 2308.151. - License required. 
Unless the person holds an appropriate license under this subchapter, a person may not: 
(1)  Perform towing operations; or 
(2)  Operate a towing company.  
Sec. 2308.152. - General license application requirements. 
An applicant for a license under this subchapter must submit to the department: 
(1)  A completed application on a form prescribed by the executive director; 
(2)  The required fees; and 
(3)  Any other information required by commission rule. Sec. 2308.153. Incident Management Towing Operator's License. 
(a)  An incident management towing operator's license is required to operate a tow truck permitted under Section 2308.103. 
(b)  An applicant for an incident management towing operator's license must: 
(1)  Be a licensed Texas driver; and 
(2)  Be certified by the National Drivers Certification Program of the Towing and Recovery Association of America or another certification program approved by the department.  
Sec. 2308.154. - Private property towing operator's license. 
(a)  A private property towing operator's license is required to operate a tow truck permitted under Section 2308.104. 
(b)  An applicant for a private property towing operator's license must: 
(1)  Be a licensed Texas driver; and 
(2)  Be certified by the National Drivers Certification Program of the Towing and Recovery Association of America or another certification program approved by the department.  
Sec. 2308.155. - Consent towing operator's license. 
(a)  A consent towing operator's license is required to operate a tow truck permitted under Section 2308.105. 
(b)  An applicant for a consent towing operator's license must be a licensed Texas driver.  
Sec. 2308.156. - Nontransferability of license. 
A license issued by the executive director is valid throughout this state and is not transferable.  
Sec. 2308.157. - Continuing education. 
(a)  The commission by rule shall recognize, prepare, or administer continuing education programs for license holders. Except as provided by Subsection (c), each license holder must complete a continuing education program before the license holder may renew the license holder's license. 
(b)  A person recognized by the commission to offer a continuing education program must: 
(1)  Register with the department; and 
(2)  Comply with rules adopted by the commission relating to continuing education. 
(c)  To renew an incident management towing operator's license the first time, a license holder must complete a professional development course relating to towing that is licensed or certified by the National Safety Council or another course approved and administered by the department under this section.  
Sec. 2308.158. - Drug testing of towing operators. 
(a)  A towing company shall establish a drug testing policy for towing operators. A towing company that establishes a drug testing policy under this subsection may adopt the model drug testing policy adopted by the commission or may use another drug testing policy that the department determines is at least as stringent as the policy adopted by the commission. 
(b)  The commission by rule shall adopt a model drug testing policy for use by a towing company. The model drug testing policy must be designed to ensure the safety of the public through appropriate drug testing and to protect the rights of employees. The model drug testing policy must: 
(1)  Require at least one scheduled drug test each year for each towing operator; and 
(2)  Authorize random, unannounced drug testing for towing operators.  
Sec. 2308.159. - License renewal. 
(a)  A license issued under this subchapter is valid for one year. The department may adopt a system under which licenses expire at different times during the year. 
(b)  The department shall notify the license holder at least 30 days before the date a license expires. The notice must be in writing and sent to the license holder's last known address according to the records of the department. 
(c)  A license holder may renew a license issued under this chapter by: 
(1)  Paying a renewal fee; and 
(2)  Completing continuing education as required by Section 2308.157.  
SUBCHAPTER E. - LOCAL REGULATION OF TOWING 
 
Sec. 2308-201. - Tow truck regulation by political subdivisions. 
(a)  A political subdivision of this state may regulate the operation of a tow truck to the extent allowed by federal law, except that a political subdivision may not issue a more restrictive regulation for the use of lighting equipment on a tow truck than is imposed by Title 7, Transportation Code. 
(b)  A political subdivision may not require the registration of a tow truck that performs consent tows in the political subdivision unless the owner of the tow truck has a place of business in the territory of the political subdivision. 
(c)  A political subdivision may require the registration of a tow truck that performs a nonconsent tow in the political subdivision, regardless of whether the owner of the tow truck has a place of business in the territory of the political subdivision. 
(d)  A political subdivision may not require a person who holds a driver's license or commercial driver's license to obtain a license or permit for operating a tow truck unless the person performs nonconsent tows in the territory of the political subdivision. A fee charged for a license or permit may not exceed $15.  
Sec. 2308.202. - Regulation by political subdivisions of fees for nonconsent tows. 
The governing body of a political subdivision may regulate the fees that may be charged or collected in connection with a nonconsent tow originating in the territory of the political subdivision.  
Sec. 2308.203. - Towing fee studies. 
(a)  The governing body of a political subdivision that regulates nonconsent tow fees shall establish procedures by which a towing company may request that a towing fee study be performed. 
(b)  The governing body of the political subdivision shall establish or amend the allowable fees for nonconsent tows at amounts that represent the fair value of the services of a towing company and are reasonably related to any financial or accounting information provided to the governing body.  
Sec. 2308.204. - Fees for nonconsent tows in other areas. 
(a)  In an area in which no political subdivision regulates the fees that may be charged or collected for a nonconsent tow from private property, a towing company may charge and collect a fee for the tow of a motor vehicle from private property in an amount not to exceed an amount equal to 150 percent of the fee that the towing company would have been authorized to charge for a nonconsent tow made at the request of a peace officer of the political subdivision in which the private property is located. 
(b)  A towing company may charge and collect a fee for the tow of a vehicle, with a gross vehicle weight rating in excess of 26,000 pounds, from private property in an amount not to exceed an amount equal to 125 percent of the fee that the towing company would have been authorized to charge for a nonconsent tow made at the request of a peace officer of the political subdivision in which the private property is located.  
Sec. 2308.205. - Storage of towed vehicles. 
(a)  A towing company that makes a nonconsent tow shall tow the vehicle to a vehicle storage facility that is operated by a person who holds a license to operate the facility under Chapter 2303, unless the towing company agrees to take the vehicle to a location designated by the vehicle's owner. 
(b)  A storage or notification fee imposed in connection with a motor vehicle towed to a vehicle storage facility is governed by Chapter 2303. 
(c)  Except as provided by this chapter, Article 18.23, Code of Criminal Procedure, or Chapter 2303, a fee may not be charged or collected without the prior written consent of the vehicle owner or operator.  
Sec. 2308.206. - Required filing. 
(a)  Before January 31 of each year, a towing company shall file with the department a schedule showing each towing fee that the towing company charges or collects in connection with a nonconsent low. 
(b)  If a political subdivision begins regulating nonconsent tow fees, the fees shall be reported to the department by the towing company before the 30th day after the regulation goes into effect. 
(c)  Any changes in nonconsent tow fees regulated by a political subdivision shall be reported to the department by the towing company before the 30th day after the effective date of the change. 
(d)  The department shall make towing fee schedules available on the department's Internet website. The department shall make no determination as to the reasonableness of a towing fee schedule. 
(e)  A license or permit holder may not charge a fee for a nonconsent tow that is greater than the fee listed in the schedule most recently submitted to the department under this section.  
Sec. 2308.207. - Required posting. 
(a)  All storage fees shall be posted at the licensed vehicle storage facility to which the motor vehicle has been delivered and shall be posted in view of the person who claims the vehicle. 
(b)  A vehicle storage facility accepting a nonconsent towed vehicle shall post a sign in one inch letters stating "Nonconsent tow fees schedules available on request." The vehicle storage facility shall provide a copy of a nonconsent towing fees schedule on request.  
Sec. 2308.208. - Municipal ordinance regulating unauthorized vehicles. 
A municipality may adopt an ordinance that is identical to this chapter or that imposes additional requirements that exceed the minimum standards of this chapter but may not adopt an ordinance conflicting with this chapter.  
SUBCHAPTER F. - UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 2308.251. - Prohibition against unattended vehicles in certain areas. 
(a)  The owner or operator of a vehicle may not leave unattended on a parking facility a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is in or obstructs a vehicular traffic aisle, entry, or exit of the parking facility; 
(2)  Prevents a vehicle from exiting a parking space in the facility; 
(3)  Is in or obstructs a fire lane marked according to Subsection (c); or 
(4)  Does not display the special license plates issued under Section 504.201, Transportation Code, or the disabled parking placard issued under Chapter 681, Transportation Code, for a vehicle transporting a disabled person and is in a parking space that is designated for the exclusive use of a vehicle transporting a disabled person. 
(b)  Subsection (a) does not apply to an emergency vehicle that is owned by, or the operation of which is authorized by, a governmental entity. 
(c)  If a government regulation governing the marking of a fire lane applies to a parking facility, a fire lane in the facility must be marked as provided by the regulation. If a government regulation on the marking of a fire lane does not apply to the parking facility, all curbs of fire lanes must be painted red and be conspicuously and legibly marked with the warning "FIRE LANE—TOW AWAY ZONE" in white letters at least three inches tall, at intervals not exceeding 50 feet.  
Sec. 2308.252. - Removal and storage of unauthorized vehicle. 
(a)  A parking facility owner may, without the consent of the owner or operator of an unauthorized vehicle, cause the vehicle and any property on or in the vehicle to be removed and stored at a vehicle storage facility at the vehicle owner's or operator's expense if: 
(1)  Signs that comply with Subchapter G prohibiting unauthorized vehicles are located on the parking facility at the time of towing and for the preceding 24 hours and remain installed at the time of towing; 
(2)  The owner or operator of the vehicle has received actual notice from the parking facility owner that the vehicle will be towed at the vehicle owner's or operator's expense if it is in or not removed from an unauthorized space; 
(3)  The parking facility owner gives notice to the owner or operator of the vehicle under Subsection (b); or 
(4)  The vehicle is: 
(A)  Left in violation of Section 2308.251 or 2308.253; or 
(B)  In or obstructing a portion of a paved driveway or abutting public roadway used for entering or exiting the facility. 
(b)  A parking facility owner is considered to have given notice under Subsection (a)(3) if: 
(1)  Conspicuous notice has been attached to the vehicle's front windshield or, if the vehicle has no front windshield, to a conspicuous part of the vehicle staling: 
(A)  That the vehicle is in a parking space in which the vehicle is not authorized to be parked; 
(B)  Description of all other unauthorized areas in the parking facility; 
(C)  That the vehicle will be towed at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle if it remains in an unauthorized area of the parking facility; and 
(D)  A telephone number that is answered 24 hours a day to enable the owner or operator of the vehicle to locate the vehicle; and 
(2)  A notice is mailed after the notice is attached to the vehicle as provided by Subdivision (I) to the owner of the vehicle by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last address shown for the owner according to the vehicle registration records of the Texas Department of Transportation, or if the vehicle is registered in another state, the appropriate agency of that state. 
(c)  The notice under Subsection (b)(2) must: 
(1)  State that the vehicle is in a space in which the vehicle is not authorized to park; 
(2)  Describe all other unauthorized areas in the parking facility; 
(3)  Contain a warning that the unauthorized vehicle will be towed at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle if it is not removed from the parking facility before the 15th day after the postmark date of the notice; and 
(4)  State a telephone number that is answered 24 hours a day to enable the owner or operator to locate the vehicle. 
(d)  The mailing of a notice under Subsection (b)(2) is not required if after the notice is attached under Subsection (b)(1) the owner or operator of the vehicle leaves the vehicle in another location where parking is unauthorized for the vehicle according to the notice.  
Sec. 2308.253. - Unattended vehicles on parking facility of apartment complex; removal and storage of vehicles. 
(a)  This section applies only to a parking facility serving or adjacent to an apartment complex consisting of one or more residential apartment units and any adjacent real property serving the apartment complex. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a vehicle may not leave unattended on a parking facility a vehicle that: 
(1)  Obstructs a gate that is designed or intended for the use of pedestrians or vehicles; 
(2)  Obstructs pedestrian or vehicular access to an area that is used for the placement of a garbage or refuse receptacle used in common by residents of the apartment complex; 
(3)  Is in or obstructs a restricted parking area or parking space designated under Subchapter G, including a space designated for the use of employees or maintenance personnel of the parking facility or apartment complex; 
(4)  Is in a tow away zone, other than a fire lane covered by Section 2308.251(c), that is brightly painted and is conspicuously and legibly marked with the warning "TOW AWAY ZONE" in contrasting letters at least three inches tall; 
(5)  Is a semitrailer, trailer, or truck-tractor, as defined by Chapter 502, Transportation Code, unless the owner or operator of the vehicle is permitted under the terms of a rental or lease agreement with the apartment complex to leave the unattended vehicle on the parking facility; or 
(6)  Is leaking a fluid that presents a hazard or threat to persons or property. 
(c)  A parking facility owner may not have an emergency vehicle described by Section 2308.251(b) removed from the parking facility. 
(d)  Except as provided by a contract described by Subsection (e), a parking facility owner may not have a vehicle removed from the parking facility merely because the vehicle does not display: 
(1)  An unexpired license plate or registration insignia issued for the vehicle under Chapter 502, Transportation Code, or the vehicle registration law of another state or country; or 
(2)  A valid vehicle inspection certificate issued under Chapter 548, Transportation Code, or the vehicle inspection law of another state or country. 
(e)  A contract provision providing for the removal from a parking facility of a vehicle that does not display an unexpired license plate or registration insignia or a valid inspection certificate is valid only if the provision requires the owner or operator of the vehicle to be given at least 10 days' written notice that the vehicle will be towed from the facility at the vehicle owner's or operator's expense if it is not removed from the parking facility. The notice must be: 
(1)  Delivered in person to the owner or operator of the vehicle; or 
(2)  Sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to that owner or operator, 
(f)  This section may not be construed: 
(1)  To authorize the owner or operator of a vehicle to leave an unattended vehicle on property that is not designed or intended for the parking of vehicles; or 
(2)  To limit or restrict the enforcement of Chapter 683, Transportation Code, the abandoned motor vehicle law. 
(g)  A provision of an apartment lease or rental agreement entered into or renewed on or after January 1, 2004, that is in conflict or inconsistent with this section is void and may not be enforced.  
Sec. 2308.254. - Limitation on parking facility owner's authority to remove unauthorized vehicle. 
A parking facility owner may not have an unauthorized vehicle removed from the facility except: 
(1)  As provided by this chapter or a municipal ordinance that complies with Section 2308.208; or 
(2)  Under the direction of a peace officer or the owner or operator of the vehicle.  
Sec. 2308.255. - Towing company's authority to remove and store unauthorized vehicle. 
(a)  A towing company that is insured as provided by Subsection (c) may, without the consent of an owner or operator of an unauthorized vehicle, remove and store the vehicle at a vehicle storage facility at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle if: 
(1)  The towing company has received written verification from the parking facility owner that: 
(A)  The parking facility owner has installed the signs required by Section 2308.252(a)( 1); or 
(B)  The owner or operator received notice under Section 2308.252(a)(2) or the parking facility owner gave notice complying with Section 2308.252(a)(3); or 
(2)  The vehicle is: 
(A)  Left in violation of Section 2308.251; or 
(B)  In or obstructing a portion of a paved driveway or abutting public roadway used for entering or exiting the facility and the removal is approved by a peace officer. 
(b)  A towing company may not remove an unauthorized vehicle except under: 
(1)  This chapter; 
(2)  A municipal ordinance that complies with Section 2308.208; or 
(3)  The direction of a peace officer or the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(c)  Only a towing company that is insured against liability for property damage incurred in towing a vehicle may remove and store an unauthorized vehicle under this section. 
(d)  A towing company may remove and store a vehicle under Subsection (a) only if the parking facility owner: 
(1)  Requests that the towing company remove and store the specific vehicle; or 
(2)  Has a standing written agreement with the towing company to enforce parking restrictions in the parking facility from which the vehicle will be removed.  
Sec. 2308.256. - Vehicle storage facility's duty to report after accepting unauthorized vehicle. 
(a)  A vehicle storage facility accepting a vehicle that is towed under this chapter shall within two hours after receiving the vehicle report to the police department of the municipality in which the parking facility is located, or, if the parking facility is not located in a municipality having a police department, to the sheriff of the county in which the parking facility is located: 
(1)  A general description of the vehicle; 
(2)  The state and number of the vehicle's license plate, if any; 
(3)  The vehicle identification number of the vehicle, if it can be ascertained; 
(4)  The location from which the vehicle was towed; and 
(5)  The name and location of the vehicle storage facility where the vehicle is being stored. 
(b)  The report required by this section must be made by telephone or delivered personally or by facsimile.  
SUBCHAPTER G. - SIGNS PROHIBITING UNAUTHORIZED VEHICLES AND DESIGNATING RESTRICTED AREAS 
 
Sec. 2308.301. - General requirements for sign prohibiting unauthorized vehicles. 
(a)  Except as provided by Subsection (a)(2)(B) and Section 2308.304 or 2308.305 an unauthorized vehicle may not be towed under Section 2308.252(a)(1) unless a sign prohibiting unauthorized vehicles on a parking facility is: 
(1)  Facing and conspicuously visible to the driver of a vehicle that enters the facility; 
(2)  Located: 
(A)  On the right or left side of each driveway or curb-cut through which a vehicle can enter the facility, including an entry from an alley abutting the facility; or 
(B)  At intervals along the entrance so that no entrance is farther than 25 feet from a sign if: 
(i)  Curbs, access barriers, landscaping, or driveways do not establish definite vehicle entrances onto a parking facility from a public roadway other than an alley; and 
(ii)  The width of an entrance exceeds 35 feet; 
(3)  Permanently mounted on a pole, post, permanent wall, or permanent barrier; 
(4)  Installed on the parking facility; and 
(5)  Installed so that the bottom edge of the sign is no lower than five feet and no higher than eight feet above ground level. 
(b)  Except as provided by Section 2308.305, an unauthorized vehicle may be towed under Section 2308.252(a)(1) only if each sign prohibiting unauthorized vehicles: 
(1)  Is made of weather-resistant material; 
(2)  Is at least 18 inches wide and 24 inches tall; 
(3)  Contains the international symbol for towing vehicles; 
(4)  Contains a statement describing who may park in the parking facility and prohibiting all others; 
(5)  Bears the words "Unauthorized Vehicles Will Be Towed at Owner's or Operator's Expense"; 
(6)  Contains a statement of the days and hours of towing enforcement; and 
(7)  Contains a number, including the area code, of a telephone that is answered 24 hours a day to enable an owner or operator of a vehicle to locate the vehicle.  
Sec. 2308.302. - Color, layout, and lettering height requirements. 
(a)  Except as provided by Section 2308.305, each sign required by this chapter must comply with the color, layout, and lettering height requirements of this section. 
(b)  A bright red international towing symbol, which is a solid silhouette of a tow truck towing a vehicle on a generally rectangular white background, at least four inches in height, must be on the uppermost portion of a sign or on a separate sign placed immediately above the sign. 
(c)  The portion of the sign immediately below the international towing symbol must contain the words "Towing Enforced" or the information provided by Section 2308.301(b)(4) in lettering at least two inches in height. The lettering on this portion of the sign must consist of white letters on a bright red background. 
(d)  Except as provided by subsection (e), the next lower portion of the sign must contain the remaining information required by Section 2308.301(b) displayed in bright red letters at least one inch in height on a white background. 
(e)  The bottommost portion of the sign must contain the telephone number required by Section 2308.301(b), in lettering at least one inch in height and may, if the facility owner chooses or if an applicable municipal ordinance requires, include the name and address of the storage facility to which an unauthorized vehicle will be removed. The lettering on this portion of the sign must consist of white letters on a bright red background.  
Sec. 2308.303. - Telephone number for locating towed vehicle required. 
If a parking facility owner posts a sign described by Sections 2308.301 and 2308.302, the owner of a vehicle that is towed from the facility under this chapter must be able to locate the vehicle by calling the telephone number on the sign.  
Sec. 2308.304. - Designation of restricted parking spaces on otherwise unrestricted parking facility. 
A parking facility owner may designate one or more spaces as restricted parking spaces on a portion of an otherwise unrestricted parking facility. Instead of installing a sign at each entrance to the parking facility as provided by Section 2308.301(a)(2), an owner may place a sign that prohibits unauthorized vehicles from parking in designated spaces and that otherwise complies with Sections 2308.301 and 2308.302: 
(1)  At the right or left side of each entrance to a designated area or group of parking spaces located on the restricted portion of the parking facility; or 
(2)  At the end of a restricted parking space so that the sign, the top of which must not be higher than seven feet above the ground, is in front of a vehicle that is parked in the space and the rear of which is at the entrance of the space.  
Sec. 2308.305. - Individual parking restrictions in restricted area. 
(a)  A parking facility owner who complies with Sections 2308.301 and 2308.302 may impose further specific parking restrictions in an area to which the signs apply for individual spaces by installing or painting a weather-resistant sign or notice on a curb, pole, post, permanent wall, or permanent barrier so that the sign is in front of a vehicle that is parked in the space and the rear of which is at the entrance of the space. 
(b)  The top of the sign or notice may not be higher than seven feet above the ground. 
(c)  The sign or notice must include an indication that the space is reserved for a particular unit number, person, or type of person. 
(d)  The letters on the sign or notice must be at least two inches in height and must contrast to the color of the curb, wall, or barrier so they can be read during the day and at night. The letters are not required to be illuminated or made of reflective material.  
SUBCHAPTER H. - REGULATION OF PARKING ON CERTAIN PUBLIC ROADWAY AREAS 
 
Sec. 2308.351. - Removal of unauthorized vehicle from leased right-of-way. 
Unless prohibited by the lease, a parking facility owner or towing company may remove an unauthorized vehicle parked in a leased area described by Section 2308.002(7)(B)(i) if the owner or towing company gives notice under Section 2308.252(a)(1), (2), or (3) and otherwise complies with this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.352. - Removal of unauthorized vehicle from area between parking facility and public right-of-way. 
Unless prohibited by a municipal ordinance, a parking facility owner or towing company may remove an unauthorized vehicle any part of which is in an area described by Section 2308.002(7)(B)(ii) if notice provided by Section 2308.252(a)(2) or (3) is given and the owner or towing company has otherwise complied with this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.353. - Removal under governmental entity's authority of unauthorized vehicle parked in right-of-way. 
(a)  A governmental entity that has jurisdiction over a public roadway and that has posted one or more signs in the right-of-way stating that parking is prohibited in the right-of-way may: 
(1)  Remove or contract with a towing company to remove an unauthorized vehicle parked in the right-of-way of the public roadway; or 
(2)  Grant written permission to an abutting parking facility owner to: 
(A)  Post one or more "No parking in R.O.W." signs along a common property line of the facility and the roadway; and 
(B)  Remove vehicles from the right-of-way of the public roadway under this chapter. 
(b)  A sign under Subsection (a)(2) must: 
(1)  State that a vehicle parked in the right-of-way may be towed at the expense of the owner or operator of the vehicle; 
(2)  Be placed facing the public roadway: 
(A)  On the parking facility owner's property not more than two feet from the common boundary line; and 
(B)  At intervals so that no point in the boundary line is less than 25 feet from a sign posted under this subsection; and 
(3)  In all other respects comply with Subchapter G. 
(c)  After signs have been posted under Subsection (b), the parking facility owner or a towing company may remove an unauthorized vehicle from the right-of-way subject to the governmental entity's written permission given under Subsection (a)(2).  
Sec. 2308.354. - Authority for removal of vehicle from public roadway. 
(a)  Under an ordinance of a municipality regulating the parking of vehicles in the municipality, to aid in the enforcement of the ordinance, an employee designated by the municipality may be authorized to: 
(1)  Immobilize a vehicle parked in the municipality; and 
(2)  Remove an immobilized vehicle from a public roadway in the municipality. 
(b)  A parking facility owner or towing company may not remove a vehicle from a public roadway except under: 
(1)  This chapter or a municipal ordinance that complies with Section 2308.208; or 
(2)  The direction of a peace officer or the owner or operator of the vehicle.  
SUBCHAPTER I. - REGULATION OF TOWING COMPANIES AND PARKING FACILITY OWNERS 
 
Sec. 2308.401. - Parking facility owner prohibited from receiving financial gain from towing company. 
(a)  A parking facility owner may not directly or indirectly accept anything of value from a towing company in connection with the removal of a vehicle from a parking facility. 
(b)  A parking facility owner may not have a direct or indirect monetary interest in a towing company that for compensation removes unauthorized vehicles from a parking facility in which the parking facility owner has an interest.  
Sec. 2308.402. - Towing company prohibited from financial involvement with parking facility owner. 
(a)  A towing company may not directly or indirectly give anything of value to a parking facility owner in connection with the removal of a vehicle from a parking facility. 
(b)  A towing company may not have a direct or indirect monetary interest in a parking facility from which the towing company for compensation removes unauthorized vehicles.  
Sec. 2308.403. - Limitation on liability of parking facility owner for removal or storage of unauthorized vehicle. 
A parking facility owner who causes the removal of an unauthorized vehicle is not liable for damages arising from the removal or storage of the vehicle if the vehicle: 
(1)  Was removed in compliance with this chapter; and 
(2)  Is: 
(A)  Removed by a towing company insured against liability for property damage incurred in towing a vehicle; and 
(B)  Stored by a vehicle storage facility insured against liability for property damage incurred in storing a vehicle.  
Sec. 2308.404. - Civil liability of towing company or parking facility owner for violation of chapter. 
(a)  A towing company or parking facility owner who violates this chapter is liable to the owner or operator of the vehicle that is the subject of the violation for: 
(1)  Damages arising from the removal or storage of the vehicle; and 
(2)  Towing or storage fees assessed in connection with the vehicle's removal or storage. 
(b)  A vehicle's owner or operator is not required to prove negligence of a parking facility owner or towing company to recover under Subsection (a). 
(c)  A towing company or parking facility owner who intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly violates this chapter is liable to the owner or operator of the vehicle that is the subject of the violation for $300 plus three times the amount of fees assessed in the vehicle's removal, towing, or storage. 
(d)  In a suit brought under this chapter, the prevailing party is entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees.  
Sec. 2308.405. - Violation of chapter; fine. 
A violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $500 or more than $1,500.  
Sec. 2308.406. - Violation of chapter; injunction. 
A violation of this chapter may be enjoined under Subchapter E, Chapter 17, Business & Commerce Code.  
Sec. 2308.407. - Minor sign or lettering height variations. 
A minor variation of a required or minimum height of a sign or lettering is not a violation of this chapter.  
SUBCHAPTER J. - RIGHTS OF OWNERS AND OPERATORS OF STORED VEHICLES 
 
Sec. 2308.451. - Payment of cost of removal and storage of vehicle. 
(a)  If in a hearing held under this chapter the court finds that a person or law enforcement agency authorized, with probable cause, the removal and storage in a vehicle storage facility of a vehicle, the person who requested the hearing shall pay the costs of the removal and storage. 
(b)  If in a hearing held under this chapter the court does not find that a person or law enforcement agency authorized, with probable cause, the removal and storage in a vehicle storage facility of a vehicle, the person or law enforcement agency that authorized the removal shall: 
(1)  Pay the costs of the removal and storage; or 
(2)  Reimburse the owner or operator for the cost of the removal and storage paid by the owner or operator.  
Sec. 2308.452. - Right of owner or operator of vehicle to hearing. 
The owner or operator of a vehicle that has been removed and placed in a vehicle storage facility without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle is entitled to a hearing on whether probable cause existed for the removal and placement.  
Sec. 2308.453. - Jurisdiction. 
A hearing under this chapter shall be in the justice court having jurisdiction in the precinct in which the vehicle storage facility is located.  
Sec. 2308.454. - Notice to vehicle owner or operator. 
(a)  If before a hearing held under this chapter the owner or operator of a vehicle pays the costs of the vehicle's removal or storage, the towing company or vehicle storage facility that received the payment shall at the time of payment give the owner or operator written notice of the person's rights under this chapter. 
(b)  The operator of a vehicle storage facility that sends a notice under Subchapter D. Chapter 2303. shall include with that notice a notice of the person's rights under this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.455. - Contents of notice. 
The notice under Section 2308.454 must include: 
(1)  A statement of: 
(A)  The person's right to submit a request within 14 days for a court hearing to determine whether probable cause existed to remove the vehicle; 
(B)  The information that a request for a hearing must contain; and 
(C)  Any filing fee for the hearing; 
(2)  The name, address., and telephone number of the towing company that removed the vehicle; 
(3)  The name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle storage facility in which the vehicle was placed; 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person, property owner, or law enforcement agency that authorized the removal of the vehicle; and 
(5)  The name, address, and telephone number of the justice court having jurisdiction in the precinct in which the vehicle storage facility is located.  
Sec. 2308.456. - Request for hearing. 
(a)  Except as provided by Subsection (c), a person entitled to a hearing under this chapter must deliver a written request for the hearing to the court before the 14th day after the date the vehicle was removed and placed in the vehicle storage facility, excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. 
(b)  A request for a hearing must contain: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner or operator of the vehicle; 
(2)  The location from which the vehicle was removed; 
(3)  The date when the vehicle was removed: 
(4)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or law enforcement agency that authorized the removal: 
(5)  The name, address, and telephone number of the vehicle storage facility in which the vehicle was placed; 
(6)  The name, address, and telephone number of the towing company that removed the vehicle; 
(7)  A copy of any receipt or notification that the owner or operator received from the towing company or the vehicle storage facility; and 
(8)  If the vehicle was removed from a parking facility: 
(A)  One or more photographs that show the location and text of any sign posted at the facility restricting parking of vehicles; or 
(B)  A statement that no sign restricting parking was posted at the parking facility. 
(c)  If notice was not given under Section 2308.454, the 14-day deadline for requesting a hearing under Subsection (a) does not apply, and the owner or operator of the vehicle may deliver a written request for a hearing at any time. 
(d)  A person who fails to deliver a request in accordance with Subsection (a) waives the right to a hearing.  
Sec. 2308.457. - Filing fee authorized. 
The court may charge a filing fee of $20 for a hearing under this chapter.  
Sec. 2308.458. - Hearing. 
(a)  A hearing under this chapter shall be held before the 14th working day after the date the court receives the request for the hearing. 
(b)  The court shall notify the person who requested the hearing, the person or law enforcement agency that authorized the removal of the vehicle, and the vehicle storage facility in which the vehicle was placed of the date, time, and place of the hearing in a manner provided by Rule 21a, Texas Rules of Civil Procedure. The notice of the hearing to the person or law enforcement agency that authorized the removal of the vehicle shall include a copy of the request for hearing. 
(b-1)  At a hearing under this section: 
(1)  The burden of proof is on the person who requested the hearing; and 
(2)  Hearsay evidence is admissible if it is considered otherwise reliable by the justice of the peace. 
(c)  The issues in a hearing under this chapter are: 
(1)  Whether probable cause existed for the removal and placement of the vehicle; 
(2)  Whether a towing charge imposed or collected in connection with the removal or placement of the vehicle was greater than the amount authorized by the political subdivision under Section 2308.201 or 2308.202; 
(3)  Whether a towing charge imposed or collected in connection with the removal or placement of the vehicle was greater than the amount authorized under Section 2308.203 or 2308.204; or 
(4)  Whether a towing charge imposed or collected in connection with the removal or placement of the vehicle was greater than the amount filed with the department under Section 2308.206. 
(d)  The court shall make written findings of fact and a conclusion of law. 
(e)  The court may award: 
(1)  Court costs to the prevailing party; 
(2)  The reasonable cost of photographs submitted under Section 2308.456(b)(8) to a vehicle owner or operator who is the prevailing party; 
(3)  An amount equal to the amount that the towing charge exceeded fees regulated by a political subdivision or authorized by this code or by Chapter 2303; and 
(4)  Reimbursement of fees paid for vehicle towing and storage.  
Sec. 2308.459. - Appeal. 
An appeal from a hearing under this chapter is governed by the rules of procedure applicable to civil cases injustice court, except that no appeal bond may be required by the court.  
Sec. 2308.460. - Enforcement of award. 
An award under this chapter may be enforced by any means available for the enforcement of a judgment for a debt.  
SUBCHAPTER K. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 2308.501. - Administrative penalty. 
(a)  The commission may impose an administrative penalty on a person under Subchapter F, Chapter 51, regardless of whether the person holds a registration, permit, or license under this chapter, if the person violates: 
(1)  This chapter or a rule adopted under this chapter; or 
(2)  A rule or order of the executive director or commission. 
(b)  An administrative penalty may not be imposed unless the person charged with a violation is provided the opportunity for a hearing.  
Sec. 2308.502. - Cease and desist order; injunction; civil penalty. 
(a)  The executive director may issue a cease and desist order as necessary to enforce this chapter if the executive director determines that the action is necessary to prevent a violation of this chapter and to protect public health and safety. 
(b)  The attorney general or executive director may institute an action for an injunction or a civil penalty under this chapter as provided by Section 51.352.  
Sec. 2308.503. - Sanctions. 
The department may impose sanctions as provided by Section 51.353.  
Sec. 2308.504. - Criminal penalty; licensing. 
This section takes effect September 1, 2008 See H.B. 2094. Sec. 5.05 as added by Acts of the 80th Legislature. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Violates the permitting or licensing requirements of this chapter: 
(2)  Performs towing without a license to perform towing in this state; 
(3)  Employs an individual who does not hold the appropriate license required by this chapter; or 
(4)  Falsifies a certification or training. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor.  
Sec. 2308.505. - Criminal penalty; towing. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Violates an ordinance, resolution, order, rule, or regulation of a political subdivision adopted under Section 2308.201 or 2308.202. for which the political subdivision does not prescribe the penalty; 
(2)  Charges or collects a fee in a political subdivision that regulates the operation of tow trucks under Section 2308.201 or 2308.202 that is not authorized or is greater than the authorized amount of the fee; 
(3)  Charges or collects a fee greater than the amount authorized under Section 2308.204; 
(4)  Charges or collects a fee in excess of the amount filed with the department under Section 2308.206; 
(5)  Violates Section 2308.205; or 
(6)  Violates a rule of the department applicable to a tow truck and towing company. 
(b)  An offense under this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $200 or more than $1,000 per violation.  
Chapter 8 - BICYCLES AND MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-79, § 1, adopted April 13, 2004, amended Chapter 8 by changing the title from "bicycles" to "bicycles and motor assisted scooters". 
Cross reference— Disposition of unclaimed bicycles in possession of police department, § 30-66; bicycles defined for traffic purposes, § 36-1; bicycle riders not to cling to other vehicles, § 36-20. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate operation of bicycles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(7). 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-195, § 1, adopted September 7, 2004, repealed section 8-1 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to registration and licensing and derived from § 7-1 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 8-2. - Application of traffic regulations. 
All ordinances of the city and all laws of the state relating to traffic and the movement of vehicles on the streets and highways of the state and the city shall apply to and govern the movement of bicycles and motor assisted scooters on such streets and highways in the city. 
(Code 1964, § 7-2; Ord. No. 04-195, § 2, 9-7-04) 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 36.  
Sec. 8-3. - Parents and guardians not to permit child to ride without knowledge of traffic regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian of any child under the age of seventeen (17) years to permit such child to ride a bicycle on the public streets or alleys of the city, unless such child has learned the laws and regulations pertaining to vehicular traffic in effect in the city to such a degree of proficiency as to be able to comply therewith. Proof that such a child has violated a traffic law or ordinance shall be prima facie proof that such child does not know the laws and regulations pertaining to vehicular traffic to such a degree of proficiency as to be able to comply therewith. 
(Code 1964, § 7-3) 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 36.  
Sec. 8-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-195, § 1, adopted September 7, 2004, repealed section 8-4 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to lights and derived from § 7-4 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 8-5. - Riding on sidewalks. 
No wheeled vehicles allowed on sidewalks except those manually or electrically propelled. 
(Code 1964, § 7-5; Ord. No. 04-195, § 3, 9-7-04) 
Cross reference— Sidewalks generally, Ch. 32.  
Sec. 8-6. - Right-of-way. 
Right-of-way shall mean the right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian that is approaching from a direction, at a speed, and within proximity that could cause a collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
All pedestrians shall have the right-of-way on a sidewalk. All bicycles and motor assisted scooters shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian on a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 04-195, § 4, 9-7-04) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 04-195, § 4, adopted September 7, 2004, amended section 8-6 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former section 8-6, pertained to removing, destroying or altering frame numbers, license plate, seal, etc., and derived from § 7-6 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 8-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-195, § 1, adopted September 7, 2004, repealed section 8-7 in its entirety. Formerly, such section pertained to dealers to report purchases and sales and derived from § 7-7 of the 1964 Code.  
Sec. 8-8. - Motor assisted scooters. 
(a)  A "motor assisted scooter" means a self-propelled device with: 
(1)  At least two (2) wheels in contact with the ground during operation; 
(2)  A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions; 
(3)  A gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters; 
(4)  A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and 
(5)  The ability to be propelled by human power alone. 
(b)  A "helmet" means properly fitted protective headgear that is not structurally damaged and that conforms to the standards of the American National Standards Institute, the American Society for Testing and Materials, the Snell Memorial Foundation or any federal agency having regulatory jurisdiction over bicycle helmets, as applicable, at the time of the manufacture of the helmet. 
(c)  Requirement for operation. 
(1)  A motor assisted scooter may be operated only on a street, highway or alley for which the posted speed limit is thirty (30) miles per hour or less. The vehicle may cross a road or street at an intersection where the road or street has a posted speed limit of more than thirty-five (35) miles per hour only if the operator walks the vehicle across the street while observing all applicable pedestrian laws. 
(2)  A person shall not operate a motor assisted scooter on a street or highway during the hours the street or highway is a designated school zone. 
(3)  A motor assisted scooter may only be operated on a street, highway or alley from sunrise till sunset, as defined by state law. 
(4)  A person operating or riding on a motor assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley must wear a protective helmet at all times. 
(5)  A person operating a motor assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley must do so following all state provisions applicable to the operation of a bicycle and as otherwise required by law. 
(6)  It is unlawful for anyone to operate or ride a motor assisted scooter on any path, trail, alley, street or highway within the city except for those streets, highways, or alleys exempted in subsection (c)(1), or on paths and trails set aside for the exclusive operation of bicycles or on a sidewalk. 
(8)  It is unlawful for more than one (1) person to be riding on a motor assisted scooter at a time. 
(d)  Adult supervision. 
(1)  A motor assisted scooter may not be operated on a street, highway or alley by a person younger than ten (10) years of age. 
(2)  A person shall not recklessly allow a child in their care, who is under the age of ten years old, to operate a motor assisted scooter on a street, highway or alley. 
(Ord. No. 04-79, § 2, 4-13-04)  
Sec. 8-9. - Penalty. 
Any violation of this section is a class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine no less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 04-79, § 2, 4-13-04)  
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS AND GENERAL BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), adopted January 17, 2017, amended Chapter 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 9, §§ 9-1—9-11, 9-21—9-37, 9-41—9-50, 9-60—9-72, 9-76—9-81, 9-93—9-99, 9-111—9-121, 9-131—9-138, 9-151—9-168, 9-171—9-173, 9-176—9-218, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Authority of building official to use facsimile signature on occupational or trade licenses issued by him, § 2-4; bond of building official, § 2-5; construction requirements for dance halls; § 5-107 et seq.; electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; buildings constituting fire hazards, § 13-116 et seq.; fire hazard inspection, § 13-141 et seq.; heating, air-conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code. Ch. 16; housing, Ch. 16½; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 21; use of mobile homes in connection with construction operations, § 21-36; planning, Ch. 28; plumbing, Ch. 29; signs, Ch. 31; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; street numbers for buildings, § 32-2; improvement on right-of-way property, § 32-17 et seq.; swimming pools, Ch. 33; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 37; basic subdivision ordinance. App. A; townhouse subdivisions, App. B; auctions prohibited within one hundred feet of private residence, § 20-13. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 9-1. - Enforcement of land use restrictions. 
(a)  The law department of the city is hereby authorized to file suit or become a party to a suit on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the purpose of enjoining or abating the violation of a restriction contained or incorporated by reference in any plan, plat, replat or other instrument affecting a subdivision inside of the city limits, which instrument has been heretofore or is hereafter duly recorded in the records of the county clerk of the county in which the subject property is situated; provided, that all authority granted to the law department of the city under this section consistent with state law shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property in the City of Pasadena; and further provided, restrictions violating the Constitution of the United States and the state shall not be enforced. 
(b)  The word "restriction" as used in this section shall be construed to mean a limitation which affects the use to which real property may be put, fixes the distances buildings or structures must be set back from property lines, street lines or lot lines, or affects the size of a lot or the size, type, and number of buildings or structures which may be built on the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-2. - General requirements for multifamily dwellings.[2] 
Every multifamily dwelling, as defined in Section 201 of the BOCA Basic Building Code*, adopted by section 9-62, in addition to all other standards, requirements and regulations set forth in the ordinances of the city, shall comply with each and every one (1) of the following living environment requirements: 
(1)  Each multifamily residential development shall be designed so that the total mass of all buildings situated upon the site shall not occupy in excess of forty-five (45) per cent of the total site area. 
(2)  Each multifamily residential development shall be designed so that not less than thirty-five (35) per cent of the total site area shall be reserved for open space. "Open space" is herein defined as that area not subject to public or private easements; save and except transmission pipeline easements. Said open space shall be open, unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, and accessible to all residents of the development and of such character that it can be used for outdoor recreation activities. Open space may include the ground floor area of any clubhouse or recreation building accessible to all residents of the development. 
a.  On-site drainage detention ponds may be considered as open space if approved by Harris County Flood Control District. (Section 4.06.08.02 Criteria Manual for the Design of Flood Control and Drainage Facilities). 
b.  Open space areas shall be landscaped with lawn, trees, and shrubs or other landscape materials. A landscape plan shall be submitted for planning commission review. 
1.  The planning commission may decline approval if due regard is not shown for preservation of natural features such as large trees, which if preserved, will add attractiveness, stability and value to the property. 
2.  If the multifamily residential development contains any dwelling units with three (3) bedrooms, a portion of the open space shall be dedicated to children's playground with appropriate facilities and delineated on the landscape plan. 
(3)  Each multifamily residential development shall be constructed on a site which adjoins a street constructed in compliance with minimum city specifications for residential streets in standard subdivisions. [3] Every street which adjoins a proposed multifamily residential development shall comply with such minimum city specifications. 
(4)  (a)  Each multifamily residential development shall be so designed that all parking areas and driveways shall be bounded by concrete curbs constructed in compliance with all applicable city specifications and no such parking area or driveways shall be constructed within ten (10) feet of any building used for residential purposes. [4] 
(b)  Each multifamily residential development shall provide at least one (1) enclosed vehicular garage for every four (4) units. 
(5)  All utility service to a multifamily residential development shall be underground. 
(6)  Each multifamily residential development shall be designed with a maximum floor area ratio not to exceed .40. "Floor area ratio" is defined as the square foot amount of total floor area (all stories) for each square foot of land area of the site for the proposed development. For the purpose of this section, "total floor area" shall be defined as all of that area encompassed within the outside edges of all exterior walls of all buildings and each level thereof on the site. Open porches, balconies, carports, and detached garages are specifically excluded from the calculations of total floor area. In no instance, however, shall any such development exceed eighteen (18) units per acre or more than two hundred (200) units per complex. 
(7)  Each multifamily residential structure newly constructed after the effective date of this section, or existing multifamily residential structure reopened for occupancy after any project-wide vacancy shall install an NFPA-13R automatic fire suppression sprinkler system in accordance with Chapter 55 and under standards and conditions required in Chapter 25, NFPA 5000 Building and Construction Safety Code, 2003 Edition, as amended. 
(8)  a.  Each multifamily residential structure in which the entire project or complex is larger than fifty (50) units shall be at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from any other multifamily residential project or complex of twenty (20) or more units. 
b.  Each multifamily residential structure in which the entire project or complex is larger than three (3) units but fifty (50) units or less shall be at least one thousand (1,000) feet from any other multifamily residential project or complex of twenty (20) or more units. 
(9)  Multilevel parking shall not be allowed for multifamily residential development. 
(10)  Each multifamily residential development shall maintain a distance of two hundred (200) feet between any trash bins and any residential property or subdivision. 
(11)  Each multifamily residential development shall construct and maintain outdoor lighting so that no outdoor lighting will be directed toward any residential property or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Any previously adopted specific reference within this section to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code or the BOCA Basic Building Code is changed to read as per the relative section of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code. See § 9-60. 

--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Subdivision ordinance, App. A. 

--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Driveways generally, § 32-33. 
 
Sec. 9-2.1. - Living environment requirement for multifamily dwellings.[5] 
Every multifamily apartment house dwelling as defined in Section 201.0 General Definitions of the 1970 BOCA Basic Building Code*, Fifth Edition, in addition to all other standards, requirements, and regulations set forth in those applicable ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas shall comply with each and every one of the following living environment requirements: 
(a)  Each multifamily residential development shall provide guest parking, in addition to that established off-street parking for residents, to be made available at the ratio of one (1) vehicular parking space per ten (10) residential units and explicitly designated as such. 
(b)  Each multifamily residential development shall provide a continuous system of sidewalks. Such pedestrial walkways shall be constructed of concrete and a minimum of four (4) feet in width, raised sidewalks immediately adjacent to parking areas acting as a curb shall be a minimum width of six (6) feet. 
(c)  Each multifamily residential development shall be designed so as to provide illumination along all drives, parking areas, open spaces, pedestrian walkways to be lighted with a minimum intensity of two-tenths (0.2) footcandles illumination. 
(d)  Each multifamily residential development shall provide adequate turnarounds (culs-de-sac) with a minimum paving radius of forty (40) feet on "dead end" private drives in excess of three hundred (300) feet. 
(e)  Each multifamily residential development shall be so designed that the minimum distance between any adjacent points of the structures shall not be less than twelve (12) feet. Structures which open upon a common courtyard shall contain at least thirty-five (35) feet between structures. 
(f)  Each multifamily residential development shall be so constructed whereby all vehicular drives and parking areas shall be of concrete in accordance with minimum city specifications. 
(g)  A ten-foot greenbelt shall be required adjacent to any property line. The greenbelt shall be landscaped and included in the landscape plan. Greenbelt areas between the front property line and parking areas shall be planted with vegetation that will form a continual hedge within two (2) years of planting or a combination of berm and plantings to reach three (3) feet in height. For each multifamily residential development containing fifty (50) or more units abutting or adjacent to any residential property or subdivision in the city, as shown by a properly recorded map or plat, shall provide a landscape buffer area no less than twenty-five (25) feet in width to be planted with trees no less than six (6) inches in caliper of a species approved by the planning and zoning commission to screen the development from view. 
(h)  All waste receptacles at a multifamily residential development shall be screened from view from the street. 
(i)  Parking requirements may be reduced from two (2) spaces per unit to one and eight-tenths (1.8) spaces per unit in multifamily residential developments if the square footage that would have been in parking is used to landscape the parking area. Guest parking and handicapped parking standards shall not be reduced. 
(j)  Every multifamily residential development abutting or adjacent to any residential property or subdivision in the city, as shown by a properly recorded map or plat, shall be set back from the property line(s) which abut(s) the residential property or subdivision a minimum distance as follows: 
(1)  3—49 unit complex consisting of one-story structures—Ten (10) feet; 
(2)  50—200 unit complex consisting of one-story structures—Twenty-five (25) feet; 
(3)  3—200 unit complex consisting of two-story structures—Fifty (50) feet; and 
(4)  3—200 unit complex consisting of three-story structures—One hundred (100) feet. 
In addition, all perimeter buildings shall be so situated on the site so that no windows, patios, or balconies shall directly overlook the residential property or subdivision. 
(k)  Each multifamily residential development shall be constructed to a roof line height not to exceed three (3) stories. 
(l)  Each multifamily residential development shall provide an individual washer/dryer hook up for each apartment unit. 
(m)  For each multifamily residential development over one hundred (100) apartment units, the developer shall submit to the planning and zoning commission at the time of preliminary site plan approval, a traffic and utility impact study prepared by a professional engineering firm to be approved by the appropriate city departments verifying that the development shall not adversely affect traffic patterns/flows as well as water/sanitary sewer/storm sewer capabilities. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Any previously adopted specific reference within this section to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code or the BOCA Basic Building Code is changed to read as per the relative section of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code. See § 9-60. 
 
Sec. 9-2.2. - Numbering and identification of business, residential and lodging units—Definitions. 
The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings in sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 unless otherwise clearly indicated in the text. Words not defined shall be interpreted in their usual sense. 
Business unit shall mean and include any room which is generally used for business or commercial purposes. 
Family shall mean and include one (1) or more individuals living together in a single housekeeping unit. 
Identifying number shall mean the address number assigned by the director of public works, or where no such number is requested from or assigned by the director of public works, any number, letter or number-and-letter combination which is distinct from any such number, letter or number-letter combination used on the same premises. 
Lodging unit shall mean and include any room, other than one (1) in a residential unit, which is generally used for sleeping purposes. 
Premises shall mean any tract or tracts of land under common ownership, including mobile home parks. Premises shall also include the total area of any condominium or townhouse development where the owners of individual units hold all or part of the land in common. 
Residential unit shall mean and include any building or portion thereof designed as a dwelling for a family. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Street numbers for buildings, § 32-3.  
Sec. 9-2.3. - Same—Directory required in certain instances. 
Whenever there are four (4) or more residential or business units on the same premises, there shall be a directory posted and maintained near the principal entrance to the premises unless an identifying number posted on each unit is clearly visible from the public street. Such directory shall indicate by map or clearly worded directions the exact location of each residential or business unit on the premises. This section shall not apply if all units on the premises are located in one (1) building which must meet the requirements of section 9-2.4(b). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-2.4. - Same—Identifying number requirements; directional requirements. 
(a)  Each residential unit, each business unit and each lodging unit shall have an identifying number posted and maintained on or within eighteen (18) inches of the principal entrance to the unit. 
(b)  If a building contains more than two (2) residential, business or lodging units which cannot be entered directly from outside, directions shall be posted and maintained outside the principal entrance to such building or inside such building where it is clearly visible upon entering the principal entrance to the building. Such directions shall indicate: 
(1)  The location of all units in the building by arrows, by a map, or by clearly worded directional information; or 
(2)  The location of all units on the same floor as the principal entrance and the floor on which each other unit is located. When the directions at the principal entrance simply indicate the floor on which some units are located, directions shall be posted and maintained at the elevator entrance to each floor, or if there is no elevator, at the principal stairwell entrance. Such directions shall show the location of all units on that floor by arrows, a map, or clearly worded directional information. 
If it is not obvious which entrance to a building is the principal entrance, a sign clearly indicating the location of the principal entrance shall be posted and maintained on all entrances which might be confused with the principal entrance. However, two (2) or more entrances may be considered principal entrances if the person in control of the property so desires. Where two (2) or more entrances are considered principal entrances, all numbers and directories must be posted and maintained at each such entrance as though it were the only principal entrance. 
(c)  If a building contains four (4) or more residential, business or lodging units, identifying numbers shall be posted and maintained at each end of said building indicating the units contained therein; provided, however, if the numbers posted at one (1) end of the building are clearly visible from a public street or private driveway, and the opposite end of the building is not visible from either a public street or a private driveway, numbers shall be required only on the end of the building that is clearly visible from the public street or private driveway. 
It shall not be necessary to post the identifying numbers of all units contained in the building at the ends of said building if the numbers posted at the ends indicate the units contained in the building. (Example: Where a building contains units numbered 1 to 20, it shall be adequate to post "1—20" on the end of the building.) 
The numbers required by this subsection shall be at least four (4) inches in height, shall be permanently affixed to the outside wall of the building, and shall be of a color which is in contrast to the background. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-2.5. - Same—Listing of occupants not required. 
It shall not be necessary to list the occupants of any unit on any sign or directory used to comply with sections 9-2.2. through 9-2.7. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-2.6. - Same—Size and location of numbers. 
All numbers which are to be posted and maintained on or within eighteen (18) inches of an entrance shall be: 
(a)  Permanently affixed to the outside of the door or on the outside wall of such building or unit; 
(b)  Of a color which is in contrast to the background; and 
(c)  At least four (4) inches in height and within forty (40) feet of the nearest public roadway. Such numbers shall increase one (1) inch in height for each additional forty (40) feet, or fractional part thereof, from the center of the nearest public roadway. 
(1)  On residential, business or lodging units which had numbers posted on the date this section was passed, numbers at least two (2) inches in height shall meet the requirements of this section, but will be required to update when they apply for any building permit. 
(2)  On units contained in buildings where numbers are posted pursuant to section 9-2.4(c), numbers posted on or within eighteen (18) inches of the entrance of the unit shall be at least three (3) inches in height. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-2.7. - Same—Responsibility for compliance; penalty. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of each person having control over the property to ensure that any number required to be posted and maintained on such property is so posted on such property at all times. 
(b)  Charges may be filed in municipal court for violation of sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 upon proper complaint under the following conditions: 
(1)  Written notice has been given the person charged by a police officer or public works employee of the city either by hand delivery or by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
Such notice shall inform the person that a directory must be maintained on the premises and/or identifying numbers must be posted on each lodging, business or residential unit as applicable. The notice shall also set out the requirements for such directory and/or numbers as specified in sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 or shall be accompanied by a copy of sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7. 
(2)  The person charged did not comply with sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 within ten (10) days of the date such person received notice pursuant to subsection (1). 
(c)  Any person who fails to ensure that any numbers required to be posted and maintained pursuant to sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 on property under his control after receiving notice as provided in subsection (b) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. Each day a number required to be posted under sections 9-2.2 through 9-2.7 is not so posted shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-3. - Permit to build, alter, etc., a fence or wall. 
No fence or wall (except for barbed wire, minor repair, or replacement providing there is no change in material or location) shall be erected, enlarged, altered or moved, unless such fence or wall is completely removed, without a permit from the building official. A scaled site plan drawing indicating the location of the existing or proposed fence or wall, a statement fully describing the materials to be used as to quantity and quality, and a complete legal description of the premises involved shall be provided by the applicant. 
(1)  Residential. The maximum allowable height shall be seven (7) feet, unless prohibited by subdivision deed restrictions. Fences shall be constructed in accordance with section 9-4(c)(1) and (2) as well as chain link or wrought iron. Any fence placed forward of the front residential building setback line shall be chain link, wrought iron, or picket fence only and shall have a maximum allowable height of four (4) feet. 
(2)  Commercial. The maximum allowable height shall be nine (9) feet, excluding razor wire or barbed wire placed on the top of a security fence. Any fence or wall height in excess of seven (7) feet shall require an original drawing sealed by a professional engineer and shall be designed for a wind load of ninety (90) miles per hour. In the case of an opaque metal fence, no previously used materials shall be permitted and the fence shall be painted one color. All storage yards shall be enclosed with an approved opaque fence not less than seven (7) feet in height above the natural grade, with no openings to the adjoining property other than the required entrances and exits to public streets. For the purposes of this paragraph, a storage yard is defined as any commercial location visible from public view on which any used goods, wares, commodities or merchandise, whether or not intended for sale, are stored for a continuous period of thirty (30) days outside of a completely enclosed building or structure. 
(3)  Barbed wire/razor wire. No permit shall be required to construct a two (2) or three (3) strand barbed wire pasture fence for the purpose of controlling livestock. The use of barbed wire for a fence for any other purpose shall be prohibited. Razor wire shall not be placed on a fence below six (6) feet of the natural grade. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Fence or wall for drive-in theaters, § 5-28; fence or wall for junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, § 17-43 et seq.; fence or wall for outside storage of used goods, wares and merchandise, § 17-68; fence or hedge required for mobile home parks, § 21-62; fences obstructing or encroaching upon streets and alleys, § 32-3; fence or wall for swimming pools, § 33-3.003 et seq.  
Sec. 9-4. - Fence or wall for multifamily dwelling. 
(a)  Every multifamily dwelling or apartment house, as defined in the building code adopted by section 9-62, built or constructed upon any tract or parcel of land shall be enclosed on all sides, except those abutting upon or facing a public dedicated street, with a fence or wall as described in subsection (c). 
(b)  Where appropriate, one (1) pedestrian opening shall be allowed per side. The opening shall be no larger than four (4) feet in width and shall contain bollards to prevent vehicle access. 
(c)  The fence or wall required by subsection (a) shall be not less than seven (7) feet in height except in those instances whereby a multifamily residential development abuts or adjoins a residential property or subdivision in the city, as shown by a properly recorded map or plat, the fence or wall shall then not be less than eight (8) feet in height, and shall be of such construction as to be opaque. Seven-foot fences shall be constructed in accordance with subsection (c)(1) and (2); eight-foot fences shall be constructed only in accordance with subsection (c)(2). The opaque portions of every fence or wall referred to herein shall be constructed in such a fashion as to be generally acceptable to those skilled in the fence building trade and may be constructed of the following materials: 
(1)  Wood boards, each measuring not less than one (1) inch thick and four (4) inches wide, of redwood, cedar, fir, pine, or combinations thereof in any alternating sequence. Alternatively, or in alternating sequence combinations with such boards, three-quarter-inch marine plywood sheets. 
(2)  Masonry, concrete block, or brick on foundations as well as drop panel and tilt wall construction equivalent to city outside wall specifications, less live load which shall be designed to sustain wind gusts of up to one hundred and forty (140) miles per hour, as certified by a registered professional engineer, and as set forth in the International Building Code as now in force or hereafter amended. 
(d)  Each multifamily residential development not fully enclosed by the preceding paragraphs, shall provide a perimeter fence along that side abutting or facing a public dedicated street. A controlled access gate shall be constructed at a setback distance sufficient to prevent traffic congestion from any vehicle being stopped in the public street at peak hours. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, App. A; townhouse subdivisions, App. B.  
Sec. 9-5. - Electric fences prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or controlling any property in the city to construct, maintain, or permit to remain on such property any fence charged with electricity. It shall further be unlawful for any person to cause any fence situated in the city to become charged with a current of electricity, or to connect any such fence with a source of electricity. In any prosecution under this section, testimony that any fence was under the control of the defendant or situated on his premises and that any person received an electric shock by coming in contact with such fence shall be prima facie evidence that such defendant caused such fence to be charged with a current of electricity and caused and permitted such fence to be connected with a source of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-6. - Fences prohibited on or in drainage easements. 
No fence shall be built, constructed or erected on or inside the drainage easements of the city or on or inside the drainage easements of the Harris County Flood Control District located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-7. - Minimum standards for off-street parking. 
(a)  The city hereby adopts the minimum off-street parking requirements, a copy of which is attached to the original of Ordinance No. 95-86 and marked Exhibit "A." 
(b)  No building permit shall be issued for any construction, reconstruction, addition, or remodeling (exceeding fifty (50) per cent of the value of the existing improvement) which provides less than the minimum standards hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Off-street parking facilities required for mobile homes located outside mobile home park, § 21-49; off-street parking facilities in mobile home parks, § 21-66.  
Sec. 9-7.1. - Minimum construction standards for off-street parking areas. 
(a)  The builder shall submit to the building official, a geometric design in the form of a scaled drawing for any proposed off-street parking area, along with a survey plat showing the location and the size of the area for the proposed parking site and topography showing the drainage plan. The geometric drawing shall be approved by the building official before a permit shall be issued under this section for either permanent or temporary placement. 
(b)  All off-street parking areas shall be constructed by one (1) of the following minimum standards: 
(1)  Commercial ordinary passenger car areas. 
a.  Five and one-half (5½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density; or 
b.  One and one-half (1½) inches of hot mix asphalt laid on a six-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density; or 
c.  Six (6) inches of crushed concrete of a one-half-inch minimum aggregate size laid on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density when used in conjunction with the operation of boat stalls. 
(2)  Commercial heavy truck lanes. Each commercial business which provides a separate loading/docking area shall designate all delivery routes designed to facilitate delivery and/or transportation of products and such areas shall be clearly defined on the parking lot drawings. Five and one-half (5½) inches of 3000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at twenty-four (24) inches O.C.E.W., or three (3) inches of hot mix asphalt laid on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density shall be required in these locations. 
(3)  Equipment and storage yards. All areas that are required to comply with parking requirements shall be constructed from concrete or asphalt with a compacted base and/or subbase as described above. The balance shall be allowed to be constructed of six (6) inches of crushed concrete or crushed limestone with a one-inch minimum aggregate size. 
(4)  Multifamily residential. Five and one-half (5½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density. All pad sites constructed for commercial solid waste receptacles and solid waste truck loading and unloading operations shall be five and one-half (5½) inches of 3000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at twenty-four (24) inches O.C.E.W. poured on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density. 
(5)  One- and two-family residential. Three and one-half (3½) inches of 2500 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 6 wire mesh poured on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density and with 1?×4? redwood or treated pine expansion joints installed not to exceed twelve and one-half (12½) feet in any direction; or 
One and one-half (1½) inches of hot mix asphalt laid on a six-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent density. 
(c)  In commercial and residential off-street parking areas, fiber-mesh concrete may be used to reduce the required reinforcement in paving, providing an engineer certifies on the drawings that the strength of the concrete is not reduced. However, fiber-mesh shall not be used to substitute reinforcing in sidewalks or driveway approaches within the public right-of-way. 
(d)  All commercial off-street parking areas and equipment/storage yards not constructed of poured concrete shall be permanently held true to square by a 2?×8? treated wood form with treated stakes or by a concrete curb six (6) inches in width and having a depth that extends to the bottom of the base material. Such concrete form shall have one No. 3 rebar placed at mid-depth. 
(e)  Minimum stall and aisle width dimensions for all commercial off-street parking areas angled at 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90° shall be in accordance with Exhibit "1". Parking lots shall be of such a design that no vehicle shall be required to back out of a driveway onto a public street, alley, or way. 
(f)  A six-inch curb or wheel-stop (pin or epoxy to pavement) shall be required at all parking spaces that abut a public right-of-way, property line, or building in accordance with Exhibit "2". A wheel-stop may serve two (2) parking spaces. 
(g)  All parking spaces shall be striped using four-inch wide painted lines and all handicap markings shall comply with American Disabilities Act requirements. 
(h)  Construction of an off-street parking area on a public utility easement shall be allowed. Off-street parking constructed on a public utility easement shall provide an expansion joint placed along the easement line and such parking area shall be constructed with a compacted flexible base with appropriate asphalt complying with minimum paving standards. Should any utility work become necessary within the easement, all damages shall be repaired by the owner of such property and all costs associated with such repairs shall be totally borne by the owner. 
OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS 
Exhibit "1" 
Angle of Parking (deg) 	Direction of Traffic 	Width of Stall (ft.) 	Depth of Stall Perpendicular to Aisle (ft.) 	Width of Aisle (ft.) 
30 	one way 	8.5 	16.4 	11 
45 	one way 	8.5 	18.7 	14.5 
60 	one way 	8.5 	19.8 	18 
75 	one way 	8.5 	19.6 	21.5 
90 	two way 	8.5 	18.0 	25 
parallel 	two way 	8.0 	— 	20 
 
 
 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-8. - Parking areas for apartment buildings. 
All parking areas to be used by occupants of apartment buildings shall be off of the public streets and alleys. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-9. - Plat filing fees. 
Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the developer may seek the advice of the planning department or the planning commission, in order to determine the feasibility of the proposal before substantial expense is incurred, to acquaint him with any plans and requirements for the area and the availability of utilities and sewer that the proposed development meets the primary objectives of this chapter. A filing fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46 shall be paid by the developer for review of the project and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena. Upon submittal of a preliminary and a final plat, a filing fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46 shall be paid by the developer for review of the project and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part, whether approval is granted or not. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17; Ord. No. 18-102, § 2, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 9-10. - Notice of deed restrictions upon conveyance. 
(a)  In this section the following words and terms shall have the meaning herein ascribed: 
(1)  Deed restrictions shall have the meaning ascribed to the word "restriction" in section 230.002 of the Local Government Code, as amended, and section 9-1(b), Code of Ordinances, provided that it shall not be deemed to include any restrictions that by their express provisions have terminated or any provisions contained within any restrictions to the extent and only to the extent that the provisions restrict the sale, rental, or use of property on the basis of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. 
(2)  Sale or conveyance means any transfer of any lot, tract or parcel of real property subject to deed restrictions that is situated in whole or in part within the corporate limits of the city, except: 
a.  A conveyance by trustee's or substitute trustee's deed to the lienholder pursuant to a foreclosure sale; 
b.  A conveyance by deed to the lienholder in full or partial satisfaction of a debt secured by the property conveyed; 
c.  A deed of trust conveyed to secure a lien; 
d.  An auction sale conducted by a public official pursuant to an order of a court of competent jurisdiction; or 
e.  A conveyance in which the purchaser is a governmental entity. 
Without limitation, the term shall include an executory contract of purchase and sale having a performance period of more than six (6) months. 
(3)  Purchaser shall mean each person who constitutes a grantee, purchaser, buyer, or transferee in a sale or conveyance, regardless of the amount or nature of the consideration received. 
(4)  Seller shall mean each person who constitutes a seller, grantor or transferor in a sale or conveyance, regardless of the amount or nature of the consideration received. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each seller to ensure that each buyer receives in connection with each sale or conveyance notice issued in accordance with the terms of this section in the form of Exhibit "A" [6], Notice to Purchaser(s), to this ordinance [Ordinance No. 90-6], which exhibit is incorporated herein by reference. The following procedure shall be followed in the giving and recording of the notice: 
(1)  The notice shall be given to each purchaser at the final closing of the sale and purchase; provided, however, seller may provide the notice prior to closing; 
(2)  Each seller and each purchaser shall sign and acknowledge the notice; and 
(3)  Following the execution, acknowledgment and closing of the sale and purchase, the notice shall be recorded in the real property records of Harris County. 
(c)  The failure of any seller to comply with this section shall constitute a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each person who constitutes a seller shall be criminally responsible and each sale or conveyance in which the seller has failed to comply with this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(d)  This section does not limit the seller's right to recover a penalty, or any part of a penalty, imposed pursuant to subsection (c) from a third party for the negligent failure to obtain the execution or proper recordation of the notice. 
(e)  The failure of the seller to comply with this section shall not affect the validity or enforceability of the sale or conveyance of the restricted property or the validity of enforceability of restrictions covering the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
 
Sec. 9-11. - Bond and insurance for multifamily residential development. 
(a)  No permit shall be issued for the construction of any multifamily residential housing complex over one hundred (100) dwelling units unless a bond or irrevocable letter of credit in favor of the City of Pasadena in the amount of one million dollars is furnished to the City of Pasadena as a guaranty of compliance with this chapter to ensure accountability for upkeep and maintenance, and other applicable law, including but not limited to, demolition of buildings, and such other remedial measures as may be necessary to guaranty full and constant compliance with all applicable laws. Such bond shall be kept in full force and effect by all subsequent owners of the complex. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owners to maintain such bond shall cause the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for such complex or structure therein. 
(b)  No permit shall issue for the construction of any multifamily residential housing complex over one hundred (100) dwelling units unless there is in force and effect a comprehensive general liability insurance policy, with the City of Pasadena named as additional insured, in the amount of two (2) million dollars for such complex. Such insurance policy shall remain in effect during the life of the structure, including all times that it is inhabited. Failure of the owner or any subsequent owner to maintain such insurance shall cause the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for such structure. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-12—9-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-21. - Building and standards commission created. 
There is hereby created and established a building and standards commission hereinafter referred to as the commission which shall be appointed, organized and function according to the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-22. - Organization of the commission. 
The commission shall be composed of five (5) members and eight (8) alternates who shall serve in the event of the absence or resignation of any of the five (5) members of the commission when requested to do so by the mayor. Each of the members and alternates shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council for a term of two (2) years. All such members shall hold office for the two-year period. Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term. Upon a majority vote the members of the commission shall elect a chairman, an acting chairman and secretary. The chairman shall serve as the presiding officer of the commission. The acting chairman of the commission shall serve as the presiding officer in the event of the absence of the chairman. Members of the commission and alternates shall not be employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-23. - Membership of commission. 
The members of the commission and alternates shall consist of persons who are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to property maintenance and who are not employees of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-24. - Members to serve without compensation. 
Members of the commission shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-25. - Removal of member. 
The mayor, with confirmation of city council, may remove a commission member for cause on a written charge. Cause for removal shall exist when a commission member has three (3) consecutive absences from regular meetings without an excuse approved by a majority of the commission members qualified and serving, and the member has been given due notice of such meetings personally by phone or mail or by notice in the minutes of a prior regular meeting. In such event the secretary of the commission shall draft a written charge accordingly and file such with the city secretary. The foregoing shall not be construed to constitute the only cause for removal. Before a decision regarding removal is made, the city council shall hold a public hearing on the matter if requested by the commission member subject to the removal action. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-26. - Alternate members. 
Alternate members of the commission shall serve for the same period and are subject to removal in the same manner as the regular members. A vacancy among the alternates shall be filled in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-27. - Proceedings of the commission. 
(a)  All cases to be heard by the commission must be heard by at least four (4) members. 
(b)  The commission shall adopt rules to establish procedures for use in hearings which must provide ample opportunity for presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents or persons opposing charges brought by the city or its building official relating to alleged violations of ordinances. 
(c)  Meetings of the commission may be held at the call of the chairman and at times determined necessary by the commission. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
(d)  The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails to vote. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official acts. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office of the city secretary as public records. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-28. - Vote. 
The concurring vote of four (4) members of the commission is necessary to take any action with respect to those ordinances designated in Chapter 54, Subchapter C of the Local Government Code, as hereafter amended by the State Legislature. The vote of a simple majority of the members of the commission is sufficient to take action with respect to all other ordinances over which the commission has jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-29. - Notice of proceedings. 
(a)  Notice of all proceedings before the commission shall be given by the building official: 
(1)  By certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property, as shown by the records in the office of the county clerk of the county in which the affected property is located if the address of the lienholder can be ascertained from the deed of trust establishing the lien or other applicable instruments on file in the office of the county clerk; and 
(2)  To all unknown owners by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of the building or structure situated on the affected property or as close to the front door as practicable. 
(b)  The notice shall be mailed and posted before the tenth day before the date of the hearing before the commission and must state the date, time, and place of the hearing. In addition, the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city on one (1) occasion before the tenth day before the date fixed for the hearing. 
(c)  If the address of a person having an interest in the property as shown in the deed records is unknown or if the notice is returned undelivered, a copy of such notice posted on the building or structure shall constitute notice to any person having an interest in the property who does not receive personal service. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-30. - Powers of commission. 
The commission shall have the power to: 
(1)  Order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings or structures found to be in violation of an ordinance; 
(2)  Declare a building substandard in accordance with the provisions of Article VII hereof, as the same be hereafter amended; 
(3)  Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property if it is determined that conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance; 
(4)  Order action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate, or remove any substandard building or structure found to exist in violation of Article VII hereof, as the same may be hereafter amended; 
(5)  Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the chief of police of the city to enforce and carry out the lawful orders or directives of the commission; 
(6)  Assess and determine the amount and duration of the civil penalty the city may recover as provided by Section 54.017 of the Local Government Code, as hereafter amended; 
(7)  Order, in an appropriate case, that a building or structure be secured from unauthorized entry and establish the specifications that must be complied with to secure the building or structure and order that the building be repaired or demolished if the building or structure is not secured in compliance with the order; 
(8)  Order the building official to post an appropriate notice in a conspicuous place on a building or structure when the building or structure has been declared substandard by the commission and dangerous to the health, safety, or welfare of its occupants or to the citizens of the city. Such notice may contain, among other provisions, language to the effect that (i) the building/structure has been declared substandard or unsafe by the commission; (ii) occupancy of the building or structure is prohibited; (iii) the building or structure must be vacated within a specified period of time; and/or (iv) entrance into the building or structure is prohibited by any persons other than inspectors of the city and persons authorized by the owner who enter solely for the purpose of correcting the hazardous condition; 
(9)  Review and study the building code, as the same now exists or may be hereafter amended, and all rules and regulations issued thereunder for the purpose of remedying any deficiencies, errors, or discrepancies therein, assessing the use of the latest safe and sound building materials, standards, specifications, and practices conducive to the constant improvement of human habitation within the city, and recommending to the building official modifications of existing rules and regulations or the promulgation of additional rules and regulations; 
(10)  Review written requests for advisory opinions from the building official regarding the technical sufficiency of any substitute material or practice not expressly authorized by the building code and issue opinions in connection therewith; 
(11)  Adjudicate appeals from acts, orders or rulings of the building official or his assistants or deputies as provided in Division 2 of this article; 
(12)  Order action to be taken to remedy, alleviate, or remove any condition relating to the accumulation of refuse, vegetation or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents; and 
(13)  Issue appropriate orders in connection with all matters brought before it over which it exercises jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-31. - Liaison with electrical, plumbing code and heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration boards. 
The commission shall establish and maintain liaison with the city electrical board, city plumbing code review board, and the city heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration board to promote harmonious administration of all the construction codes of the city and the accommodation of innovations permitted or recommended within their respective jurisdictions by such boards. For the accomplishment of this function, the commission may, from time to time, petition the mayor to order a joint meeting or meetings of the commission and one (1) or more of such boards. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-32. - Additional authority of the commission. 
In addition to its statutory authority provided for under Chapter 54, Subchapter C of the Local Government Code, as hereafter amended, the commission shall have such additional authority as shall be from time to time delegated to it by the city council of the City of Pasadena and shall determine such issues and render decisions in accordance therewith that may be from time to time required of an appellate body, regardless of the name or designation provided in the various codes adopted by the city council of the City of Pasadena and shall render decisions in accordance with the limitations, restrictions and provisions as provided for in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-33. - Failure to comply with order of commission. 
Failure to comply with an order issued by the commission shall entitle the city to avail itself of any and all remedies provided by law, including but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  To vacate, secure, remove, repair or demolish a building or relocate the occupants at its expense and assess the expenses as a lien upon the real property on which the building or structure is located; 
(2)  To remedy at its expense conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation or other matter creating breeding and living places for insects and rodents and assess the expenses as a lien upon the real property on which the condition existed; 
(3)  To proceed under the jurisdiction of the municipal court of the city; provided, however, that this remedy shall not be construed to require an order from the commission before the city may proceed under the jurisdiction of the municipal court; 
(4)  To enforce a civil penalty by filing a certified copy of the order with the district clerk of Harris County; and 
(5)  To proceed, in appropriate cases, in district or county court to enforce the city ordinances and orders of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-34. - Procedures to follow when order issued. 
After the decision becomes final a copy of the order issued by the commission shall be promptly mailed first class, certified, return receipt requested to all persons to whom notice is required to be sent under section 9-29 hereof. In addition, a copy of the order shall be published one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city within ten (10) calendar days after the date of mailing the copy as provided in this section. Also, a copy of the order shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and in the deed records of the county in which the land is located. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-35. - Appeals from commission orders. 
Appeals from commission orders may be taken to the court of appropriate jurisdiction. However, with respect to orders issued hereunder pursuant to authority granted in Chapter 54, Subchapter C of the Local Government Code, as hereafter amended, if appeals are not taken within the required period, the decision of the commission shall be, in all things, final and binding. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-36. - Repair or demolition after contract execution. 
If an order has been issued pursuant to this article for the repair or demolition of a building or structure and the city has let a contract for demolition or repair, and the building or structure is subsequently repaired or demolished by the owner(s) prior to completion of the contract let by the city, the administrative expenses and all costs for cancellation of the contract shall be certified as a charge which shall be assessed against the owner(s) thereof, and which shall constitute a lien on the land on which the building or structure is or was situated. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-37. - Execution of written release upon payment of charges or where lien placed on property through error; execution of written notice of compliance. 
(a)  Upon full payment of the charges assessed against any property, or in the event the lien is placed on the property through error, the mayor is hereby authorized to execute, for and in behalf of the city, a written release approved in each case by the legal department. 
(b)  Upon compliance with an order of the commission to repair or demolish a building or structure, the building official shall be and is hereby authorized to execute a written "Notice of Compliance" setting forth the date the notice of compliance is issued, the date the building inspector found the building or structure to be repaired or demolished in compliance with the order; and if the building or structure has not been demolished, whether or not the building or structure is in such condition that it may be occupied. 
(c)  A fee shall be imposed for such release of lien provided hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-38—9-40. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - APPEALS TO COMMISSION UNDER BUILDING CODE 
 
Sec. 9-41. - Generally. 
This Division 2 shall apply only to those cases which are not subject to authority granted in Chapter 54, Subchapter C of the Local Government Code, as hereafter amended. In such cases the Commission shall act as an appellate body to receive, hear, process and adjudicate appeals from the acts, orders or rulings of the building official or his/her assistants or deputies under the building code and other ordinances under which the building official, or his/her assistants or deputies exercise authority, as the same now exist or may be hereafter amended. The procedure for such appeals is prescribed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-42. - Appellant's statement to be filed with building official. 
(a)  Any person desiring to effect an appeal under this division shall file with the building official a written statement in English, typewritten or printed in ink, containing the following information: 
(1)  A description of the place where the subject construction or installation is located, including postal address and legal description; 
(2)  The name of the assistant or inspector, if any, whose act, order or ruling is complained of; 
(3)  A description, including scale diagram, of the subject construction or installation, or so much thereof as is involved in the act, order or ruling complained of; 
(4)  The date of the disputed act, order or ruling; 
(5)  A statement of the act, order or ruling complained of; 
(6)  A statement of reasons why such act, order or ruling is incorrect and a declaration of the act the appellant desires by the building official; and 
(7)  The mailing address of the appellant. 
(b)  The statement referred to herein shall be signed by the owner of the subject property or by a representative of a contractor working or applying to work on the subject property, as the case may be, and duly acknowledged under oath. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-43. - Notice to appellant as to change in action complained of. 
Within ten (10) consecutive, regular business days after receipt of a statement under the provisions of section 9-42, the building official shall deposit in the mail a written notice stating whether or not the act, order, or ruling complained of has been or is to be changed, and if so, in what manner and when the change was or will be made. Such notice shall be addressed to the appellant at the mailing address shown in such statement. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-44. - Request for hearing. 
Within ten (10) days after the mailing of a notice pursuant to section 9-43, and not thereafter, the appellant may file with the city secretary a written request in the English language for a hearing upon such notice, together with a true copy of the appellant's written statement filed pursuant to section 9-42 and a true copy of the notice received by the appellant under section 9-43. The appellant must clearly state in his written request his objections to the notice, the grounds of the objections, and the particular commission action requested thereon. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-45. - Fixing time for hearing. 
The city secretary shall fix a hearing day for such appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-46. - Notice of time and place of hearing. 
The city secretary shall mail or cause to be mailed written notice of the hour and day set for a hearing under this division to the appellant, at the address shown in his statement filed under section 9-42 within not less than five (5) days prior to the day fixed for the hearing. Such notice shall name a chamber or office within the city hall where such appeal shall be heard. The deposit, in the mail, of such written notice of hearing shall be deemed conclusive proof of notice given. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-47. - Right of building official and other appropriate parties to be heard and to introduce evidence. 
The building official and other appropriate city employees shall have the right to be heard at a hearing held under this division and to introduce evidence therein. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-48. - Commission action and notice thereof. 
The commission shall have the right to affirm, notify or reverse the act, order or ruling appealed from under this division. Written notice of the commission's decision shall be mailed to the appellant in the manner prescribed in section 9-46. In no case shall such notice of decision be mailed later than thirty (30) days after the first day of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-49. - Interested member disqualified from voting. 
No commission member shall vote upon any appeal before the commission in which he/she is an appealing party. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-50. - Appealed action not suspended or abated during appeal. 
Nothing in this division shall be construed to operate, during an appeal, as a suspension or abatement to any act, order or ruling of the building official unless and until such suspension or abatement is effected by the written decision or modification or reversal, if any, of the appealed act, order or ruling. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-51—9-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BUILDING CODE[7] 
Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention code, § 13-151; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; plumbing code, Ch. 29; signs, Ch. 31. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-60. - 2015 International Building Code—Adopted. 
This section hereby adopts 2015 International Building Code for all commercial projects in this jurisdiction; this shall include multifamily residential projects. Exception: One- and two-family dwellings must comply with the 2015 edition of the International Residential Code, per the requirements of sections 9-62 and 9-63. 
(1)  Any previously adopted specific reference to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code, the BOCA Basic Building Code or the 2003 edition of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code in the Code of Ordinances for the City of Pasadena is hereby changed to read as per the relative section of the 2015 International Building Code. This includes but is not limited to the following specific references in the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances: 
a.  Section 9-2. General requirements for multifamily dwellings. 
b.  Section 9-2.1. Living requirements for multifamily dwellings. 
c.  Section 9-4. Fence or wall for multifamily dwelling. 
d.  Section 31-9. Sign applications, permits and fees. 
e.  Section 31-14. Structural requirements; generally and for specific signs. 
f.  Section 33-1.006. Conflicts in construction. (pools) 
(2)  If for any reason whatsoever there exist any conflicts, contradictions, discrepancies or omissions from the previous building codes and/or ordinances and the 2015 International Building Code, as adopted, the more stringent requirements shall apply unless otherwise allowed or directed by the "Authority Having Jurisdiction". 
(3)  Building permit department fees. General requirements and conditions apply to all permits, registrations or other specific conditions are as follows: 
Any fee for permit, registration and other fees identified in this section is required to be permitted as identified by the fee schedule(s). 
No permit in any case or project discipline will be less than a minimum standard $50.00 including the application fee, for processing and allows for one site inspection except as specifically identified elsewhere in this Code. Fees not specifically modified or adjusted will be charged a fee as previously established in Code. 
a.  Building fee schedule. 
1.  Commercial. New commercial construction, additions, alterations and repairs. The fee for all types of commercial constructions, additions, alterations, and repairs shall be computed at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot of area covered by roof or similar structure to include stand alone foundations with required review approvals. This is the accumulative aggregate of all floor(s) square footages. Provided that the fee computed shall never be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). Foundation only permits will have specific conditions required with allowance based on the project conditions. 
2.  Residential. The fee for all types of new one- and two-family residential dwelling construction, additions, alterations and repairs shall be computed at the rate of twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot covered by roof or similar structure. This is the accumulative aggregate of all floor(s) square footages. Provided that the fee computed shall never be less than fifty dollars ($50.00). Residential storage buildings one hundred (100) square feet and under are exempt from permit requirements, but must comply with setback requirements. Foundation-only permits for all types of new one- and two-family residential dwelling construction and additions shall not be allowed unless specifically authorized and fees paid as per normal construction of one-story under roof. 
The construction of residential garages, shops, barns, storage and other utility type structures at 1,200 square feet or less are allowed to be constructed to residential standards, those structures over 1,200 square feet must be constructed to all commercial building for fire separations/distances, design loads and structural conditions, mechanical, electrical and plumbing codes and standards. Yet the structure can be used for private residential use only without required plumbing fixture ratios without any type of business, operation or advertisement use allowed with minimum improved residential off-street parking access. In no case can a structure over 1,200 square feet be allowed to be constructed closer than five (5) feet from any property line and must satisfy all property specific setback requirements. 
3.  Roof system repair or replacement. Roof system replacement and/or repairs in excess of 25 per cent of each roof requires permits. 
i.  The permit fee for any residential roofing repair or replacement shall be forty dollars ($40.00) for each structure inclusive of the application. This is for overlay only or replacement of like materials and any minor decking and structural work, with the approval of the building inspector or a plan reviewer. 
ii.  The permit for any commercial roofing, repair or replacements shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each structure plus the standard ten dollars ($10.00) application. This is for overlay only or replacement of like materials and any minor decking and structural work, with the approval of the building inspector or a plan reviewer. 
Commercial roof projects where the roof is to be altered or structurally modified in any form must provide engineered drawings and the plan review fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), the building permit fee will be no less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). The identified fees apply per each building. 
Wood shingle, shake and other combustible roofing materials are specifically prohibited in any type of roofing project with the exception of minor repairs to existing residential single-family homes. 
4.  Plan checking and review. 
i.  Commercial building permit. An applicant for commercial building permit for construction, alteration, additions or repairs shall submit with the application two (2) sets of plans and specifications complete with topography, landscape, boundary survey, drainage, electrical, plumbing, ADA compliance, IECC compliance and heating-air conditioning. The applicant shall also submit a plan review fee in the amount equal to one-half (½) of the building permit fee of twenty cents ($0.20) per square foot of area covered under roof. This plan review fee shall be ten cents ($0.10) per square foot under roof. That said plan review fee shall never be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The plan review fee shall be submitted in advance when submitting the application package for construction, no routing or plan review will take place prior to the fees being satisfied. Plan checking fee shall not be refundable. 
ii.  Residential building permit. An applicant for a residential building permit for construction, alteration, additions, or repairs shall submit with the application two (2) sets of drawings of plans and specifications complete with a boundary survey, and any plans for plumbing, electrical, IECC compliance and heating-air conditions. The minimum plan review fee shall be computed at ten cents ($0.10) per square foot for any construction, alteration, additions or repairs for five hundred (500) square feet or more under roof. No plan review fee will be charged for any plan review of residential construction project covering less than five hundred (500) square feet under roof. All detached structures will be viewed as independent construction with plan review fees incurred for construction over five hundred (500) square feet under roof. 
5.  Application fee. Where not otherwise specified in this section, there shall be a ten dollar ($10.00) application fee charged for all permits issued, regardless of the discipline. 
6.  Fences. Permits for new residential fences shall be forty dollars ($40.00) including the application fee. Permits for new commercial fences shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per one thousand (1,000) linear feet or additional portion thereof plus an application fee. Permits for new commercial storage lot fences shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per five hundred (500) linear feet or additional portion thereof plus an application fee. The permit fee for a multi-family fence shall be calculated at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each five hundred (500) lineal feet or part thereof in the length of each side of the fence or wall, gates and doors inclusive plus an application fee. Repair and replacement of alike materials in the exact same location and elevations are exempt unless the fence and attachments thereof are found in violation of other City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances or specific business requirements. 
7.  Reinspection. Where all or any part of an operation authorized by a permit issued hereunder fails to pass inspection, a reinspection fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) may be charged for each required subsequent inspection. 
8.  Failure to obtain permit. The identification of a fee shall determine the requirement for a permit in any discipline in this Code. No construction, alteration, removal, demolition or other building operation shall be commenced until the required fees, as set forth in this Code, have been paid and a permit issued and where such operations have begun prior to issuance of the permit, all such operations shall cease and the property be placed on "HOLD" until a fee equal to twice the fee that would normally be required and a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) administrative fee have been paid and a proper permit approved and issued. Mechanical, electrical and plumbing permits shall be required for any category and/or work for which a fee is established. This includes any installation, modification, alteration, addition to, relocations or other work determined to require a permit per the building official or his duly appointed agent(s). 
9.  Driveways, approaches, sidewalk. The fee for construction or alteration of any portion of a driveway, approach or sidewalk shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each portion when included in a building permit. The stand alone fee(s) will be the same plus the application but in no case less than forty dollars ($40.00) residential and sixty dollars ($60.00) commercial for each permit issued, inclusive of the application. 
10.  Carport, canopy, awning and similar overhead structure(s). The fee for each carport, canopy, awning and similar overhead structure(s) or installations will be calculated at ten cents ($0.10) per square foot under roof but in no case shall the permit be less than fifty dollars ($50.00) including application. The residential construction and/or erection must satisfy setbacks and construction requirements as identified in section 9-76 of this Code. Those structures in excess of five hundred (500) per square foot shall satisfy the plan review fee requirements and satisfy minimum commercial design requirements. Carports cannot be enclosed nor any portion of the structure capable of occupancy or habitation, this specifically prohibits storage areas above a residential carport unless the minimum required setbacks can be satisfied. 
Any type of carport, canopy, awning and similar overhead structure(s) or installations at a commercial site or for commercial/business use, must satisfy all relative commercial building/plan review fee(s) and design requirements. 
11.  Culverts. The fee for a permit to install residential stormwater culverts shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
12.  Incinerators. The fee for a permit for the construction or installation of an incinerator shall be one hundred and fifty dollars ($150.00) for each unit. 
13.  Storage tanks and product lines. The permit fee for a permit for the installation or removal of any type above or below grade storage tank or product lines shall be one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each tank. 
14.  Demolition. The fee for a permit for the demolition of a building, a structure or any portion thereof shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for commercial and the permit shall be good for thirty (30) days only or the duration of the remodel project. This fee is in addition to the normal building permit fee but can be added to at half the rate of the normal rate when inclusive in a building remodel permit. If a demolition fee is included with a commercial or residential building permit, the demolition is allowed to run concurrent with the respective building permit. 
15.  House moving within, into or out of the City of Pasadena. No structure can be relocated within or outside the city limits without the satisfying of an inspection prior to the move at a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). This fee is in addition to the permit fees and procedures for the building and placement and the other specifics identified elsewhere in the code(s). The licensed mover must provide approved routes and copies of TXDOT required permits prior to the start of the moving into, outside or within the jurisdiction of the City of Pasadena. 
16.  Paving. Paving installations, including landscape islands shall be priced at twenty dollars ($20.00) per every five thousand (5,000) square feet or portion thereof, with a minimum fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Any consideration or type of surface areas for storage lot of shall be priced at seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per every three thousand (3,000) square feet or portion thereof, with a minimum fee of one hundred seventy-five dollars ($175.00), this permit will only be available with all required improvements. 
Fee for a commercial, equipment/storage yard or multifamily residential parking lot area shall be based upon twenty dollars ($20.00) per first ten thousand (10,000) square feet and ten dollars ($10.00) per any additional five thousand (5,000) square feet or portion thereof. Fee for a one- or two-family residential off-street parking area shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
17.  Paving and/or parking repairs. Paving and/or parking repairs shall require a permit for any type repair or rework to include asphalt patching, potholes, curb and concrete repairs with a minimum fee of sixty dollars ($60.00). Repairs or improvements at/or over fifty (50) percent of existing area shall be brought into minimum off-street paving and parking requirements with the exceptions of landscaping, parking count and current stormwater drainage at existing business locations. 
This does not supersede the change of use or ownership compliance requirements with regards to the certificate of occupancy program. This is to include storage lot surface areas. Storage lots require permit for any site repairs or improvements and must be completed to minimum codes and standards. 
18.  Swimming pools. 
1.  Swimming pool contractors must register the legal company name, officers, responsible party/parties and insurance information as required per minimum requirements for plumbing contractors to include insurance responsibilities and responsible party or parties are identified, with the permit department on a form provided by the permit department for an annual fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). This registration will be good for one calendar year from the date of initial registration or subsequent follow up annual registrations unless the required insurance is not maintained. 
2.  All swimming pools/spa(s) shall be permitted and fee(s) applied in the same manner as building permits with the improved water surface area, measured in square feet to be used in the building fee calculation of the pool(s)/spa(s). No pool/spa shall be used or in any way occupied for recreation without satisfying all inspections. All local, state and federal requirements shall be the responsibility of the permit holder. Any violation of these requirements will be the sole responsibility of the permit holder/contractor. Plan review fees will apply to all swimming pool projects. 
19.  Address modifications. The administrative fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for each such condition shall be charged for changing or correcting permit addresses, application information or other modifications requested or necessary to any permit process, after the clerical setup of permits are completed by the permit office. This will only be completed after a written request is provided by the original applicant or owner stating specific requested revisions and reason(s) for the request. 
20.  Certificate of occupancy for an existing building or space. It shall be unlawful to make any change in the use or occupancy of any existing structure and/or space to be used for a commercial purpose which would make it subject to any special provision of this and any other applicable code, without obtaining a certificate of occupancy from the City of Pasadena Permit Department, prior to any release of utilities (electrical, gas or water) being approved by the City of Pasadena Building Official or the Permit Department. If there is no change within the use group classification by the new occupant of any existing structure to be used for a commercial purpose, the existing off-street parking requirements shall be deemed to be adequate. Variance procedures for any landscaping site plan requirements shall be submitted to the City of Pasadena Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with chapter 9, building and general regulations, section 9-199(C) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena. A certificate of occupancy shall be approved only after application is made and all codes deemed in compliance after inspection by the building official, the fire marshal, health department and the planning department or designated representatives. Such certifications shall be indicative that the structure or space meets the intent of the provisions of law governing building regulations for the purposed new occupant/occupancy and that such change does not result in any greater hazard to the public safety or welfare. A fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the inspections shall be submitted with the application for the certificate of occupancy. 
21.  Certificates of occupancy. Certificates of occupancy issued with a one- or two-family project will be a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) added to the permit and plan review fees. Commercial project certificate of occupancy's in conjunction with a permit will be a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) added to the permit and plan review fees. 
22.  Temporary certificate of occupancy or a letter of completion. The fee for a temporary certificate of occupancy or a letter of completion (no occupancy) shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and will only be provided at written request of the owner, applicant or the general contractor. 
23.  Temporary utility release(s). The fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be required with a written request for any and all utility release(s) to an owner or agent for the cleaning, showing or other requests for commercial spaces without occupancy. This type of release(s) will only be available after inspector site inspection and approval for a maximum of ninety (90) days but can be renewed for the same price for each additional ninety (90) days or portion thereof with an additional written request and department approval. 
24.  Annual building contractor registration fee. All building and remodel contractors must register with the City of Pasadena Permit Department for an initial fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and annual renewal fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Residential contractors must provide verifiable Builder Registration proof of compliance with the Texas Residential Construction Commission program. Commercial building contractors for any new construction or the remodel of an existing structure must provide a minimum proof of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) liability insurance with the City of Pasadena as a certificate holder. The annual City of Pasadena registration will be valid concurrent with the same date as the state for residential contractors, the commercial builders/contractors' registration will be valid for one year from the annual anniversary of the registration date, or the valid insurance period whichever is most stringent. Loss of registration with the state or failure to maintain proper insurance will void any City of Pasadena registration and require renewal to reinstate the required registration. 
Exemption: Homeowners with homestead exemptions per the current tax records or an individual that is building or remodeling a personal single-family dwelling for the purpose of habitation by this same individual are exempt from this registration. 
b.  Mechanical fee schedule (HVAC/Refrigeration) 
Mechanical contractor annual registration fee ..... $100.00 
Application fee ..... 10.00 
Residential replacement of A/C condenser (each) ..... 40.00 
Residential replacement of heater or air handler (each) ..... 40.00 
Residential replacement of evaporator and drains (each) ..... 40.00 
Residential addition or replacement of air treatment system (each) ..... 40.00 
Residential addition or replacement of exhaust vents ..... 40.00 
Complete installation or replacement of residential heating and/or air conditioning system (each-plus $5.00/ton) ..... 50.00 
A/C duct replacement, addition or extension (plus $3.00/outlet) ..... 30.00 
Decorative appliance installation or replacement (each) ..... 40.00 
Minimum/miscellaneous air condition permits ..... 50.00 
Class 1 commercial exhaust hood (each) ..... 100.00 
Class 2 commercial exhaust hood (each) ..... 50.00 
Unit or infrared heaters (each additional $25.00) ..... 40.00 
Refrigeration permit (plus $3.00/ton) ..... 40.00 
Boiler installation or replacement (plus $3.00/HP) ..... 50.00 
Boiler application or operating permit (each) ..... 75.00 
Complete installation or replacement of commercial heating and/or air conditioning system (each-plus $5.00/ton) ..... 60.00 
Commercial replacement of A/C condenser (each-plus $5.00/ton) ..... 60.00 
Commercial replacement of heating or air handler (each-plus $5.00/ton) ..... 60.00 
Chiller replacement or installation (plus $3.00/ton) ..... 75.00 
Cooling tower replacement or installation (plus $3.00/ton) ..... 75.00 
Temporary operating permit (A/C, heating or boiler) ..... 40.00 
Commercial ventilation system (per fan) ..... 40.00 
Registration of energy inspector, or apartment maintenance personnel (paid annually) ..... 50.00 
Re-inspection fee ..... 50.00 
c.  Electrical fee schedule. 
Electrical contractor (any type) annual registration fee ..... $100.00 
*Miscellaneous/minimum fee* 	$40.00 each 
Application fee 	$10.00 applies to all applications 
Motors less than 2HP 	$8.00 each 
=/>2HP but <10HP 	$10.00 each 
=/>10HP but <25HP 	$15.00 each 
=/>25 HP but <100HP 	$20.00 each 
100HP and over 	$25.00 each 
Clothes dryer 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Cooking tops 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Dishwasher 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Garbage disposal 	$4.00 each 
Hot water heater 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Lighting fixtures or ballasts 	$0.50 each 
Residential meter loop and service 	$25.00 each (2 outlets) residential 
Commercial meter loop and service 	$50.00 each service/up to 400 amp 
Commercial meter loop and service 	$100.00 each service 400 to 800 amp 
Commercial meter loop and service 	$200.00 each over 800 amp 
Outlets 	$0.50 each 
Ovens 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Washing machine 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Range receptacle 	$5.00 each residential 
	$7.00 each commercial 
Electric heat per KW 	$1.00 each 
X-ray machines 	$25.00 each 
CT-MRI equipment 	$50.00 each 
	$50.00 each residential 
Pool lighting/pumps 	$100.00 each commercial 
Generators only allowed with electrical inspector review and approval. The installations will require residential or commercial building permit(s). 
Commercial (permanent) 	$175.00 each 
Residential (permanent) 	$75.00 each 
Temporary with case specific approval by building official or an authorized inspector 	Commercial $125.00/residential $50.00each unit (not to exceed three working days without special permission granted.) 
Electrical sign and other fees: 
Shop inspection (local only) 	$50.00 each sign - in this jurisdiction 
Electrical sign installation - incandescent and fluorescent types 	$40.00 each per circuit 
Electrical sign installation - neon types 	$75.00 each per circuit 
Festoon lighting and streamers 	$10.00 each per circuit 
Light standards and poles up to a maximum of four additional units at 	$50.00 
$10.00 each 
Decorative structures* 	$50.00 each 
 
These installations shall not strobe, chase, flash, spin or in any way be a problem with general traffic or be considered a public nuisance as determined by the permit department. Wind load must satisfy the minimum requirement as defined by the building code. Additionally, certain types of decorative installations may be determined to be regulated under the City Sign Code. Prior to any type installation; approval(s) from the permit department will be required. 
Electrical work at or over 600 VAC or other specialty installations for distribution, repairs or installations will be required to pay a fee equal to three (3) per cent of such value of the electrical portion of the work as determined by the most current RSMeans information or other acceptable valuation method, a copy of which must be provided by the applicant. However the fee will never be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
Mobile home pole 	$40.00 each (to include RV outlets) 
Temporary saw pole residential 	$40.00 each 
Temporary saw pole commercial 	$75.00 each 
Temporary cut-in residential 	$50.00 each 
Temporary cut-in commercial 	$100.00 each 
Reconnection fee 	$60.00 each 
Code one 	$40.00 each 
Application fee 	$10.00 each (this applies to all) 
 
d.  Plumbing fees. 
Plumbing contractor annual registration fee ..... $100.00 
Lavatory ..... 4.00 
Commode ..... 4.00 
Bath tub ..... 4.00 
Kitchen, bar sink ..... 4.00 
Shower ..... 4.00 
Ice maker ..... 4.00 
Hose bibb vacuum breakers (1—5) ..... 10.00 
Floor drains, floor sinks ..... 5.00 
Gas (1—5 openings) ..... 10.00 
Gas turn on (G.T.O.) ..... 25.00 
Temporary gas release ..... 40.00 
Drinking fountain ..... 5.00 
Water heater - residential ..... 15.00 
Water heater - commercial ..... 20.00 
Washing machine -residential ..... 4.00 
Washing machine - commercial ..... 7.00 
Disposal - residential ..... 5.00 
Disposal - commercial ..... 7.00 
Dishwasher - residential ..... 4.00 
Dishwasher - commercial ..... 7.00 
Urinal ..... 4.00 
Grease trap - mechanical type ..... 50.00 
Separators and interceptors/sand and lint trap ..... 100.00 
Sample well ..... 15.00 
Tie in existing sewer line ..... 5.00 
Tie in existing water line ..... 5.00 
Tie in existing gas line ..... 5.00 
Tie in existing storm line ..... 5.00 
Trap primer ..... 5.00 
2 and 3 compartment sink ..... 15.00 
Mop sink ..... 10.00 
Roof drain ..... 5.00 
Lawn sprinkler - residential ..... 50.00 
Lawn sprinkler - commercial ..... 100.00 
Fire sprinkler system ..... 100.00 
Fire plugs (1—25) ..... 50.00 
Fire plugs each additional ..... 2.00 
Shower pan ..... 10.00 
Building drain (tunnel) ..... 75.00 
Sewer line 0—100' ..... 75.00 
Water line 0—100' ..... 75.00 
Gas line 0—100' ..... 75.00 
Storm line 0—100' ..... 50.00 
Sewer, water, gas, storm line— 
Each additional 100' or portion thereof ..... 35.00 
Sanitary lift station ..... 125.00 
Annual gas test per meter ..... 25.00 
Vacuum breaker (atmospheric) ..... 10.00 
Backflow preventer ..... 50.00 
Backflow preventer annual test ..... 25.00 
Manhole ..... 40.00 
Sewer disconnect ..... 20.00 
Thermal expansion device ..... 5.00 
Inlet area drain (each) ..... 5.00 
Medical gas system ..... 100.00 
Medical gas outlets (each) ..... 2.00 
Miscellaneous ..... 40.00 
Application fee ..... 10.00 
e.  Sign, occupational and multifamily permit fees. 
1.  Sign contractor annual registration fee ..... $250.00 
Sign permit and operation fees 
Application fee 	$10.00 applies to all applications 
Preconstruction site inspection(s) 	$50.00 each 
Inspection(s)/reinspection(s) 	$50.00 each 
Annual operating 	$50.00 each face/biannual - 2-year renewal program - six-month prorated with approvals 
Reinspection fee 	$50.00 each 
Formal request for variance 	$200.00 nonrefundable fee 
 
2.  Occupational programs: 
Type of Occupational program 	Section - Code of Ordinances 	Fee Charge 
Dance halls 	Type "A" 	Chapter 5 	$100.00 annual 
Dance halls 	Type "B" 	Chapter 5 	$75.00 annual 
Dance halls 	Type "C" 	Chapter 5 	$50.00 annual 
Dance halls 	Type "D" 	Chapter 5 	$75.00 annual 
Special license per section 5-132 	Chapter 5 	$50.00 each 
Manufactured home parks 	<30 units - chapter 21 	$100.00 
Manufactured home parks 	30+ units - chapter 21 	$150.00 
Game room license 	Ordinance Nos. 83-84 and 69-165 	1 to 50 - $50.00 
51 to 200 - $200.00 
201+ - $250.00 
Game machine registrations 	Ordinance Nos. 83-84 and 69-165 	Prorated semiannual at $10.00 annual each 
Therapeutic massage license 	Section 19-27 	$50.00 
 
3.  Annual occupancy license fee(s). The fee(s) from section 16½-7 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances will be as follows: 
i.  The annual occupancy licensing fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit including the annual inspection fee for a duplex or triplex. The annual occupancy fee for multiunit complex with four (4) or more units shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) base fee per multifamily complex. There will be an annual inspection fee of three dollars and twenty-five cents ($3.25) per unit, with a minimum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per multifamily complex. 
ii.  The annual occupancy license fee and unit inspection fees shall be due and payable to the City of Pasadena Permit Division on or before the expiration date of the license. 
iii.  A replacement license may be issued for lost, destroyed, or mutilated licensed upon application of the form provided by the administrator for a fee of five dollars ($5.00). A replacement license shall have the word "replacement" stamped across the face and shall bear the same number as the [license] replaced. 
4.  Itinerant vendors and solicitors license fees. The fees for section 25-15 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances will be as follows: 
The fee for an itinerant vendor's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). When any person engages in any activity mentioned in section 25-11 through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to such $50.00 fee, pay a license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each agent or employee so engaged. The fees provided for herein shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of such licenses. No such fee shall be prorated. 
f.  Holds, revocation, fines and penalties. 
1.  Contractors or homeowners with two (2) or more outstanding re-inspect fees on any current project permit will be placed on administrative "HOLD" and will not be extended any further inspections until re-inspect fees are paid, arrangements are satisfied with the required inspector or supervisor to satisfy release of the permit "HOLD" status. 
2.  Double fees plus a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) administrative fee shall be paid prior to issuance of permits for any work started prior to permit issuance unless verifiable through the request received time on the escrow system that is available for contractors. 
3.  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be fined in a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. Each offense is independent and can be prosecuted separately. 
4.  Contractors and/or projects may be put on administrative "HOLD" by the permit department for violations of any provisions of local code, State of Texas or other Federal Program(s). 
g.  Permit suspension or revocation. A permit may be suspended or revoked for any one of the following reasons: 
1.  Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit. 
2.  Violating either willfully or maliciously or by reason of incompetence, any provision of this section or adopted codes with amendments thereto. 
3.  Conviction of defrauding any person for whom he/she has rendered or contracted to render service. 
4.  Contractors with three (3) or more outstanding re-fees on all permits in this jurisdiction shall be placed on administrative "HOLD" until recovery efforts are satisfied with the city permit department. Additionally, if the contractor fails to satisfy this requirement, the contractor will have all permits cancelled and the contractor registration revoked. If this transpires, it will require that all new applications, permit and contractor registration fees must be satisfied. 
5.  Failure on the contractor to satisfy all inspection requirements and properly close out permits with requested and approved final inspections will result in the contractor being placed on administrative "HOLD" until all necessary inspections are satisfied with the city permit department. 
h.  Specific policies and procedures. 
1.  Scheduled overtime inspections. Shall be scheduled and paid for by 4:00 p.m. on the business day prior to the requested scheduled inspection. The fee shall be two hundred forty dollars ($240.00) for a three-hour maximum inspection, including driving time. Time will commence when the inspector leaves the office or his home (portal to portal). Inspections exceeding three (3) hours, including travel time, will require the charge of a new overtime inspection at the above rate for every additional three (3) hours or portion thereof, as described above. 
2.  Emergency inspections. Emergency inspections may be conducted as per subsection 1. above with the exception that the requestor contractor or property owner shall satisfy the permit process within two (2) full business days (forty-eight (48) hours elapsed) after the permit department is open for normal business. Failure to satisfy this requirement may subject the property or project to removal of utilities and/or revocation/denial of the certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-61. - Same—Amendments. 
This section hereby sets forth and adopts amendments to the 2015 International Building Code. Specific items to be changed, amended, replaced and or deleted are as follows: 
(1)  101.1 Insert [City of Pasadena, Texas] and add after "this code" at end of sentence: to include all applicable requirements in the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  101.4.1 - .7 Deleted in its entirety and insert: All installations must comply with Chapters 12, 16, 16½ and 29 with approved amendments from the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  103 Change the reference to the "Department of Public Safety" in all locations in the International Building Code(s) to read the "Permit Department for the City of Pasadena". 
(4)  103.1 Delete this and infill/modify the language to read: This must comply with the established requirements per [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  105.2 Deleted in its entirety and insert: 
All construction, modifications or installations must comply with Chapters 12, 16, 16½ and 29 with approved amendments from the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  Delete Sections 106, 107, 108, 110, 112, 113 and 115 and replace all to read as follows: 
This must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  Section 202; amend definition of Ambulatory Care Facility as follows: 
AMBULATORY CARE FACILITY. Buildings or portions thereof used to provide medical, surgical, psychiatric, nursing or similar care on a less than 24-hour basis to individuals who are rendered incapable of self-preservation by the services provided. This group may include but not be limited to the following: 
- Dialysis centers 
- Sedation dentistry 
- Surgery centers 
- Colonic centers 
- Psychiatric centers 
(8)  Section 202; add definition of Assisting Living Facilities to read as follows: 
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES. A building or part thereof housing persons, on a 24-hour basis, who because of age, mental disability or other reasons, live in a supervised residential environment which provides personal care services. The occupants are capable of responding to an emergency situation without physical assistance from staff. 
(9)  Section 202; amend definition of SPECIAL INSPECTOR to read as follows: 
SPECIAL INSPECTOR. A qualified person employed or retained by an approved agency who shall prove to the satisfaction of the registered design professional in responsible charge and approved by the Building Official as having the competence necessary to inspect a particular type of construction requiring special inspection. 
(10)  308.4 This code requirement applies to all new group I-2 locations after adoption of this ordinance. Those preexisting locations that maintain continuity of the required licensing with the proper State of Texas Department or Regulatory Agency shall be allowed to continue to operate to include the sell or other conveyance of the business in the same structure. If for any reason whatsoever there exist any conflicts, contradictions, discrepancies or omissions from the previous building codes, ordinances and/or amendments thereof and those adopted by this ordinance, the more stringent requirements shall apply unless otherwise allowed or directed by the "Authority Having Jurisdiction". 
(11)  308.4.3 shall be added to read as follows: 
Child care facilities of any type are required to comply with this Code and the specific requirements and allowances of the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services. 
(12)  Section 406.3.5.1 Carport separation; add sentence to read as follows: 
A fire separation is not required between a Group R-2 and U carport provided that the carport is entirely open on all sides and that the distance between the two is at least 10 feet (3048 mm). 
(13)  Section 1006.2.2.6 Add a new Section 1006.2.2.6 as follows: 
1006.2.2.6 Electrical Rooms. For electrical rooms, special exiting requirements may apply. Reference the electrical code as adopted. 
(14)  Section 1009.1; add the following Exception 4: 
Exceptions: {previous exceptions unchanged} 
4.  Buildings regulated under State Law and built in accordance with State registered plans, including any variances or waivers granted by the State, shall be deemed to be in compliance with the requirements of Section 1009. 
(15)  Section 1203.1; amend to read as follows: 
1203.1 General. Buildings shall be provided with natural ventilation in accordance with Section 1203.4, or mechanical ventilation in accordance with the Uniform Mechanical Code. 
Where air infiltration rate in a dwelling unit is 5 air changes or less per hour when tested with a blower door at a pressure 0.2 inch w.c. (50 Pa) in accordance with Section 402.4.1.2 of the International Energy Conservation Code, the dwelling unit shall be ventilated by mechanical means in accordance with Section 403 of the Uniform Mechanical Code. 
(16)  Table 1505.1; delete footnote c and replace footnote b with the following: 
b.  Non-classified roof coverings shall be permitted on buildings of U occupancies having not more than 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area. When exceeding 120 sq. ft. of protected roof area, buildings of U occupancies may use non-rated non-combustible roof coverings. 
c.  [delete] 
(17)  Section 1505.7; delete the section 
(18)  Section 1704.2, Special inspections and tests is amended to read as follows: 
1704.2 Special inspections and tests. Where application is made to the Building Official for construction as specified in Section 105, the owner or the owner's authorized agent, or the registered design professional in responsible charge, other than the contractor, shall employ one or more approved agencies to provide special inspections and tests during construction on the types of work listed under Section 1705 and identify the approved agencies to the Building Official. The special inspector shall not be employed by the contractor. These special inspections and tests are in addition to the inspections identified by the Building Official that are identified in Section 110. 
(19)  Section 1704.2.1, Special inspector qualifications, is amended to read as follows: 
1704.2.1 Special inspector qualifications. Prior to the start of construction and or upon request, the approved agencies shall provide written documentation to the registered design professional in responsible charge and the building official demonstrating the competence and relevant experience or training of the special inspectors who will perform the special inspections and tests during construction. [Remainder unchanged] 
(20)  Section 1704.2.4, Report requirement, is amended to read as follows: 
1704.2.4 Report requirement. Approved agencies shall keep records of special inspections and tests. The approved agency shall submit reports of special inspections and tests to the Building Official upon request, and to the registered design professional in responsible charge. Individual inspection reports [Reports] shall indicate that work inspected or tested was or was not completed in conformance to approved construction documents. [Remainder unchanged] 
(21)  Section 1704.2.5.2, Fabricator approval, is amended to read as follows: 
1704.2.5.1 Fabricator approval. Special inspections during fabrications required by Section 1704 are not required where the work is done on the premises of a fabricator registered and approved to perform such work without special inspection. Approval shall be based upon review of the fabricator's written procedural and quality control manuals and periodic auditing of fabrication practices by an approved agency, or a fabricator that is enrolled in a nationally accepted inspections program. At completion of fabrication, the acceptable or approved fabricator shall submit a certificate of compliance to the owner or the owner's authorized agent or the registered design professional in responsible charge, for submittal to the building official as specified in Section 1704.5 stating that the work was performed in accordance with the approved construction documents. The certificate of compliance shall also be made available to the Building Official upon request. 
(22)  Chapter 27 is hereby deleted and is replaced with the following: Electrical must comply with Chapter 12 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances with approved amendments. 
(23)  Chapter 28 is hereby deleted and is replaced with the following: Heating, air conditioning, mechanical refrigeration and boilers must comply with Chapter 16 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances with approved amendments. 
(24)  Chapter 29 is hereby deleted and is replaced with the following: Plumbing must comply with Chapter 29 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances with approved amendments. 
(25)  Chapter 30 is required to satisfy all of the compliance requirements of the Texas Department Licensing and Regulation. 
(26)  Chapter 3107 is hereby deleted in its entirety and is replaced with the existing requirements of Chapter 31 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances with approved amendments. 
(27)  Chapter 3108 is hereby amended to include 3108.6 to read as follows: 
Telecommunication towers and other similar structures must comply with the requirements of the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 97-57 and any other previously adopted ordinance(s) governing these same structures, which is hereby made a part of this code adoption. 
(28)  Chapter 3109 Swimming Pool(s) Enclosures and Safety Devices - Add to 3109.1 to read at the end of the sentence: 
Additionally, all swimming pools and spas shall have parallel compliances with the Texas Department of Health requirements for any public swimming pools at the time of this adoption. This will include Chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena and the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 94-153. If any language contradictions or conflicts arise, this insertion will hold precedence over any other references. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-62. - International Residential Code—Adopted. 
The city council does hereby adopt "The 2015 International Residential Code", as published by the International Code Council, copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary. Such code is incorporated herein by reference the same as if copied at length herein, subject, however, to the additions, insertions, deletions and changes set forth in section 9-63 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-63. - Same—Amendments. 
The 2015 International Residential Code as adopted in section 9-62 is hereby amended as set forth in this section. 
(1)  That Section R101.1 shall be amended by deleting the brackets and wording therein and inserting in place thereof the words "the City of Pasadena, Texas." That Section R103.1 shall be amended by deleting the phrase "department of building safety" and inserting in place thereof the words "Department of Permits and Inspections". 
(2)  That Section R103.2, is deleted in its entirety. 
(3)  That Section R104.10.1 shall be amended to read as follows: 
R104.10.1 Issues concerning areas prone to flooding involving the Building Official shall be governed by City of Pasadena Ordinance 99-20 and the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances sections 9-188, 9-189, 9-190, 9-193.2, 9-193.3, 9-193.4, 9-194.1, 9-194.2, 9-194.3 and 9-194.4. 
(4)  That Section R105.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
R105.2 Work exempt from permit. Exemption from the permit requirements of this Code shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of this Code or any other laws or ordinances of this jurisdiction. Residential Building Permits shall not be required for the following: 
1.  Storage buildings less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  House leveling. 
3.  Siding installation that does not compromise any element of the energy envelope as determined by the International Energy Conservation Code. 
Additionally the language for electrical, gas and mechanical in this section (R105.2) is deleted in its entirety. 
(5)  That Section 106.1.3 shall be amended to read as follows: 
R106.1.3 Information for construction in areas prone to flooding. Issues involving flood prone areas must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(6)  Section R106.2 Site Plan. Subjects involving site plans shall be governed by the requirements the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 06-322 and must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  Section R107.3 Temporary Power Delete the phrase "ICC Electrical Code" and insert in place thereof the words "most recent version of National Electric Code." 
(8)  Section R109.1.3 Flood plain inspections. Issues involving flood plain inspections shall be governed by and must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(9)  That Section R110.2 shall be amended to read as follows: 
R110.2 Change in use. Changes in the character or use of an existing structure shall not be made except after application, inspection and approval of the building official. 
(10)  That Sections R112, R112.1, R112.2, R112.2.2, R112.3 and R112.4 shall be deleted and the following substituted therefor: 
SECTION R112 
BUILDING AND STANDARDS COMMISSION 
R112.1 All appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of this Code shall be in accordance with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(11)  That Section R302 shall be amended to read as follows: 
R302 Setback. Setback requirements shall be determined by City of Pasadena Code of Ordinance, section 9-76 article IV, section 17-68, section 21-44, appendix B, City of Pasadena Ordinance 71-291, appendix C City of Pasadena Ordinance 91-36 and appendix A City of Pasadena Ordinance 67-1966 and must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(12)  That Section R308.5 shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(13)  That Section R309.2 shall be amended by replacing the words and numbers "½-inch (12.7mm)" with the words and numbers "5/8-inch Fire Rated" and the following sentence should be added: 
"This required separation must form a full encapsulation of the attached garage from the balance of the structure and any attic access opening, if applicable, must be of fire treated lumber construction or have 5/8 "fire-rated sheet rock applied." 
(14)  That Section R309.4 shall be amended to read as follows: 
Carports shall be governed by City of Pasadena Ordinance 96-35 and must comply with the existing established requirements per relative elements of [Chapter 9] Section 9 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(15)  Section R313 Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems. Delete subsections in their entirety. 
(16)  Section R315.2.2 Alterations, repairs and additions. Amend to read as follows: 
Exception: 
2.  Installation, alteration or repairs of electrical powered {remaining text unchanged} 
(17)  That Section R324.2 shall be amended to add the following sentence: 
"Termite treatment verification form shall be submitted before concrete foundation is poured, if applicable." 
(18)  That Section R325 shall be added as follows: 
Building Address Required. 
"City of Pasadena Ordinance 2000-200 shall govern the size and placement of the required letters." 
(19)  That Section R326 shall be added as follows: 
SECTION R326 
FLOOD-RESISTANT CONSTRUCTION 
All buildings and structures erected shall conform to City of Pasadena Ordinances 99-20 and 2000-219. 
(20)  Section R401.2, amended by adding a new paragraph following the existing paragraph to read as follows: 
Section R401.2. Requirements. {existing text unchanged} … 
Every foundation and/or footing, or any size addition to an existing post-tension foundation, regulated by this code shall be designed and sealed by a Texas-registered engineer. 
(21)  Chapter 11 [RE] - Energy Efficiency is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following: 
N1101.1 Scope. This chapter regulates the energy efficiency for the design and construction of buildings regulated by this code. 
N1101.2 Compliance. Compliance shall be demonstrated by meeting the requirements of the residential provisions of 2015 International Energy Conservation Code. 
(18)  Chapters 12 through and including 42, All construction, modifications or installations must comply with Chapters 9, 12, 16, 16½ and 29 with approved amendments from the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(19)  That Chapter 41 entitled Swimming Pools shall be deleted in its entirety. The subjects contained therein shall be governed by City of Pasadena Ordinance 94-153. 
(20)  That Part X comprising Appendices A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, J, K, L, M, N, O, P and Q shall be deleted in their entirety. 
(21)  All reference in the 2015 International Residential Code to a "Board of Appeals" is hereby amended to state "City of Pasadena Building and Standards Commission." 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING CODE REGULATING ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS AND MOVING WALKS 
 
Sec. 9-64. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to the design, construction, installation, maintenance, operation, alteration and repair of all new and existing elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, manlifts, moving walks, inclined chairlifts, wheelchair lifts, and personnel hoists. 
All of the above type installations must comply with the requirements of the Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 754 (Vernon Supp. 2002) in its current form. The license and permit programs will be administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation in Austin, Texas. The cite for that department's rules regulating elevators is 16 Administrative Code Chapter 74, in its current form. 
The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation will honor the current license of equipment and installations that are currently approved and duly licensed or permitted for operation within this jurisdiction until such time as renewal of license or operating permits are required for the same. The Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation shall begin overseeing the design, construction, installation, maintenance, operation, alteration and repair of all new and existing elevators, dumbwaiters, escalators, manlifts, moving walks, inclined chairlifts, wheelchair lifts, and personnel hoists on January 1, 2004. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-65. - Definitions. 
The following words and terms, for the purposes of this Code and as used elsewhere, shall have the meanings shown herein: 
Automotive lift: A fixed mechanical device for raising an entire motor vehicle above the floor level, but not through successive floors of the building or structure. 
Conveyors: A system of machinery and manual or mechanized devices other than elevator and dumbwaiter equipment, consisting of belts, chains, rollers, buckets, aprons, slides and chutes and other miscellaneous equipment for hoisting, lowering and transporting materials and merchandise in packages or in bulk in any direction in a building or structure. 
Dumbwaiter: A hoisting and lowering mechanism with a car of limited capacity and size which moves in guides in a substantially vertical direction and is used exclusively for carrying material. 
Elevator: A hoisting and lowering mechanism equipped with a car or platform which moves in guides for the transportation of individuals or freight in a substantially vertical direction through successive floors or levels of a building or structure. 
Elevator repairs: All work necessary to maintain present elevator equipment in a safe and serviceable condition and to adjust or replace defective, broken or worn parts with parts made of equivalent material, strength and design, and only where the replacing part performs the same function as the replaced part. 
Escalator: A power-driven, inclined, continuous stairway used for raising and lowering passengers. 
Freight elevator: An elevator primarily used for carrying freight and on which only the operator and the persons necessary for loading or unloading and employees having special permission of the building official are permitted to ride. 
Freight lift: A power-operated raising and lowering device for transporting freight vertically, operating entirely within one (1) story of the building or structure. 
Hand elevator: A freight elevator that is driven by manual power. 
Hoist, material platform: A manually or power-operated suspended platform conveyance operating in guide rails for the exclusive raising or lowering of materials, which is operated and controlled from a point outside the conveyance. 
Hoisting and conveying equipment, special: Manually or power-operated hoisting, lowering or conveying mechanisms - other than elevators, escalators, or dumbwaiters - for the transport of persons or freight in vertical, inclined or horizontal direction on one (1) floor or in successive floors. 
Hoisting and elevating equipment, miscellaneous: All power-operated hoisting and elevating equipment for raising, lowering and moving persons or merchandise from one (1) level to another, such as: inclined elevators; slings and hooks; tiering and piling machines not permanently located in a fixed position; mine elevators; skip hoists for blast furnaces; stage and orchestra lifts; lift bridges; temporary builders' hoists; and similar equipment. 
Hydraulic elevator: A power elevator in which the motion of the car is obtained through the application of force from liquid under pressure. 
Moving walk: A type of passenger-carrying device on which passengers stand or walk, and in which the passenger-carrying surface remains parallel to its direction of motion and is uninterrupted. 
Passenger elevator: An elevator for the transportation of individuals. 
Power elevator: An elevator in which the motion of the car is obtained through the application of force other than by hand or gravity. 
Sidewalk elevator: A freight elevator which operates between a sidewalk or other area exterior to the building and floor levels inside the building below such area, which does not have a landing opening into the building at its upper limit of travel and which is not used to carry automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-66—9-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SETBACK REQUIREMENTS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Charter reference— Authority to establish building lines on streets, Art. I, § 5. 
Cross reference— Fences and walls for junkyards and automobile wrecking yards to conform to setback requirements, § 17-47; fence or wall for outside storage of used goods, wares and merchandise to conform to setback requirements, § 17-68; setback requirements for mobile homes located outside mobile home park, § 21-44; setback requirements for units and mobile homes in mobile home parks, § 21-64; ground signs to comply with setback requirements, § 31-64(d); setback requirements for townhouse subdivisions, App. B, § 2B. 
 
Sec. 9-76. - Generally. 
(a)  No permit for the construction, erection or installation of a building or structure, or parts of a building or structure, shall be issued for the construction, erection or installation of a building or structure within twenty-five (25) feet of: 
(1)  The property line on the front side of the property; or 
(2)  The existing or ultimate proposed future right-of-way lines of any street, road, avenue, highway or drive or any extensions thereof as set forth in the major street plan for Pasadena, Texas. 
Provided, however, that a carport may be erected in conjunction with single or duplex residential dwellings unless prohibited by a subdivision deed restriction. It is the duty of the applicant for the permit to determine if there exists any subdivision deed restrictions which prohibit the erection of the carport and by applying for the permit certifies to the city that such a prohibition does not exist. 
Carports which are permitted under this section may be constructed of wood or metal and shall be attached to the main structure at the innermost end with either a flat roof or a roof with a pitch not to exceed four-foot vertical on twelve-foot horizontal. The carport shall not have any ceiling openings accessible for any storage area, shall be supported at its outermost end by not more than two (2) stanchions (poles) with braces anchored in a manner approved by the building official, and such poles shall not be placed nearer than five (5) feet from any property line. The horizontal portion of the carport framework shall not be less than eight (8) feet nor more than twelve (12) feet above grade (natural ground) elevation. The stanchions supporting the carport shall be separated by not more than twenty (20) feet and the roof overhang shall not exceed two (2) feet from the supporting stanchions on any side. No wall shall be erected or attached to any carport permitted under this section. 
(b)  No permit for the construction, erection or installation of a single or duplex residential building or structure, or parts of such building or structure, shall be issued for the construction, erection or installation of such building or structure, within five (5) feet of any property line, subject to subsection (a) hereof. For purposes of this subsection (b) "single residential building or structure" means a building occupied exclusively for residential purposes or as a boarding or rooming house serving not more than fifteen (15) persons with meals or sleeping accommodations or both. 
"Duplex residential building or structure" means a building occupied exclusively for residence purposes and having two (2) apartments, or as a boarding or rooming house serving not more than fifteen (15) persons with meals or sleeping accommodations or both. 
(c)  No permit for the construction, erection, or installation of a service station gasoline island metal canopy having a clearance of at least twelve (12) feet above the finished grade elevation shall be issued nearer than ten (10) feet from any property line. Any stanchion(s) supporting the metal canopy for a service station gasoline island shall not encroach onto the property setback lines as set forth elsewhere in this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-77. - Conformity with recorded subdivision plats. 
No permit shall be issued for the construction or erection of a building or structure between the right-of-way line of any street, avenue or drive, and the building setback lines as dedicated and shown by the plats of subdivisions within the city which have been properly filed of record in the deed or map records of Harris County, except that permits may be issued for the construction or erection of a building or a structure up to a distance of twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line in the 700 and 800 blocks of Center Street. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Subdivisions, App. A, App. B.  
Sec. 9-78. - Private garages, sheds, shops, etc. 
(a)  Unattached. No permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or installation of a building or structure, or part of a building or structure, to be occupied exclusively as a private garage, shed, shop or other nonresidential use, or any combination thereof, located on the same lot with a dwelling, and not attached to such dwelling, within three (3) feet of the lot line of the adjoining property nearest either side of such private garage, shed, shop, building or structure or within five (5) feet of the rear lot line of the lot on which the same is situated. 
(b)  Attached. No permit shall be issued for the construction, erection or installation of a building or structure, or part of a building or structure, to be occupied exclusively as a private garage, shed, shop or other nonresidential use, or any combination thereof, located on the same lot with a dwelling, and attached to the dwelling, within five (5) feet of the lot line of the adjoining property nearest either side of such private garage, shed, shop, building or structure or within five (5) feet of the rear lot line of the lot on which the same is situated. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-79. - Variances. 
The building official, with city council approval, may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in his opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the building official shall prescribe only conditions that he deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings hereinbelow required, the building official shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work at the proposed location, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the building official, with city council approval, finds: 
(a)  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and 
(b)  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and 
(c)  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to other property in the area; and 
(d)  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly development of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such findings of the building official, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be kept on file in the office of the building official. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this article so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to those seeking the variance, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship. 
(e)  That the city traffic director has made a favorable recommendation relative to the effect on traffic safety of the proposed variance. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-80—9-92. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - HOUSE LEVELING 
 
Sec. 9-93. - Definition. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a "house leveler" is a person who levels a house or any other type of building that is either on blocks or on a slab, by adjusting or repairing same, or by reenforcing the foundation of a house or building, by any method or means used. 
(b)  Any person who is contracted, hired or obtained by any method, or by any system, to obtain the services of a "house leveler" shall be deemed to be a "house leveler" and shall be regulated by this article. 
(c)  A "house leveler" or any person so defined in this section shall be referred to as a "leveler" in this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-94. - Violations of article. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and each and every day that such violation continues shall be a separate violation. Upon conviction, any person guilty of such violation shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-95. - Permit required; permit fee. 
Any leveler shall be required to obtain a permit from the department of building inspection before any work is done on the proposed site. A twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be required for such permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-96. - Leveler's bond or insurance. 
(a)  When a leveler applies for a permit to level a house or building, or repair the foundation of a house or building, he shall submit to the department of building inspection a good and sufficient surety bond or insurance policy (in the event of a bond, to be executed by some good solvent bonding company authorized to do business in this state, and in the event of an insurance policy, to be executed by some good solvent insurance company authorized to do business in this state). Such surety bond or insurance policy shall be in the sum of at least ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and shall be conditioned that the obligor therein will pay, to the extent of the face amount of such surety bond or insurance policy, all judgments which may be recovered against the leveler by reason of the wrongful or illegal acts of the leveler, or his servants, officers, agents or employees, that are committed in the performance of his or their duties. Such surety bond or insurance policy shall be further conditioned that such person so injured shall have the right to sue directly upon the bond or policy in his own name, and the same shall be subject to successive suits for recovery until a complete exhaustion for the face amount thereof. 
(b)  Such bond or insurance policy shall be further conditioned that if the leveler abandons or wholly fails to carry out the provisions of any contract with a subscriber for his services, the same shall be prima facie evidence of the right of the subscriber to demand and recover up to the full face amount of such bond or insurance policy as liquidated damages for such failure to provide the service as contracted. 
(c)  Such bond or insurance policy shall be further conditioned that it shall not expire for at least six (6) months after the job for which a permit is sought is completed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-97. - Plans and specifications. 
When a leveler requests a permit to level a house or building, or repair a foundation, he shall submit to the department of building inspection two (2) copies of plot plans or specifications, which shall reveal the dimensions of the house or building and that portion of the house or building that needs leveling. If the slab foundation is cracked, the location of the area in which the foundation is cracked shall be marked on the plans or specifications. One (1) copy of such plans or specifications will be returned to the leveler when his permit is issued, and the department of building inspection will retain the other copy. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-98. - Inspection of work; plank requirements. 
When the leveler to whom a permit is issued under this article has excavated and has placed the jack or plank (which plank shall not be less than a good 4? by 4? wooden plank) in position, the leveler shall call the building official to the site for inspection of same. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-99. - Correction of rejected work; new permit required. 
If the building official rejects a job inspected under this article due to the leveler's failure, in the judgment of the building official to comply with the minimum standards, for such work, the leveler must make the necessary corrections and it shall be necessary for him to obtain another permit, with the same fees, before the building official will return to the site and make another inspection. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-100—9-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - HOUSE MOVING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-111. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
House. By the term "house," is meant any building or structure used or designed to be used for human habitation or occupancy in any manner or for any purpose. 
House moving. By the term "house moving" is meant the transportation of a house from place to place along or across any public street or alley within the corporate limits of the city. 
Licensee. The term "licensee" shall mean any person to whom a license required by section 9-131 has been issued. 
Street. The term "street" shall mean any part of the street, including the sidewalk area. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-112. - Permit. 
(a)  Any licensee desiring to move any house shall, prior to beginning work, apply for and obtain a permit from the building official. Such application shall show the present location of the house, the new location, the proposed route of moving, the size and type of construction of the house, and such other information as the building official may require. The licensee shall pay a permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each structure to be moved, where the ground space of the structure does not exceed four hundred (400) square feet. For each structure to be moved that has a ground space of more than four hundred (400) square feet, the permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00), plus one-half (½) cent for each square foot in excess of four hundred (400). In case of buildings of two (2) stories or more, the fee shall be fifty (50) per cent more than that above stated herein. The permit fees herein provided for are in addition to the yearly license fee provided for in section 9-134. 
(b)  The permit fees prescribed in subsection (a) shall apply to the moving of a house from one (1) location to another within the city or from within the city to a point outside the city. The fee for a permit to move a house which has been previously permanently located outside the city into the city shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such house. 
(c)  Written notice of the filing of an application for a permit under this section, together with a copy of such application, shall be served by the applicant or his agent upon the owner of any wires, poles or other structure located upon the streets, alleys or public places which may be affected by the moving of the house. Such notice, together with the copy of the application, shall be served on such owner at least three (3) days before the application for the permit shall be considered by the building official. If the owner of any such wires, poles or other structures located upon the streets, alleys or public places desires to file any objection to the application, he shall do so within three (3) days after the service of such notice and the building official may, after the expiration of such three-day period, grant or refuse such application, filing written reasons for refusal if such be the case, and in the event any objections have been filed thereto, he may extend the time for consideration of the application and notify all interested parties to appear before him for hearing thereon upon some specific date to be set by him, subject to confirmation of the city council. 
(d)  If a permit is granted under this section, the building official shall enter an order upon the application stating the conditions under which it is granted, designating the route along or over which the house, building or structure may be moved and the time within which the work of moving shall be completed. Each such permit shall show: 
(1)  The name of the licensee. 
(2)  The present location of the house. 
(3)  The proposed new location. 
(4)  The route of moving, as approved by the chief of police. 
(5)  The exact date and time during which the house will occupy the street and sidewalk. 
(6)  The time that the house is allowed to remain in the streets. 
(7)  The size and type of construction of the house. 
(8)  The receipt of the permit fee. 
(e)  Each permit provided for in this section shall be issued in duplicate and one (1) copy shall be posted on the house to be moved. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-113. - Bond. 
A licensee, when applying for a permit to move a building, shall be required to post a bond or valid insurance policy in the minimum amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be issued by a company doing business in the State of Texas, for the purpose of guaranteeing payment by the licensee for any damages to city property incurred in the process of moving; and to guarantee that the licensee shall clear the property from which the building was moved of all debris within ten (10) days after moving such building. The insurance policy or bond shall be valid for at least six (6) months after the building has been moved. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-114. - Permanent location and installation to comply with codes and ordinances. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to begin or complete the moving of any house onto any property in the city unless the permanent location and installation of such house on such property in all respects complies with all applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-115. - Notice to chief of police and fire chief. 
Immediately upon issuance of a permit under this article, the building official shall notify the chief of police and the fire chief of the issuance of the permit, stating the route of moving, when the moving will begin and the number of days allowed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-116. - Maximum time for occupancy of street. 
The maximum time during which a house may legally remain in a street under a permit granted pursuant to this article shall be twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-117. - House to be kept in motion. 
During the entire time that a house is occupying the street, or any portion of same, the licensee shall keep it continuously in motion toward its destination and shall not allow the work of moving to stop during such time. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-118. - Cutting of trees and branches. 
It shall be unlawful for any licensee engaged in moving a house to cut down any trees or branches growing within any parkway or esplanade of a public street or to cut any branches therefrom, without having first obtained permission from the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-119. - Disconnecting utility services. 
It shall be unlawful for any license to disconnect any electric light and power connection, gas connection, water connection or telephone connection from any house which he proposes to move, without the consent of the public utility owning such connection. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-120. - Damaging, removing, etc., utility fixtures. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee to remove, tear down, destroy, alter, change or tamper with any pole or wire or other property belonging to the city or to any electric light and power company, gas company, or telephone or telegraph company, without the consent of such public utility or other person owning the same. Where it is found necessary to remove any pole or lift any wire or cable, or to temporarily cut any wire or cable, or other installation belonging to the city or to any electric light or power company, gas company, telephone or telegraph company, in order for the licensee to move the house or structure along the route designated by his permit, the licensee shall give the owner of such poles, wires, cables or installations notice of such necessity and pay in advance to the owner thereof the actual cost of removing such pole or raising or cutting any wire or cable found necessary. For this purpose, the owner of such installation shall make an estimate of such cost and furnish same to the licensee within forty-eight (48) hours after receiving such notice. Should the licensee and owner not be able to agree upon such costs, same shall be referred to the director of public works for final determination of the amount thereof and both the licensee and the owner of such installations shall be bound by his findings. 
(b)  Upon the granting of a permit under this article and payment of the estimated costs by the licensee of removing poles, lifting wires or cutting wires and cables or other installations, as herein stated, it shall be the duty of any person owning wires and structures along and upon the designated route to furnish, within six (6) hours of the time the house, building or other structure is to be moved, one (1) or more employees, whose duty it shall be to lower, raise, cut or remove, as the conditions may require, the wires or other structures of the particular person by whom they are employed, with which the house being moved may come in contact and which may necessarily have to be lowered, raised, cut, or removed in order to facilitate the moving of the house. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-121. - Notice when moving completed; inspection and repair of streets, curbs, etc. 
(a)  Whenever a licensee has completed the work of moving a house under a permit issued pursuant to this article, and the house no longer occupies any part of the street, he shall promptly notify the director of public works of such fact. The director of public works shall cause an inspection to be made of the route of moving and the installation of the house. If he finds that the licensee has caused damage to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or other public property, he shall notify the licensee of such fact, specifying the damage by mailing to him a written notification at either of the addresses listed in the licensee's application for a license under this article. The licensee shall proceed within two (2) days from the date of such notification to begin the work of repairing the damage, which work shall be promptly done and completed under the supervision of and to the entire and complete satisfaction of the director of public works. 
(b)  In the event that the licensee fails to begin work in two (2) days, or fails to continuously proceed therewith promptly and expeditiously or fails to complete it to the entire and complete satisfaction of the director of public works, the director may promptly cause the damage to be repaired on behalf of the city. In such case, the director shall make and execute a certificate, setting out the relevant facts pertaining to the transaction, and shall certify therein the amount of damage sustained by the city and shall file the certificate with the building official. The licensee, by accepting the permit, thereby constitutes and appoints the director of public works as his agent and representative with full power and authority to bind the licensee and his surety to prepare and file the certificate. Upon the filing of such certificate, the amount stated therein shall be and become a sum, liquidated and certain, owing the city by the licensee and the surety on his bond and, in any suit involving such sum, the facts recited in the certificate and the amount of damage certified therein shall in all things be presumed to be true and binding upon the licensee and his surety in the absence of clear, convincing and unmistakable proof that the director of public works has acted arbitrarily and without any evidence whatsoever of such facts. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-122—9-130. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MOVER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 9-131. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to move any house along or across any public street or alley within the corporate limits of the city without being licensed to engage in the business of house moving as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-132. - Application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to engage in the business of house moving shall make application for a license to the city building official. Such application shall be in writing and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name of the applicant and his residence and business address. If a partnership or association, the application shall state the names of all partners, their residence addresses and the office address of the partnership or association. If a corporation, the application shall state the names and residence addresses of all officers and directors and the principal office of the corporation. 
(2)  A statement that the applicant (or officers, if the applicant is a corporation) has read and thoroughly understands the terms of this article and agrees to abide by its terms in the business of house moving. 
(3)  The application shall contain such other information as may be required by the city building official. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant, if an individual; by a partner, if a partnership; by the president, if an association or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-133. - Insurance required of applicant. 
No license shall be issued under this division unless the applicant furnishes proof to the building official that he has in force and effect public liability and property damage insurance. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-134. - Fee. 
The applicant for a license under this division shall pay a license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) a year. If application is made subsequent to January first, the fee shall be reduced two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) for each entire quarter of the year which has expired. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-135. - Issuance. 
The building official shall examine the application filed pursuant to this division and, if he is satisfied that the same is in order, he shall issue to the applicant a license to engage in the business of house moving in the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-136. - Not transferable. 
A license issued under this division shall be personal to the licensee and shall not be transferable. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-137. - Expiration and renewal. 
A license issued under this division shall expire at midnight the following December 31. Upon expiration, a license may be renewed upon filing an application, license fee and a new insurance policy as in the case of original licenses. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-138. - Suspension or revocation. 
The building official is empowered to suspend or revoke the license of any licensee under this division who is finally convicted of a violation of any provision of this article, and such suspension or revocation shall not bar a prosecution for the same offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-139—9-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - DANGEROUS BUILDINGS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings constituting fire hazards, § 13-116 et seq.; fire hazard inspection, § 13-141 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 9-151. - Definition. 
(a)  All buildings or structures which have any or all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings: 
(1)  Those which have interior walls or other vertical structural members that list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the center of gravity falls outside the middle third of its base. 
(2)  Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show thirty-three (33) per cent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members or fifty (50) per cent of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering. 
(3)  Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs or overloaded roofs or floors, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purpose used. 
(4)  Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to have become dangerous to life, safety, morals, or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city. 
(5)  Those which are so dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation, or which are likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those occupying such building or structure. 
(6)  Those having light, air and sanitation facilities which are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety or general welfare of human beings who live or may live therein. 
(7)  Those which have inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or those having insufficient stairways, elevators, fire escapes, or other means of communication. 
(8)  Those, regardless of their structural condition, which have during times that they were not actually occupied by their owners, lessees or other invitees, been left unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that they may be entered and utilized by vagrants or other uninvited persons as a place of harborage or may be entered and utilized by children as a play area. 
(9)  Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property. 
(10)  Those which because of their condition are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the people of the city. 
(11)  Those buildings existing in violation of any provisions of this Code, the building code, the fire code, or other ordinances of this city if the violation is of such a nature that the building or structure constitutes a danger to its occupants or to others. 
(b)  A building or structure that is boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner may, nevertheless, be deemed to be a dangerous building under the foregoing criteria if: 
(1)  The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or 
(2)  It is found that the means utilized to secure the building or structure are not adequate to prevent unauthorized entry of the building in contravention of subsection (a)(8) above. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-152. - Declared to be nuisances. 
All dangerous buildings within the terms of section 9-151 hereof are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be vacated and/or repaired and/or demolished and/or secured as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-153. - Authority of building official. 
The building official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce any and all provisions of this article. The building official's enforcement authority shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Inspecting or supervising the inspection of any building, wall or structure about which complaints are filed by any person to the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(2)  Inspecting or supervising the inspections of any building, wall or structure reported by the health or police department or fire marshal's office of this city as probably existing in violation of the terms of this article. 
(3)  Inspecting or supervising the inspection of buildings or structures in the city to determine whether they are "dangerous buildings" within the terms of section 9-151. 
(4)  Making or causing to be made surveys in any area of the city to determine the general condition of structures or buildings, the extent of deterioration, the lack of facilities or maintenance, unsafe and unsanitary conditions and other relevant factors necessary to implement the purposes of this article. 
(5)  Presenting testimony to the building and standards commission in support of any allegations of a violation of the provision(s) of this article. 
The building official and building inspectors shall be authorized to enter any building, structure, or premises at any reasonable time to exercise the authority prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-154. - Access to structures. 
The owner, operator, agent or occupant of every structure, building or premises shall permit the building official and building inspectors to enter the structure, building or premises at reasonable times for the purpose of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-155. - Identification. 
The building official and building inspectors shall be supplied with official identification and upon request shall exhibit identification when entering any structure, building or premises. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-156. - Notice of violation. 
(a)  Whenever the building official determines that there has been a violation or that there are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation or alleged violation of this article, notice of such violation or alleged violation shall be given to the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent and all other persons having an interest in the structure or building as shown by the deed records of the county clerk in which the land is located. 
(b)  The notice provided for in this section shall be in writing, shall contain a description of the premises upon which the building or structure is located, and shall specify the alleged violation. In addition, the notice shall state whether the building or structure must be vacated (if it is occupied), secured, repaired, removed and/or demolished in order to comply with the terms of this article. 
(c)  Any person or entity notified pursuant to this section shall be given a reasonable time, not exceeding thirty (30) days, to comply with the notice. If after inspecting the structure or building, the building official determines that it is necessary to extend such time period, written notice of the time extension shall be given to the affected person or entity. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-157. - Standards to be followed in issuing notices of violations. 
The building official shall follow the applicable standards set forth below in issuing notices of violations of this article: 
(1)  If the structure or building is occupied and in such condition as to make it dangerous to the health, safety or welfare of its occupants, the notice shall provide that the building or structure must be vacated. 
(2)  If the structure or building can reasonable be repaired so that it will no longer violate the provisions of this article, the notice shall provide that the structure or building must be repaired (or demolished at the owner's option) such that it complies with the applicable provisions of this Code. 
(3)  If the structure or building cannot be reasonably repaired such that it complies with the applicable codes of the city, the notice shall provide that the structure or building must be demolished. 
(4)  If the building or structure is unoccupied and the condition of the building or structure is such that it may be brought into compliance by securing it from unauthorized entry, then the notice may provide that it be so secured and be kept secured and may include written specifications that must be complied with in securing the building or structure; in addition, the notice may provide that the building or structure be repaired or demolished if it is not secured in compliance with the notice. 
(5)  If the building or structure is at least fifty (50) per cent damaged, decayed or deteriorated, the notice shall provide that the building or structure must either be repaired or demolished if it cannot be repaired so that it complies with the applicable codes of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-158. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-159. - Notice of hearing before building and standards commission. 
Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee, agent or other person(s) with an interest in the building or structure to comply with the notice sent pursuant to section 9-156 hereof, the building official may schedule a hearing before the building and standards commission and provide notices of such hearing in accordance with the requirements of article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-160. - Service of notices when interested parties not in city. 
In cases where the owner, occupant, lessee, mortgagee or any other person having an interest in the property is absent from the city, the notice required pursuant to section 9-156 of this article shall be sent by registered mail or certified mail to the owner, occupant, mortgagee, lessee and all other persons having an interest in the building or structure involved, as shown by the deed records of the county clerk in which the land is located, to the last known address of each, and a copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building to which the notice relates. Such posting and mailing shall be deemed adequate service of notice. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-161. - Placarding inherently dangerous building. 
(a)  If a building inspector completes an inspection of a building or structure and finds it to be inherently dangerous and, in the opinion of such inspector, a nuisance per se, upon approval of such finding ex parte by the building official, such inspector shall place a notice on such building or structure forthwith which shall contain language to the effect that the building or structure is a dangerous building/structure and that all unauthorized persons entering the building/structure shall be subject to a fine as set forth in subsection (b). 
(b)  The placard shall contain a warning that any unauthorized person entering a placarded building/structure as set forth in section 9-161(a) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon final conviction therefor, shall be fined a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(c)  The approval of the building official of a finding pursuant to this section and the posting of the notice provided for above shall not be construed to deprive any person entitled thereto to the notice and hearing prescribed in article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-162. - Emergencies. 
(a)  In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person unless a "dangerous building," as defined herein, is immediately repaired, vacated, demolished or secured, the building inspector shall report such facts to the building official. If the building official finds that there is in fact an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person unless the building/structure is immediately repaired, vacated, demolished or secured, he shall cause the immediate repair, vacating, demolition or securing of such building/structure. 
(b)  Whenever the building official causes a building/structure to be repaired, vacated, demolished or secured pursuant to this section, he shall cause a notice, as described in section 9-161, to be posted on the building/structure. In addition, the building official shall schedule a hearing before the commission concerning the action taken pursuant to this section and send notice of such hearing to all persons required pursuant to Article II hereof. The notice shall set forth the specific conditions which rendered the building a dangerous building and an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of person(s). At such a hearing, the burden shall be upon the city to show that the immediate action was necessary because the building/structure was dangerous within the meaning of section 9-156 and an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of person(s). If after completion of the presentation of the testimony by all parties appearing, the commission finds that the action was necessary because the building/structure was dangerous within the meaning of section 9-156 and an immediate danger to health, life or safety of person(s), all administrative expenses and any cost of vacating, repairing, securing, or demolishing the building or structure shall be calculated and assessed against the owners of the building/structure, shall constitute a lien on the land on which the building/structure stood, and shall bear interest as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-163. - Penalty. 
(a)  Any person who removes a notice or placard duly posted on a building or structure in accordance with this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Any person with an interest in the building or structure or the land upon which the building or structure is situated who permits a dangerous building or structure, as defined in this article, to exist on premises in the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-164. - Authority of city attorney. 
The city attorney shall have authority to: 
(1)  Prosecute all persons failing to comply with the terms of the notices and orders provided for in this chapter. 
(2)  Appear at all hearings before the building and standards commission. 
(3)  Bring suit to collect all municipal charges, liens, or costs incurred by the public works department in preparing or causing "dangerous buildings" to be vacated, repaired, secured and/or demolished. 
(4)  Take such other legal action as is necessary to carry out the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive and shall be in addition to any other remedies provided by law; any and all remedies may be pursued concurrently or consecutively, and the pursuit of any remedy shall not be construed as an election or the waiver of the right to pursue any and all of the others. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
DIVISION 2. - CLEANUP AFTER DEMOLITION OR REMOVAL OF BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES 
 
Sec. 9-165. - Cleanup after demolition or removal of structure or buildings. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after any building or structure is demolished or removed from any lot or tract of land: 
(1)  All debris must be removed from the property. 
(2)  All holes or depressions in the ground must be filled to grade level. 
(3)  All lumber, pipes and all other building materials must be removed from the property. 
(4)  All pipes and conduits must be removed from above grade and must be removed or sealed below grade. 
(5)  All piers, pilings, steps, foundations, and other appurtenances must be removed from the property. 
(b)  Each owner and each person having control over the property on which the building or structure stood prior to removal or demolition is individually responsible for completing such work or causing such work to be completed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-166. - Report, inspection where work believed not completed. 
City employees may make a written report to the building official whenever such employee has reason to believe a building or structure has been demolished or removed from a lot or tract of land and the work required by this article has not been completed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-167. - Notice to complete work. 
To the extent that the commission has not issued an order pursuant to Article II hereof, whenever it shall come to the knowledge of the building official that a building or structure has been demolished or removed and that the work required by this article has not been completed, the building official shall cause written notice to be given by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the property or to any person having control over the property setting out the work required by this article which has not been completed. In such notice, the building official may order the owner of the property or person having control over the property to complete or cause to be completed all work required by this article within thirty (30) days of service of such notice. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-168. - Penalty. 
Failure to comply with the requirements of section 9-165, or the order of the building official given pursuant to this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such work is not completed in accordance with the provisions of this article shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-169, 9-170. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Cross reference— Basic Subdivision Ordinance, App. A. 
 
Sec. 9-171. - Condominium composed of single family detached dwelling units. 
A proposed condominium consisting of single family detached dwelling units shall be developed in accordance with the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Pasadena, Texas, Ordinance No. 67-1966 and any amendments thereto; provided, however, that no lot lines need be shown on the required plat and that the number of buildings and their locations must be shown on the preliminary and final plats. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-172. - Condominium consisting of townhouse-type dwelling units. 
A proposed condominium consisting of townhouse-type dwelling units shall be developed in accordance with the Townhouse Subdivisions Ordinance, Ordinance No. 71-77 and any amendments thereto. 
For the purpose of this article, townhouse-type dwelling units are defined as those units having no more than two (2) points or areas of attachment (common walls, floors, or ceilings) with other dwelling units, except that units located on the ends of structures shall have no more than one (1) common point or area of attachment. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— Townhouse Subdivision Ordinance, App. B.  
Sec. 9-173. - Condominium composed of apartment-type dwelling units. 
A proposed condominium consisting of apartment-type dwelling units shall be developed in accordance with the Multi-family Dwelling Development Ordinance, Ordinance No. 71-56 and any amendments thereto. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, apartment-type dwelling units are defined as those units having more than two (2) points or areas of attachment with other dwelling units, except that units located on the ends of structures shall have more than one (1) common point or area of attachment. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17) 
Cross reference— General requirements for multifamily dwellings, § 9-2.  
Secs. 9-174, 9-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 
 
Sec. 9-176. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
Appurtenant structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure. 
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one (1) per cent or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one (1) per cent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the FHBM. After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) per cent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation at which the base flood for the area of construction would occur. 
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Breakaway walls means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building of supporting foundation system. 
Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is designated on a FIRM as Zone V1-30, VE or V. 
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
Critical facility is any structure or facility that produces, uses, or stores highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water-reactive materials; all hospitals, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, standalone emergency rooms and housing likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a flood; all schools, police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response activities before, during, and after a flood; and any public and private utility facilities that are vital to maintaining or restoring normal service to flooded areas before, during, and after a flood. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
Development permit means the permit describing the fill, drainage, grading for the property to be developed. 
Disclosure laws means a notification that must be made to prospective property owners that the property is located in the 100-year (one (1) percent) floodplain. 
Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls meet the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Elevation certificate is a FEMA approved form completed and approved by the city certified floodplain manager. It must be provided for each and every structure in the City of Pasadena. All properties must meet the elevation requirements of this article regardless of whether the property is in the floodplain. 
Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMS effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Fill means any material added above natural grade. Fill is considered to be development. Any fill placed within the city limits of Pasadena must have a fill permit issued by the city floodplain manager or the designated certified floodplain manager. 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration. The report contains flood profiles, the water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood hazard boundary-floodway map. 
Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
Floodplain management regulations means ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
Flood proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level i.e.: require elevations to be one (1) foot above base flood elevation (BFE) or the highest street elevation adjacent to the property. 
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
Habitable floor means any floor usable for living purposes, which includes working, sleeping, eating, cooking or recreation, or combination thereof. A floor used for storage purposes only is not a "habitable floor." 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district of a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation program that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of Interior in states without approved programs. 
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations. 
Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. 
New construction means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Post-construction means final pollution control measures and stabilization including maintenance responsibility. 
Primary frontal dune means a continuous or nearly continuous mound or ridge of sand with relatively steep seaward and landward slopes immediately landward and adjacent to the beach and subject to erosion and overtopping from high tides and waves during major coastal storms. The inland limit of the primary frontal dune occurs at the point where there is a distinct change from a relatively steep slope to a relatively mild slope. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, bayou, etc. 
Sand dunes mean naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach. 
Special flood hazard area. See "area of special flood hazard." 
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulation. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17; Ord. No. 17-113, § 1, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 9-177. - Areas of application. 
This article shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-178. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for City of Pasadena, Texas" dated June 18, 2007, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) dated June 18, 2007 and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-179. - Establishment of development permit. 
A floodplain development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article regardless of whether the development is within the special flood hazard boundary. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-180. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-181. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-182. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally constructed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-183. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create the liability on the part of the City of Pasadena or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-184. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The director of public works is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-185. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding; 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article; 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required; 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation; 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situation, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the Texas Water Development Board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained; 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 9-178, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of section 9-187 et seq.; 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one (1) foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one (1) foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA. 
(11)  In addition to the areas designated on the FIRM map as susceptible to flooding, the administrator should indicate additional areas that through experience he has found to be susceptible to flooding and make the information available to the public. 
(12)  Review and approve all elevation certificates for compliance with current regulations. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17; Ord. No. 17-113, § 2, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 9-186. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a commercial development permit shall be presented to the building official on forms furnished by the permit department and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate, drawn to scale showing site elevations, finished floor elevations, location and dimensions of existing and proposed structures and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. 
Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level of the lowest floor (including basement) of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 9-189(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 9-183(a) [Section 9-185(1)]. 
(b)  Approval or denial of a construction permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of waterfront locations, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area; 
(11)  The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit or approval issued under the provisions of this regulation, in cases where there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans upon which the permit or approval was based; 
(12)  Upon notice from the floodplain administrator that work on any building, structure, dike, bridge or any improvement which would affect water drainage, is being done contrary to the provisions of this regulation, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, such work shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or to his agent, or to the person doing the work, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required to be given by the floodplain administrator, provided written notice shall follow within twenty-four (24) hours from the time oral notice to stop work is issued; 
(13)  The floodplain administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building, structure, or premises to perform any duties imposed upon him by this regulation; 
(14)  Penalty. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this article by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation per day. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Pasadena from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17; Ord. No. 17-113, § 3, 9-5-17)  
Sec. 9-187. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-188. - General standards both for construction and post-construction. 
In all areas of the city, except areas designated as VE on the FIRM map, the following standards shall apply to all construction within the City of Pasadena: 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding, meeting the same requirements as FF to BFE; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; 
(8)  There shall be no new development within the 100-year (one (1) percent) flood hazard zone in the Armand Bayou Watershed south of the tidal influenced flow; 
(9)  An elevation certificate (Standard FEMA form) signed by a professional engineer is required for each and every building within the City of Pasadena, regardless of its location with respect to the flood hazard boundary; 
(10)  There shall be no adverse flooding impact on any property from any fill placed in the same or nearby watershed; and 
(11)  Final pollution control measures and stabilization or post-construction: These measures shall stabilize construction sites where either of the following conditions are met: 
a.  All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed and a uniform (e.g., evenly distributed, without large bare areas) perennial vegetative cover with a density of seventy (70) percent of the native background vegetative cover for the area has been established on all unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed. 
b.  For individual lots in a residential construction site by either: 
i.  The homebuilder completing final stabilization as specified in condition (11)a. above; or 
ii.  The homebuilder of single-family homes establishing final stabilization for an individual lot by sodding the front yard with a vegetative cover with a minimum of seventy (70) percent density (no bare spots) and installing a perimeter of sod for the remaining portions of the yard to prevent soil erosion. 
c.  For construction activities on land used for agricultural purposes (e.g. pipelines across crop or range land), final stabilization may be accomplished by returning the disturbed land to its pre-construction agricultural use. Areas disturbed that were not previously used for agricultural activities, such as buffer strips immediately adjacent to surface water and areas which are not being returned to their pre-construction agricultural use must meet the final stabilization conditions of condition (a) above. 
d.  Acceptance of improvement by the city can occur before the final stabilization coverage requirement is met, if the developer agrees to maintain the stabilization until coverage is achieved and all other permanent measures are complete. 
e.  Once final stabilization has been achieved, the responsible party shall notify the director of engineering, building official, or designated representative that final stabilization has been achieved. 
f.  Erosion control structures must be provided where necessary to control erosive velocities in unlined channels or swales leaving the site. 
g.  Sediment traps must be provided on the site, as necessary, to control sedimentation from concentrated storm water discharges into an environmentally sensitive area. Individual assessments must be made on a site-specific basis. However, a rock rubble low berm must be installed around an outfall that discharges directly into an environmentally sensitive area, unless this requirement is waived by the director of engineering because the responsible party has installed another type of sediment trap that provides equal or better protection. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-189. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of the city, except those covered by section 9-190 (coastal high hazard), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  New construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement elevated to the following: 
a.  For curb and gutter streets, a minimum of one (1) foot above the centerline of the street at the midpoint of the lot, or one (1) foot above the BFE using City of Pasadena bench marks and correcting for latest NAVD leveling, whichever is higher. (Contact city for latest NAVD leveling.) 
b.  Open ditch street one (1) foot above the centerline of the street at the midpoint of the lot, or one (1) foot above the BFE, whichever is higher. 
c.  For structures within two hundred (200) feet of the floodway a minimum elevation of two (2) feet above the BFE, or subsection a. or b. above, whichever is higher. 
(2)  A registered professional engineer, or registered public surveyor shall submit certification to the floodplain administrator on forms provided by him that the standard of section 9-186(a)(1) is satisfied with regard to section 9-189(a). 
(3)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to one (1) foot above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, to be designed so that below the base flood level plus one (1) foot the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. 
(4)  Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
a.  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
b.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. 
c.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(5)  Manufactured homes. 
a.  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A, shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
b.  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iii) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to two (2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
c.  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is two (2) feet above the base flood elevation; and 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(6)  Recreational vehicles. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1, A30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (iii) meet the permit requirements of this chapter, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (d) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(7)  Critical facilities. There shall be no critical facilities constructed in the 100-year (one (1) percent) flood zone. 
(8)  Floodplain storage capacity. Fill placed within the 100-year (one (1) percent) flood zone shall be mitigated such that no flood storage capacity is lost. 
(9)  Mandatory disclosure. Property located within the 100-year (one (1) percent) flood zone must be disclosed as "flood prone" for any property sale. 
(10)  Floodways located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-178 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development. 
(11)  Upon application of all building permits, there shall be submitted a site plan showing to scale, the size and location of all proposed construction and all existing structures of the site, distances from all lot lines, building lines, building setbacks, and all easements and/or rights-of-way, and show the elevation of the lowest floor and the centerline of the street at the centerline of the lot. In order to obtain a permit, it will also be a requirement to prepare and submit for approval a drainage plan which (1) provides such means as are appropriate and necessary to prevent impoundment or diversion of the natural flow of surface water of the adjoining property, (2) provides that all of the storm water from the adjoining property which may have previously flowed across the subject property resulting from a five-year storm event will drain into the city storm water drainage system, (3) must maintain positive drainage on residential lots as originally designed and approved by director from rear to the front into storm system, for lots with rear drainage the opposite would be required, all landscaping and fill for foundation shall accommodate the original drainage design, (4) commercial property including residential property used in any form as commercial or converted to commercial use shall internally collect all drainage from entire site including all roof drains and down spouts into a storm sewer system and connect this system to the city storm sewer system, no sheet flow across property lines shall be allowed. Implementation of the drainage plan is required before a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
(12)  The construction or improvements permitted under sections 9-188, 9-189, 9-190 and 9-191 shall be designed and constructed so as to provide positive drainage away from the structure(s) placed upon the site, and, in addition, provisions shall be made to contain and discharge storm water from the site so as not to interfere with or harm adjoining properties or disrupt or impound the natural flow of surface waters from adjoining properties. 
(13)  Prior to request for top of form inspection, an accurate boundary line survey by a State of Texas registered surveyor shall be submitted to the permit department. Said survey shall include items (11) above and the established street grades, base flood elevation, top of the form elevation and a topography of the entire site, and such survey shall show the elevation of the lowest floor to be constructed in accordance with the provisions of section 9-189(1) hereof. 
(14)  Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones). Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-178, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with flood depths of one (1) to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least one (1) foot above the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified) or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the base flood elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
b.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 9-186 are satisfied. 
c.  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-190. - Coastal high hazard areas. 
(a)  Coastal high hazard areas located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 9-178 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (zones V1-30, VE and/or V). These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, in addition to meeting all provisions outlined in this article, the following provisions must also apply: 
(1)  Obtain the elevation (in relation to mean sea level) using City of Pasadena bench marks and latest NAVD leveling of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all such information. 
(2)  All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean [high] tide. 
(3)  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that: 
a.  The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated to a minimum of two (2) feet above the base flood level; 
b.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Wind and water loading values shall each have a one (1) per cent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval); 
c.  The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards. 
d.  A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of (c)(1), (2) and (3). 
(4)  Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
For the purpose of this section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions: 
a.  Breakaway wall collapse shall result from water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and 
b.  The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement, or other structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Maximum wind and water loading values to be used in this determination shall each have one (1) per cent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (one-hundred-year mean recurrence interval). 
(5)  If breakaway walls are utilized, such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage. Such space shall not be used for human habitation. 
(6)  Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings. 
(7)  Prohibit man-made alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands which would increase potential flood damage. 
(b)  There shall be no manufactured homes placed or substantially improved within Zone V1-30 and VE on the community's FIRM. 
(c)  Recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V, and VE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or (iii) meet the requirements for development permit and subsections (1) through (6) of section 9-189. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached conditions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-191. - Standards for construction on engineered fill. 
In addition to all other applicable requirements set forth in this Code or any other applicable laws or regulations, all filling of lots or vacant property, new construction or substantial improvements proposed to be constructed on engineered fill shall apply for a development permit prior to filling to verify the location is in authorized area or of special flood hazards and must be constructed on properly designed and compacted fill that extends beyond the building walls before dropping below the base flood elevation and must be appropriately protected from erosion and scour. The design of the fill must be sealed by a registered engineer in the State of Texas demonstrating that proper compaction has been obtained and NPDES regulation have followed, the fill is not within the 100-year floodplain and has not changed the BFE. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 9-192, 9-193. - Reserved.  
Sec. 9-194. - Standards for subdivisions proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 1, 2, and 3 of Ordinance No. 87-21 adopting the provision. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions including placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of section 9-179, section 9-186, and the provisions of section 9-188 through section 9-193 of this article. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which are greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 9-178 or section 9-184(9) of this article. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards and shall be required to apply for letters of utility availability. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and provide a complete soil report including soil borings minimum ten (10) feet deep at spacing at director's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-194.1. - General regulations for construction and post-construction. 
(a)  For all developments, the developer shall install detention [pond facilities] unless the developer submits to the city floodplain administrator sufficient evidence, documentation, and calculations prepared by a registered professional engineer reflecting an investigation of stormwater runoff and demonstrating that there is no significant increase in quantity of flow in the receiving drainage facility. Said increase shall be consistent with current flood studies prepared or approved by the floodplain administrator. If, upon review of such information, the floodplain administrator determines that detention is required, a complete set of construction drawings consistent with regulations contained herein of all pond facilities shall be required either at the time of application for a building permit or application to the planning and zoning commission for final approval of plat. Construction drawings shall contain specifications addressing all requirements as herein set forth. No permit for any construction shall be issued until the plans are reviewed by the departments of planning and public works verifying the proposed design is in accordance with these requirements. 
(b)  All development which abuts a Harris County Flood Control drainage facility shall be submitted to the Harris County Flood Control District for review of additional right-of-way requirements. 
(c)  The use of a pond facility by more than one (1) commercial property owner shall not be permitted. The use of a pond facility by multiple commercial establishments under a single property ownership is permissible. 
(d)  Dry pond and wet pond designs are both allowed subject to the regulations set forth herein. 
(e)  Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy, all pond facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the requirements set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-194.2. - Design regulations. 
(a)  Maintenance berms. Maintenance berms shall be provided at a minimum width of five (5) feet, and shall be constructed around the entire pond facility. Maintenance berms shall be unencumbered and allow the entrance of vehicles and equipment as necessary to do routine maintenance in accordance with these regulations. 
(b)  Side slopes. Dry pond facilities shall be established at a ratio of four (4) (horizontal) to one (1) (vertical). Wet pond facilities shall be required to establish four (4) to one (1) side slopes only above the top of finished bulkhead. 
(c)  Bottom slopes. Dry pond facilities shall be designed and constructed so that complete drainage can be achieved following the rainfall or runoff event. The bottom slope shall be constructed in the configuration of a geometric plane with a minimum slope of one one-hundredths (0.01) feet per foot. 
Any dry pond facility required for a residential subdivision shall be allowed a bottom slope at a minimum of five one-thousandths (0.005) feet per foot if a minimum six (6) feet concrete pilot channel is installed across the entire length of the pond or a minimum of two (2) percent slope is installed if one (1) of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  The pond facility is a minimum of three (3) acres in size and is dedicated to and accepted by the city as a park facility; or 
(2)  The pond facility is a minimum of one and five-tenths (1.5) acres in size, is dedicated to the applicable community association as a park facility, and has received approval of the plan as a park by the city planning and zoning commission during the subdivision review process. 
(d)  Entry and exit of water. All water to be detained within the pond facility for a minimum a one hundred-year design with a one (1) foot free board shall enter and exit by backfilling at one (1) controlled location through a concrete energy dissipating structure. Such structure shall be located at the lowest point of elevation within the pond facility and designed to fill the pond at a minimum of the design rate. Design of said structure shall be approved by the city floodplain administrator. 
(e)  Additional wet pond regulations. Wet pond facilities shall have a minimum sustained depth of no less than four (4) feet of water. Concrete bulkheads shall be constructed to contain and surround the entire permanent water surface. Said permanent water surface shall be kept in a constant state of agitation by means of aerator devices, fountains or other approved devices. The number of such devices shall be determined by the city floodplain administrator. 
(f)  Grass establishment. Dry pond facilities shall be required to establish a solid sod grass cover on all side slopes and on bottoms. Wet pond facilities shall establish solid sod grass cover only above the permanent water surface. The nonsloped portion of a maintenance berm may be sprigged or hydro-mulched or solid sodded and the developer shall specify grass variety on the construction plans. 
(g)  Fencing. Fencing of any kind shall be specifically disallowed surrounding or within a pond facility. 
(h)  Screening. Dry pond facilities shall be required to provide a landscaped screening area a minimum of five (5) feet in width to screen the pond facility from view of all public rights-of-way. The screening area shall be required abutting all maintenance berms located between the pond facility and the street right-of-way. The method of required screening is defined in section 9-196(b). 
(i)  Pond location. Pond facilities shall be located to the rear of a building unless deemed necessary by the director such that the resulting building screens portions of the pond facility from view of all street rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-194.3. - Maintenance for construction and post-construction. 
(a)  Responsibility for maintenance. The property owner shall be responsible for the continuous maintenance of all existing and new detention facilities. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, the following: Repair of any concrete drainage structures, repair of side and bottom slopes to maintain engineered topography, reestablishment of any lost vegetation, continuous removal of trash and debris, regular mowing of grass, extermination of rodent, serpent, pests, and mosquito populations, and repair of all aeration devices. All stormwater released shall conform to subsequent requirements of N.P.D.E.S. regulations. 
(b)  Noncompliance. Each pond facility shall be subject to an annual maintenance inspection. Any pond facility found not to be in compliance with these regulations shall be subject to the penal provision contained in this code. Due notice of such noncompliance shall be served to the property owner at the address listed in the most recently approved certified tax roll as provided by Harris County Appraisal District. Method of notice shall be by certified mail when tax roll indicates a physical address; otherwise, regular mail shall be deemed sufficient. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-194.4. - Responsibility for review. 
The city floodplain administrator shall review existing detention facilities within the city for compliance with these design standards. The floodplain administrator shall coordinate a plan of improvement with the owner of such existing facilities to comply, as near as possible, with such requirements. The owner shall comply within a six-month period from notification by the city that such facility is not in compliance. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
ARTICLE X. - LANDSCAPING OF NONRESIDENTIAL SITES 
 
Sec. 9-195. - Applicability. 
(a)  This article shall apply to the following: 
(1)  All new multifamily apartment houses which are required by law to have eight (8) or more offstreet parking spaces. 
(2)  All new nonresidential developments which are required by law to have eight (8) or more offstreet parking spaces. 
(3)  All new gasoline service stations containing two (2) or more service islands. 
(4)  Existing multifamily houses and nonresidential developments which are improved, whether by attached or detached additions, to such an extent that the resulting multifamily apartment house or nonresidential development will be required by law to have eight (8) or more offstreet parking spaces. 
(5)  A change in land use of an existing development that requires the resulting development to have eight (8) or more offstreet parking spaces. 
(6)  Existing nonresidential developments which are required by law to have eight (8) or more offstreet parking spaces and which change ownership after the effective date of Ordinance No. 90-226. 
(b)  Unmanned warehouses used only for the storage of goods, wares or merchandise shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-196. - Definitions. 
Inert architectural material: Brick, stone, pebbles, aggregates, sand, natural forms (driftwood, fossils, seashells, etc.), water forms and other non-living landscape features. Concrete and asphalt paving shall not be considered inert architectural materials and shall not be used in landscape areas. Inert architectural materials shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of any landscape area. 
Ornamental fence or wall: A fence or wall not to exceed three (3) feet in height constructed of masonry, concrete block or brick on a foundation equivalent to outside wall specifications, less live load, as set forth in the most recently adopted City of Pasadena Building Code. 
Planter: An area bounded by curb within a parking lot set aside for landscaping. A planter shall be no less than one hundred thirty-five (135) square feet with a minimum dimension of seven and one-half (7½) feet from the inside curb. 
Plant material: Living trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, sod, flowering annuals, biennials and perennials. Plastic or other artificial plant simulations shall not fulfill requirements for plant material. 
Tree: Any living self-supporting woody plant having at least one (1) well defined stem and growing to a minimum clear wood height of five (5) feet. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-197. - Property perimeter requirements. 
(a)  A landscape area five (5) feet in width shall be required along the front property line and along the side property lines to the building setback line or building, whichever distance is greater. Corner lots shall be treated as having two (2) front property lines. 
(b)  Landscape area(s) between the front property line(s) and the parking area(s) shall provide a three-foot opaque screen within two (2) years of planting using one (1) of the following methods: 
(1)  Plant material or combination of plant material and inert architectural material that will form a continual evergreen hedge. The hedgerow plants shall be no less than five-gallon size, spaced no more than thirty (30) inches on center and of a type and variety specifically approved by the city. 
(2)  A berm, plant material, or combination of plant material and inert architectural material. 
(3)  An ornamental fence or wall, plant materials, or combination of plant material and inert architectural material. 
(c)  Screening opacity may be reduced to fifty (50) per cent when a ten-foot landscape area is provided between the front property line(s) and an internal service drive. 
(d)  Landscape areas along the side property lines shall be improved with plant material or a combination including inert architectural material. 
(e)  On sites not abutting major thoroughfares, there shall be at least one (1) tree of two-inch caliper for every forty (40) linear feet or fraction thereof of front property and side property landscape areas. Trees may be clustered but shall not be planted within any public road right-of-way or utility easement. 
(f)  On sites abutting major thoroughfares, as designated in the official Major Street Plan, there shall be at least one (1) tree of three-inch caliper for every thirty-five (35) linear feet or fraction thereof or one (1) tree of four-inch caliper for every fifty (50) linear feet or fraction thereof of frontage. Trees shall be placed in a boulevard-type manner, approximately on center and a uniform distance from the curb. 
(g)  Nonresidential development abutting an unscreened residential lot, as shown in a properly recorded map or plat of said subdivision, shall build or construct along that abutting property line a wall or fence as described in section 9-4(c). 
(h)  All landscaping shall meet the requirements of section 36-22.1 concerning the intersection visibility triangle. 
(i)  No landscaping exceeding three (3) feet in height shall be located within a ten-foot radius of any driveway/street intersection. Trees within the ten-foot radius shall maintain a minimum of eight (8) feet of visual clearance. 
(j)  Vehicles shall not encroach upon perimeter landscape areas or planters. Either wheel stops must be provided to ensure no vehicle overhang or, in the case where wheel stops are not provided, the perimeter landscape shall be increased to eight (8) feet in width. In such event the interior three (3) feet of width shall be planted with grass or sod only. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-198. - Parking area requirements. 
(a)  A parking lot, at a minimum of twenty (20) stalls, shall provide a planter at the ratio of one (1) for every ten (10) parking stalls or fraction thereof. Planters shall not be attached on more than one (1) side to required perimeter landscape areas. Each planter shall contain one (1) tree or shrub at least four (4) feet in height and plant material or combination of plant material and inert architectural material. 
(b)  Planters may be aggregated but shall serve the entire parking area. 
(c)  All commercial waste receptacles, storage areas, and electrical and mechanical equipment, such as transformers, heat pumps and air conditioners, shall be screened from view from the street. 
(d)  Sidewalks immediately adjacent to parking areas acting as a curb shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-199. - Planting and maintenance. 
(a)  The owner of the property shall be responsible for maintenance of all landscaping in a healthy and growing condition. All unhealthy and dead plant materials shall be replaced at the next appropriate growing season or within six (6) months, whichever comes first. 
(b)  Trees shall be properly guyed and staked as necessary. Stakes and guy wires shall not interfere with either vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(c)  Grass planted as a ground cover shall be sodded along the property line(s) and on berms to reduce erosion, but otherwise may be sprigged or seeded. Other ground cover materials shall be planted as a continual border along property line(s) to reduce erosion. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  All landscape areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply located within fifty (50) feet of all plant material to be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-200. - Site plan requirements, approval, appellate procedures. 
(a)  At the time of application for a building permit, a landscape plan shall be filed with the planning department for review and approval. The landscape plan shall include: 
(1)  Plat or parcel boundaries drawn on a map of suitable scale showing property dimensions. 
(2)  Location of all proposed structures, driveways, parking spaces and other vehicular use areas, internal service drives and easements. 
(3)  Location of existing trees, proposed landscape areas and layout showing placement and spacing of plants. 
(4)  Plant list including type, size, variety and number of plants. 
(5)  Use and placement of inert architectural material within landscape areas. 
(6)  Landscape irrigation plan or exterior plumbing hose bib locations. 
(b)  An exemption from the tree or planter requirement may be granted by the director of planning only: 
(1)  If existing trees are to be preserved which can be substituted for required trees; or 
(2)  If a drainage retention area, required by Harris County Flood Control District, is landscaped to fulfill the same square footage requirements. 
(c)  Appeal of any other requirement set forth herein shall be with the Pasadena Planning and Zoning Commission. The appellant shall clearly state in detail what adjustments are requested and propose an alternative landscape plan. The planning commission may grant approval of the alternative landscape plan if found to be in compliance with accomplishing the basic intent and purpose. 
(d)  Prior to issuing a certificate of occupancy all screening and landscaping must be in place in accordance with the landscape plan. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
ARTICLE XI. - ANTENNA TOWER REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 9-201. - Definitions. 
(a)  In this section the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed: 
(1)  Alteration means any modification, replacement, or reconstruction that increases the height or materially increases the dimension of a tower structure. 
(2)  Director means the planning director or director's designee as executive officer of the city's planning commission. 
(3)  Grade means the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building or structure and a line five (5) feet from the building or structure. 
(4)  Height of building means the vertical distance above a reference datum measured to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of mansard roof or to the average height of the highest gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference datum shall be selected by either of the following, whichever yields a greater height of building: 
a.  The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or ground surface within a five-foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk or ground surface is not more than ten (10) feet above the lowest grade. 
b.  An elevation of ten (10) feet higher than the lowest grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described in paragraph a. above is more than ten (10) feet above lowest grade. 
The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the building. 
(5)  Height of tower means the vertical distance between the finished grade at the base of the tower or the lowest point of contact with the building, and the highest point of the tower structure, excluding the antennae. 
(6)  Monopole means a single, slender and typically cylindrical, vertical structure to which antennae are affixed. 
(7)  Public utility means any person, company, corporation, cooperative corporation, partnership, or any combination thereof, that is subject to both a municipal franchise agreement and the comprehensive regulatory system established by and defined in the Texas Public Utility Regulatory Act, that owns or operates for compensation equipment or facilities for: 
a.  Producing, generating, transmitting, distributing, selling, or furnishing electricity; or 
b.  The conveyance, transmission, or reception of communications over a telephone system as a dominant carrier. 
The term "public utility" shall not include, as is defined in the Public Utility Regulatory Act, telegraph services, television stations, radio stations, community antenna television services, general radio-telephone services, or radio-telephone services authorized under the Public Mobile Radio Services Rules of the Federal Communications Commission or private water companies. 
(8)  Residence means any permanent building or structure containing habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy, designed and used primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating, which is intended to be used or occupied as a dwelling place for residential purposes, whether or not detached, including homes, townhomes, patiohomes, duplexes, triplexes, quadraplexes and condominiums; provided, however, residences shall not include apartment buildings with more than four (4) units. Hotels, motels, boardinghouses, apartment buildings with more than four (4) units, group homes, halfway houses, nursing homes, hospitals, nursery schools, schools, and child care facilities shall not be considered residences. A building or structure located on a lot or tract of land used as the site of a tower shall not be considered a residence so long as its primary use is to contain, house, store, and protect materials or equipment directly related to the purpose and use of the tower. 
(9)  Residential means pertaining to the use of land for a residence as is defined in this section. 
(10)  Residential lot means: 
a.  A lot which is included within a recorded residential subdivision subject to any enforceable, valid and unexpired residential deed restrictions upon which a residence exists or may be constructed pursuant to those valid and applicable deed restrictions; or 
b.  An unrestricted lot upon which a residence exists. 
(11)  Residential restrictions means one (1) or more restrictive covenants contained or incorporated by reference in a properly recorded map, plat, replat, declaration, deed, judgment or other instrument filed in the county real property records, map records, or deed records. 
(12)  Subdivision means all land encompassed within one (1) or more maps or plats of land within the city that is divided into two (2) or more parts and are recorded in the deed, map, or real property records of the county or counties in which the land covered by the map or plat is located. 
(13)  Tower or tower structure means a fixed, freestanding or guyed, uninhabitable structure, not designed as a shelter or to be occupied for any use. This definition includes, but is not limited to, any such structure supporting antennae that transmit or receive any portion of the electromagnetic spectrum of radio waves. The following are, by way of example but not limitation, towers or tower structures: guyed or freestanding monopole structures, lattice or open framed structures, antennae supports, water towers, and other similar self-supporting, trussed, or open framed structures. 
(14)  Calendar days means any day including Saturdays, Sundays, and scheduled holidays designated by city council. 
(15)  Residential neighborhood means: 
a.  Any subdivision wherein a majority of the total number of lots, tracts, parcels, or sites are occupied by residences and from such living units commercial activities are not generally carried out; or 
b.  Any subdivision which is burdened by restrictions which limit the lots, tracts, parcels, and sites within the subdivision so that a majority of such lots, tracts, parcels, or sites may be occupied by only a residence and from such living units commercial activities are not generally carried out; provided however, that for any block in the residential neighborhood therein where a majority of the occupied lots, tracts, parcels, or sites are used for commercial, business, or industrial purposes, such block shall not be considered a "residential neighborhood." 
(16)  Schools means any primary/intermediate/secondary or higher educational institution whether public or private. 
(17)  Day care centers means any facility whether or not known or incorporated under such descriptive title or name such as nursery school, kindergarten, playschool, child development center or early childhood center which cares for thirteen (13) or more children for less than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(18)  Apartments means dwelling units for multifamily in excess of four (4) units. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-202. - Tower permit required. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the building official and approved in accordance with the provisions of this article prior to the construction, placement, or alteration of any tower or tower structure, as defined in this article and not specifically excluded herein, that is located within the boundaries of the municipality. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be required for any tower repaired, replaced, or modified with no resulting increase in height or dimension and any tower repaired, replaced, or modified in order to comply with the requirements of any statute, regulation, order, or rule of the Federal Communications Commission, the Federal Aviation Administration, or any other federal, state, or other governmental agency or authority. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-203. - Exemptions. 
This article does not apply to the following structures: 
(a)  Church bell towers and religious symbols associated with a place of worship; 
(b)  Tower structures less than twenty (20) feet in height; 
(c)  Monopole tower structures less than thirty (30) feet in height; 
(d)  Tower structures used primarily for the support of amateur and citizens' band radio antennae and meeting subsection (b) above; 
(e)  Tower structures that are attached to, placed upon, or constructed on top of a building provided that the height of the tower structure does not exceed ten (10) feet or the height of the building upon which the tower is constructed, whichever is less; 
(f)  Tower structures on real property owned, leased, held or used, or dedicated for use by a public utility for rendering its service, such as tower structures being used primarily for the transmission of electrical power by a public utility or the conveyance of communications over a telephone wire-line system operated by a public utility; 
(g)  High mast monopole structures built, owned or maintained by the Texas Department of Transportation, Harris County, or the City of Pasadena; and 
(h)  Tower structures constructed or placed on land or other structures owned, leased, held, or dedicated for use by the Texas Department of Public Safety, Harris County, the City of Pasadena or other governmental entities or agencies, which land or other structures are used by such governmental entity or agency primarily for rendering fire, police, or other public protection services notwithstanding that such tower structures may be used jointly by such governmental entity or agency and any other public or private person or entity for other and additional public or private purposes. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-204. - Location of towers. 
(a)  No tower permit shall be approved or a building permit issued unless the proposed tower is in compliance with the applicable provisions governing distance requirements, which are as follows: 
(1)  The distance between the base of a single monopole tower, constructed without guy wire attachments, and all residential lots, schools, day care centers and apartments within a residential neighborhood must not be less than: 
a.  One and one-half (1½) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over sixty (60) feet, but not over ninety (90) feet; 
b.  Two (2) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over ninety (90) feet, but not over one hundred five (105) feet; 
c.  Two and one-half (2½) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over one hundred five (105) feet, but not over one hundred twenty (120) feet; or 
d.  Three (3) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over one hundred twenty (120) feet. 
(2)  The distance between the base of a lattice tower, a guyed monopole tower, or any other tower structure and all residential lots, schools, day care centers and apartments within a residential neighborhood must not be less than: 
a.  Three (3) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over forty-five (45) feet, but not over eighty-five (85) feet; 
b.  Three and one-half (3½) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over eighty-five (85) feet, but not over one hundred twenty (120) feet; 
c.  Four (4) times the height of the tower structure if the height of that tower structure is over one hundred twenty (120) feet, but not over one hundred fifty (150) feet; or 
d.  The lesser of: 
(i)  Three (3) times the height of the tower structure; or 
(ii)  One thousand five hundred (1,500) feet if the height of that tower structure is over one hundred fifty (150) feet. 
(b)  All tower permit applications submitted to the city which includes a survey which meets the minimum standards as set forth by the Texas Board of Professional Land Surveyors. All properties within the required setback distance radius can use the distance of a straight horizontal line from the center of the base of the tower to the nearest outside wall of the residential structure on the lot for the setback distance measurement. All other distance measurements referred to in this section, except for those defined in subsection (c), shall be the distance of a straight horizontal line from the center of the base of the tower to the radial tangent of the residential lot. 
(c)  If the tower is constructed, attached to, or placed on a building or similar structure built and designed primarily for the purpose of supporting the tower, then subsection (a) shall apply. The survey provided by the applicant shall be measured from the horizontal distance between the radial tangent of the residential lot and the point on finished grade where a vertical line from the center of the base of the tower strikes the grade. 
(d)  The requirements of subsection (a) do not apply if the applicant provides a notarized affidavit, on a form approved by the building official, of all owners of record of all residential lots within the otherwise applicable distance requirements of this section which evidences a clear intent for the residential lots to be excluded from the protection of this section. 
(e)  A tower which is properly permitted under this article or which was in existence on the date of final passage of the ordinance creating this article, shall not be required to be removed or relocated in order to meet the minimum distance requirements of this article due to subsequent platting of a residential lot nearer to the tower than the distance requirements of this section. However, any alteration to existing tower structures shall require compliance with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(f)  Property uses and distances referred to in this section shall be determined as of the date and time that the completed tower permit application is filed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-205. - Tower security fence. 
(a)  The base of a tower must be completely enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier which limits climbing access to such tower and any supporting systems, lines, wires, buildings or other structures. Exemptions from compliance with this section are provided in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  The fence, wall or barrier required by subsection (a) shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height with no openings, holes, or gaps larger than four (4) inches measured in any direction. 
(c)  Gates and doors allowing direct access to the tower and enclosed by a fence, wall, or barrier, as required by this section, shall be equipped with a lock to keep and capable of keeping such doors or gates securely closed and locked at all times and shall only be built on the side opposite of any public right-of-way. 
(d)  The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Any tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support the tower, provided that the general public has no physical access to the tower; or 
(2)  Existing tower sites having security fences at least six (6) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-206. - Screening fence, residential areas. 
(a)  The base of a tower, including all mechanical equipment and accessory structures, must be screened from view of residential lots by a wooden, substantially opaque screening fence designed and built to provide privacy with a minimum height of eight (8) feet. Exemptions from compliance with this section are provided in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  The screening fence may contain gates or doors allowing access to the tower and accessory structures for maintenance purposes; such gates or doors shall be kept completely closed except for maintenance purposes and shall be located a minimum of eighteen (18) feet from the public right-of-way. 
(c)  The requirements of this section do not apply to: 
(1)  Any tower constructed or placed a distance of more than two (2) times the height of the tower structure from all residential lots; or 
(2)  Any tower located on a building that is not designed or built primarily to support the tower, provided that the general public has no physical access to the tower. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-207. - Landscaping. 
(a)  All applicable tower sites shall have landscaping maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times and in compliance with all applicable ordinances, deed restrictions, and regulations. 
(b)  All towers not exempted in section 9-3 shall be required to file a landscape plan with the planning department prior to issuance of a permit to construct said tower. 
(c)  The landscape plan shall contain at a minimum a landscape area eight (8) feet in width surrounding and immediately adjacent to any fence material required around the base of the tower. 
(d)  Landscape area must be improved with plant material of a height not less than five (5) feet which will provide an opaque screen upon planting. Said landscape area is not required abutting the access gate portion of required fence. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-208. - Application procedures for a tower permit. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall be submitted to the building official in the manner prescribed herein. The applicant shall, with the filing of the completed tower permit application, submit payment of the appropriate tower permit fees established by the building official and approved by city council that are calculated to reasonably cover the expenses of administering the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The application shall not be considered complete unless accompanied by such drawings, descriptive data, filing fees, ownership information, and other pertinent data as is required by the building official. Each application for a tower permit or for a waiver shall include envelopes addressed to the owners and a complete list of those owners, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all property within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the proposed tower site. 
(c)  In the event that any of the required documentation, data, reports, or drawings contain any false or erroneous information known to the applicant, then any permit issued pursuant to that false or erroneous information shall be void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued. 
(d)  The building official shall issue a permit for construction, placement, or alteration of a tower only if it: 
(1)  Conforms to all restrictions relating to the use of the property described in the application; 
(2)  Complies with all local ordinances, rules, and regulations relating to commercial building permits; and 
(3)  Meets the requirements of 14 CRF, Part 77, all other regulations of FAA and FCC, as well as any other regulatory authorities and within jurisdiction this article. 
(e)  No later than the thirtieth calendar day following the filing of the required application, the building official shall issue to the applicant a written notice of approval or disapproval of the tower permit. Any notice of disapproval of a tower permit application must include a written report explaining in detail the reasons for such disapproval. The issuance of a written notice to the applicant shall be complete upon the deposit of such properly addressed notice in the United States mail, first class postage paid. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-209. - Notice requirements for a tower permit. 
(a)  The notice requirements of this section apply only to applications for tower permits for the construction, placement or alteration of towers subject to the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The applicant for a tower permit must post and use reasonable efforts to maintain a sign on the subject tower site for a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days beginning no later than the sixth calendar day following the date of the filing of the required completed application with the building official. The sign shall be posted no less than fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way that is used as access to the tower site. The sign shall face and be legible from the public right-of-way. The sign shall contain at a minimum the following items of information: 
(1)  That this is the proposed site of a tower; 
(2)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The tower permit application number assigned to this project by the City of Pasadena; and 
(4)  The telephone number of the City of Pasadena Permit Division where additional information concerning this project may be obtained. 
The applicant shall remove the sign from the subject tower site after (i) the permit is obtained or (ii) the appeals process is complete. 
(c)  Written notice of the filing of each application for a tower permit or an application for a waiver as is provided for herein, shall be given to the owners, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all property within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the proposed tower site to assure that all owners of record within a distance of two hundred (200) feet receive notice. Notice shall also be given to any established civic organization for that area within a three-hundred-foot radius of the proposed tower site, provided that the organization is registered with the city. Notice to all owners of record and civic organizations registered with the city shall be deemed given if properly addressed and deposited in the United States mail, with first class postage paid. The required written notice shall be in a form prescribed by the building official and shall be mailed no later than the tenth calendar day following the filing of the required completed application. 
(d)  Written notice shall be published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation by the building official not later than the seventh calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application. Such notice shall be published in the section of such newspaper in which other legal notices are commonly published, and shall be headed with the following words (or their reasonable equivalent), on conspicuous type: "NOTICE OF PROPOSED TOWER CONSTRUCTION." The notice shall state the height and location of the proposed tower site, describe the intended use of the tower, and advise that additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official. 
(e)  The "written notice" required in subsection (c) above shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person or entity that will own the proposed tower structure; 
(2)  The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant if different from the owner of the proposed tower; 
(3)  The approximate proposed location of the tower structure including the street address, or nearest street intersection, and the name of the subdivision or survey if there is no recorded subdivision; 
(4)  The proposed use of the tower structure and site; 
(5)  The proposed maximum height above grade of the proposed tower structure; and 
(6)  That additional information may be obtained by writing or calling the office of the building official. 
(f)  Appeal of the building official's decision on an application for a tower permit by either an applicant or property owner within two hundred (200) feet of the tower site shall be made in accordance with section 9-211. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-210. - Application for waiver. 
(a)  An application for a tower permit shall not be approved for a tower that is not in conformance with the regulations prescribed in this article unless a written application for a waiver has been submitted to and approved by the planning director or the city. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit who receives written disapproval from the building official may elect to submit a written application for a waiver to the planning director. An application for a waiver from the requirements of this article may be filed simultaneously with the filing of the application for a tower permit. 
(c)  An application for a waiver must be submitted in such manner as prescribed by the planning director citing the specific provision of this article from which a waiver is desired, the extent of the waiver sought, and the specific facts or reasons why such a waiver is necessary along with all supporting information or documentation. 
(d)  The director or the planning commission of the city, upon an application for a waiver, shall waive the requirements of section 9-204(a) if: 
(1)  One or more intervening buildings, structures, topological features or trees substantially obstruct the view of the tower from residential lots; or 
(2)  The area which is located between the tower and the residences within the distance requirements set forth in section 9-204(a) is predominantly commercial, industrial or business development. 
(e)  A waiver may be allowed where the director, with reasonable justification, has found the following: 
(1)  That a literal application of this article will result in undue and unnecessary hardship or the rights of property owners within the setback area covered by section 9-204(a) would not be significantly harmed by the construction of such tower; 
(2)  The waiver, if granted, will not be contrary to the public interest; 
(3)  The waiver, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in a violation of any other applicable ordinance, regulation or statute; and 
(5)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in the violation of any applicable deed restriction. 
(f)  No later than the thirtieth calendar day following the filing of the required application for a waiver, the director shall issue to the applicant a written notice that the waiver has been granted or refused. Any notice of refusal of an application for a waiver must include a written report explaining in detail the reasons for such refusal. The issuance of a written notice to the applicant shall be complete upon deposit of such notice in the United States Mail, first class postage paid, addressed to the applicant at the address given on the application for the waiver. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-211. - Appeal and hearing procedures. 
(a)  Persons who own property within two hundred (200) feet of a proposed tower site and who have reasonable grounds to believe that approval of an application for a tower permit, the granting of a waiver for the proposed construction will unreasonably impact safety for adjacent land uses or violate any applicable restriction, rule, regulation, or ordinance may request a hearing before the planning commission to protest and present evidence establishing their allegations. Such hearing request must state the specific grounds relied upon and be presented to the office of the planning director no later than 2:00 p.m. on the thirty-seventh calendar day following the date of filing of the required completed application. Copies of all supporting documents, instruments, or other materials that are to be presented to the commission shall accompany such hearing request and shall be available for inspection and photocopying. 
(b)  An applicant for a tower permit or a waiver has until 2:00 p.m. on the seventh calendar day following the issuance of a notice of disapproval or refusal by the building official to file a written notice of appeal to the planning commission. The notice of appeal and request for hearing must be filed in the manner prescribed. 
(c)  Notice of the time, place, and location of the public hearing at which the protest or appeal is to be presented must be given by the planning commission before the tenth day before the date of the hearing by: 
(1)  Publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and county in which the land that is the subject of the waiver is located; 
(2)  By written notice delivered to the applicant, such written notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail, first class postage; and 
(3)  By written notice delivered to the owners, as is indicated by the most recently approved tax rolls, of all property located within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the property upon which the waiver is requested. Such written notice shall be served by depositing the same, properly addressed and postage paid, in the United States Mail, first class postage. 
(d)  All properly filed appeals and protests concerning the approval or disapproval of an application for a tower permit or the granting or refusal of an application for a waiver for a particular project shall be considered in a single public hearing by a majority vote action of the planning commission. The public hearing shall be scheduled by the director at the next available planning commission meeting, assuming that proper notice has been given. 
(e)  At the public hearing on the application for a waiver, a waiver shall only be allowed where the commission, following a full hearing, has found the following: 
(1)  That a literal application of this article will result in undue and unnecessary hardship; 
(2)  The waiver, if granted, will not be contrary to the public interest; 
(3)  The waiver, if granted, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare; 
(4)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in a violation of any other applicable ordinance, regulation or statute; and 
(5)  The waiver, if granted, will not result in the violation of any applicable deed restriction. 
(f)  No action may be taken by the planning commission unless approved by a majority vote of the members of the commission at which the application for a tower permit or a waiver is considered. 
(g)  If the planning commission rejects an application for a tower permit or a waiver, or otherwise refused to approve a tower permit or grant a waiver, the planning commission shall issue a written report explaining in detail the reasons for such rejection, disapproval, or refusal. Such written report shall be issued not later than sixty (60) calendar days from the date the application was filed. 
(h)  The decision of the planning commission concerning the issuance or denial of a tower permit or the granting or refusal of a waiver shall be the final administrative determination of the issue presented. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-212. - Building permit requirement and plan review. 
(a)  A tower permit obtained pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become invalid after the passage of ninety (90) days from the date of final approval of the tower permit unless any required building permit for the construction or alteration of the tower has been obtained before the expiration of that ninety-day period. 
(b)  The construction, placement, or alteration of a tower is subject to any plan review, permitting requirement, or hearing process applicable to commercial construction in general which is required by ordinance or by the rules promulgated; provided that such regulation or rules are consistent with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-213. - Maintenance and inspection. 
(a)  All buildings, structures, supporting structures, wires, fences, or ground areas used in connection with a tower shall be maintained in a safe condition and in good working order. All equipment or machinery required by the building code, the fire code, or any other applicable regulation or ordinance for a building or structure or supporting structure or device shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or operator of a tower shall be responsible for the maintenance of the tower, supporting structures, buildings, fences, and ground areas. 
(b)  By applying for a tower permit under this article, the applicant specifically grants permission to the city, its duly authorized agents, officials, and employees, to enter upon the property for which a permit or waiver is sought, after first providing reasonable notice, for the purpose of making all inspections required or authorized to be made under this article, the fire code, the building code, the city health code or any other applicable regulation, rule, or ordinance. 
(c)  Every five (5) years after its initial construction, the structural integrity of each antenna tower shall be certified in writing by a state licensed civil engineer. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-214. - Deed restriction affidavit. 
(a)  Every applicant for a tower permit or a waiver shall furnish an affidavit setting forth that the applicant is familiar with the title to the real property to which the requested permit appertains and that the intended use will not violate any applicable deed restrictions. Such affidavit shall be accompanied with a certified copy of the instruments containing the deed restrictions, or the instrument of revocation or termination, or the declaratory judgment, or any other recorded document containing restrictions that affect the use of the property. 
(b)  A tower permit shall not be issued until the requested affidavit and supporting documentation has been produced. Any permit issued on the basis of erroneous documentation known to the applicant or an affidavit which contains false information known to the applicant is void with the same force and effect as if it had never been issued and without the necessity of any action by the city or any other person or agency. A tower permit shall not be issued for the construction or alteration of a tower if the use or the intended use will be in violation of the recorded deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-215. - Permitted hours for construction and maintenance. 
Construction, placement, removal, maintenance, alterations, or modifications to a tower or equipment storage facility for a tower shall not be performed except between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of any day, except in a bona fide emergency; provided however, that the owner, operator, or his agents may perform regular maintenance between the hours of 9:00 p.m. through 7:00 a.m. as long as it does not create an unreasonable noise. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-216. - Penalty for violation. 
(a)  Failure of any person to comply with any provision of this article shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. All authority granted to the city attorney, building official, planning director, planning commission and their designees under this article shall be exercised uniformly on behalf of and against all citizens and property of the city. 
(b)  If the building official, or one of his designees, makes a determination that a violation exists, a notice to comply shall be served on the owner or operator of the tower structure. The notice to comply shall be served as provided in subsection (e) below. 
(c)  After the expiration of ten (10) days from the date on which the notice to comply is served, the building official or his designee shall inspect the tower structure and site described in the notice. If the violation no longer exists, then the building official shall make a record of his findings, close the matter and take no further action. If the violation has not been abated, corrected, or in the process of being corrected, then he shall cause to be issued to the owner or operator of a tower structure a citation informing the violator of the specific provision of this article that is being violated, describing the condition causing the violation, and requiring the violator to appear before a magistrate. 
(d)  Each notice to comply must contain the following information: 
(1)  That the building official has made a determination that a violation exists; 
(2)  The specific condition that constitutes a violation of this article; 
(3)  The specific provision of this article that is being violated; 
(4)  The street address or general description of the property upon which the tower structure that is in violation of this article is constructed; and 
(5)  That the owner or operator receiving this notice must abate, cease, or correct the violation not later than the tenth day after the date on which this notice is served. 
(e)  The notice to comply shall be served on the owner or operator of a tower structure in the following manner: 
(1)  In person or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested; or 
(2)  If the owner cannot be located or identified or otherwise refuses to accept service as provided in this subsection, by posting a copy on the property upon which the tower structure exists and by publishing the notice to comply in a newspaper of general circulation in the county, two (2) times within seven (7) consecutive days. In the event service is accomplished pursuant to this subparagraph, it shall be deemed that the notice to comply was served on the second day such notice is published in a newspaper of general circulation for purposes of calculating the passage of the ten-day period provided by this section for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-217. - City attorney authorized to file suit to abate violation. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to file suit on behalf of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin or abate a violation of this article. This penalty shall be cumulative and in addition to any other civil or criminal penalty provisions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 9-218. - Transitional provision. 
The provisions of this article shall apply only to towers constructed, placed, or altered after the effective date of this article, except for the fencing requirements of section 9-205 which shall be applicable to all towers subject to this article. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Chapter 9½ - BUSES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of traffic and transportation, § 2-133 et seq.; auto wreckers, Ch. 7; junked vehicles, § 20-71 et seq.; motor vehicle dealers, Ch. 22; taxicabs, Ch. 35; traffic, Ch. 36; marking of school buses, § 36-14; flashing signals on school buses, § 36-15; procedure upon meeting or overtaking school buses, § 36-40; bus stops, § 36-179; traffic and transportation commission, § 36-206 et seq. 
 
Sec. 9½-1. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have meanings herein ascribed to them, except as otherwise indicated: 
Bus shall mean any motor vehicle designed or adapted to be used for the transportation of passengers and operated for hire, over the streets of the city, which takes passengers without the city limits to points within the city limits or from points within the city limits to points without the city limits. 
Director shall mean the director of the department of traffic and transportation and his duly authorized representatives. 
Driver shall mean the person who actually drives and manages a bus upon the streets. 
Operator shall mean the person, firm or corporation owning a bus or having such interest therein as entitles him to the rights of an owner thereof, unless the context requires a different meaning. 
Street shall include any street, alley, avenue, lane or public place, square or highway within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
No operator of any bus or any line of buses shall permit or cause to be driven, nor shall any driver of any bus, drive upon any street of the city any bus which does not comply with all the provisions of this chapter. It shall be a violation of this chapter on the part of any operator of a bus or line of buses and on the part of the driver to fail to comply and to fail to require compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-3. - Compliance with ordinances and laws applicable to motor vehicles. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or the granting of any license in the operation of any bus, every person in any manner connected therewith shall conform to and observe all present and all future ordinances of the city and all laws of the state applicable to the operation of motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-4. - State law preemption. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, to the extent that the general laws of the state preempt the city in the regulation of buses, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-5. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bus in the city unless such person holds a license authorizing such operation issued as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-6. - Certificate of public convenience and necessity—Prerequisite to issuance. 
No license shall be granted under this chapter until the applicant therefor has obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-7. - Same—Application and accompanying data. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate a bus or buses shall file with the director an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity, which application shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and post office address of the applicant; and if the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of the partners; and if the applicant is a corporation, the name and places of residence of the then acting officers of such corporation. 
(2)  The number of buses to be operated, and the seating capacity of each of such vehicles. 
(3)  The route over the streets of the city which the applicant desires to follow in the operation of such bus or buses. 
(4)  The approximate number of trips daily to be made by the applicant's bus or buses over the prescribed route. 
(5)  The schedule of fares to be charged by the applicant for the services rendered. 
(6)  The applicant's qualifications for providing the service to be rendered. 
(b)  Such application shall be accompanied by supporting statements or certificates containing the following information: 
(1)  A map or sketch in triplicate showing the proposed route to be traveled by the bus or buses operated by the applicant. 
(2)  The director may require such other information as in his judgment may be necessary to fully consider the applicant's facilities and ability to safely and satisfactorily perform the service to be rendered. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-8. - Same—Notice of application and hearing thereon. 
(a)  The director shall cause a notice of each application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this chapter to be published in the official newspaper of the city for one day, the cost of publishing such notice to be paid in advance by the applicant. Such notice shall set forth the fact that such application has been filed, and shall state that a hearing will be held in the council chamber of the city hall, and shall designate the time, which shall be not less than five (5) days nor more than fifteen (15) days after the first publication of such notice. Notice shall also be posted to comply with the open meetings act. 
(b)  The director shall record the hearing at the expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-9. - Same—Consideration of application; issuance. 
(a)  The director, upon receipt of an application for a certificate of public convenience and necessity and the supporting information required by this chapter, shall take into consideration the merits of the application, the demands of public convenience and necessity for the service to be rendered, the number, kind, type of equipment to be used by the applicant, and such other relevant facts as the director may deem advisable or necessary, which may throw light on the public convenience and necessity. 
(b)  If the director finds from his investigation, and after a hearing, that the public convenience and necessity justify the operation of the bus or buses for which the certificate is desired, the director shall issue a certificate that the public necessity and convenience will be served by permitting the operation by the applicant of the number and sort of buses set forth in his application, or so many thereof as the director finds the public necessity and convenience demand, along the routes and upon the schedules proposed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-10. - Same—Appeals by applicant. 
If any applicant for a certificate of public convenience and necessity under this chapter is dissatisfied with the decision rendered by the director, such applicant shall have the right of appeal to the mayor and city council, which appeal shall be perfected by his delivering to the city secretary a letter addressed to the mayor and city council, stating that an appeal from the decision of the director to the council is desired. The city council, within ten (10) days after receiving such notice of appeal from the findings of the director, shall grant the applicant a hearing, and after such hearing may sustain, reverse or modify the decision made by the director. The council's decision shall be certified to the director and should such decision be in favor of granting an application theretofore denied by the director, or of granting an applicant a certificate for the operation of more buses or upon other schedules than those approved by the director, the director shall then issue the certificate of public necessity and convenience in accordance with the decision of the council. If, however, in the first instance, no appeal is taken from the decision made by the director within the time provided, such decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-11. - Fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for a license required by this chapter shall be as follows: 
(1)  For each bus to be operated, having a seating capacity of thirty (30) or more, the sum of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
(2)  For each bus to be operated, having a seating capacity of more than twenty-four (24) and less than thirty (30), the sum of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00). 
(3)  For each bus to be operated, having a seating capacity of more than nineteen (19) and less than twenty-five (25), the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(4)  For each bus to be operated, having a seating capacity of more than fourteen (14) and less than twenty (20), the sum of ninety dollars ($90.00). 
(5)  For each bus to be operated, having a seating capacity of less than fifteen (15), the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  The license fees provided for hereunder shall be paid on an annual basis and if the holder of any license shall not, on or before the expiration of one year from the date of issue thereof, pay in advance the license fee for the succeeding year, such license shall thereupon terminate and come to an end. 
(c)  If a license is not finally granted, the applicant shall be entitled to a refund of the amount he has paid as the license fee for the first year. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-12. - Transfer. 
A license granted under this chapter shall be personal to the person to whom it is granted and shall not be transferred without consent of the director. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-13. - Duties and powers of director, department of traffic and transportation. 
(a)  The department of traffic and transportation and its director shall be charged with the active supervision of the operations of all buses operating under license and regulated by the city. It shall be the duty of such department and director to: 
(1)  Maintain a continuous inspection and supervision of the service rendered the public by such buses; 
(2)  From time to time, render to the mayor and city council a public report on the quality, adequacy and efficiency of the service rendered the public by such buses; 
(3)  Maintain a continuous inspection and supervision of the rates, fares, tolls and charges collected from the public by such buses; 
(4)  Analyze and study such rates, fares, tolls and charges and from time to time render to the mayor and city council a public report on such rates, fares, tolls and charges; 
(5)  In the event any rate, fare, toll or charge becomes excessive and renders to any operator a return in excess of a fair return, apply to the city council, on behalf of the public, for a reduction in such rate, fare, toll or charge, and prepare and present the public's case in the ensuing hearing; 
(6)  In the event of an application by an operator for an increase in a rate, fare, toll or charge, prepare and present the public's case in the ensuing hearing; 
(7)  Render assistance to the tax assessor and collector in the valuation of the tangible and intangible properties of any buses for ad valorem taxation; 
(8)  Report to the city council any failure or refusal of any operator to permit examination and inspection by such department and director of the books, accounts, papers and documents of such bus line and make recommendations thereon. 
(b)  In connection with its duties, the department of traffic and transportation and its director are empowered: 
(1)  To recommend to council approval or disapproval of any change, alteration or extension of any service rendered to the public, proposed by any operator; 
(2)  To direct improvements in the service being rendered by any operator; 
(3)  To examine and carefully inspect all of the books, accounts, papers and documents, as well as the property of any such operator; 
(4)  To call on any operator for financial statements and reports on services rendered; 
(5)  To take all other steps necessary to improve the service rendered the public and to assure fair and reasonable rates, fares, tolls and charges; 
(6)  Except where the routing of a bus line is specifically and specially controlled by an ordinance of the city council, the director, subject to prior approval of council, shall have the right, power and authority to control, regulate and designate all routes, to be traveled within the city by motor buses furnishing mass transportation of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81) 
Cross reference— Department of traffic and transportation, § 2-133 et seq.  
Sec. 9½-14. - Insurance. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, no license issued under this chapter shall become effective until the person to whom such license is granted shall have filed with the director a standard policy of public liability and property damage executed by an insurance company duly and legally authorized to do business in the state, such policy to be performed in Harris County and to be approved by the director, and insuring the general public against any loss or damage that may result to person or property from the operation of buses covered by such license. 
(b)  The public liability and property damage insurance herein provided for shall have limits of not less than the following amounts for bodily injuries to or death of any of the following person or persons: 
Seating Capacity 
(number of passengers) 	Limit for Bodily 
Injuries to or 
Death of One 
Person 	Limit for Bodily 
Injuries to or Death 
of All Persons Injured 
or Killed in Any one 
Accident, Subject to a 
Maximum of 
$100,000.00 for 
Bodily Injuries to or 
Death of One Person 
7 or less 	$5,000.00 	$300,000.00 
8 to 12 	5,000.00 	400,000.00 
13 to 20 	5,000.00 	500,000.00 
21 to 30 	5,000.00 	600,000.00 
31 or more 	5,000.00 	700,000.00 
 
For the injury or destruction of property in any one accident, limit of liability shall be not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). 
(c)  Such insurance shall be for the protection of the passengers of such bus or buses as well as for the general public but shall not cover personal injuries sustained by the servants, agents or employees of the person filing same. Policies issued under this section shall contain a provision for a continuing liability thereon up to the full amount thereon, notwithstanding a recovery thereon. 
(d)  If the director shall determine, after a hearing duly had, and after ten (10) days' notice is given to the operator, that any standard policy of insurance filed with the director has become so impaired so as to afford less protection to the public than when originally filed, he shall require a new and additional policy so as to bring the protection of such insurance to its original amount, the operator shall have five (5) days' notice after receiving notice of such requirement to provide the new or additional policy. In the event such operator fails to provide the additional policy required, his license shall automatically terminate and expire. 
(e)  Neither the city nor any of its officers shall be liable for the pecuniary responsibility or solvency of any such insurance or in any manner become liable for any sum on account of such claim or act of omission nor for any failure on the part of any of its officers or employees to have required either strict or substantial compliance by any operator with any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-15. - Certificate of self-insurance in lieu of insurance. 
(a)  A bus operator may, in lieu of the insurance requirements provided for in section 9½-14, file with the director a certificate of self-insurance issued by the state department of public safety in accordance with the provisions of the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Law. In the event of the cancellation at any time of the certificate of self-insurance, the right of the holder of the bus license to operate buses thereunder on the streets of the city shall automatically be suspended and shall remain suspended until the restoration of the certificate of self-insurance or until the holder of the license complies with all the provisions of section 9½-14 concerning liability insurance. 
(b)  This section does not and shall not be construed to reduce the minimum insurance requirements of section 9½-14 based on seating capacity. The certificate of self-insurance shall only be accepted in lieu of an insurance policy in an amount which would be required to establish "proof of financial responsibility," as defined in subsection 10 of Section 1 of Article 1 of the Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Law, and any excess over that amount must be supplied by a policy of insurance. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-16. - Maintenance. 
All buses shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and every bus shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected at least once in each twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-17. - Equipment. 
All buses shall be equipped with rear vision mirrors, a double windshield wiper, a partition or other guard to keep passengers from standing to the left of the driver, proper headlights and taillights which shall always be in good working condition and which shall be lit from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise while and if the bus is being driven and four-wheel brakes which may be either hydraulic or air brakes and which shall always be kept in first-class working order. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-18. - Rates to be fixed by council. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, and notwithstanding the granting of any license pursuant to this chapter, the rates to be charged by the operator of any bus or line of buses shall and may be fixed and determined from time to time by the city council and such rates may be changed from time to time by the city council where passengers are transported for hire wholly within the city limits. Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any ordinance fixing such rates. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-19. - Posting of rates and routes. 
Every bus shall have posted in a conspicuous place in the bus the route to be travelled thereby and a schedule of the rates of fares and shall have painted on the front and on the rear thereof, or on both sides, a serial bus number indicating the bus route in accordance with such classification and enumeration of routes as the director may devise and order. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-20. - Inspection; correction of defects. 
The director, or his duly appointed representative, may at any time make tests and inspections of all buses, and if, as a result of such inspection, any bus is found to be in an unsatisfactory condition, the owner or operator thereof shall be notified of the defects observed and shall immediately correct same to the satisfaction of the director. If the director finds any bus to be unfit or unsafe for the carriage of passengers, he shall forthwith notify the operator of such bus or line of buses and such operator shall not thereafter cause or permit such bus to be operated on any street of the city until it has been made safe for the carriage of passengers. The director and any employee whom he may designate to the duty of inspection of buses shall be given free and ready access to all buses. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-21. - Drivers not to smoke or use tobacco. 
Drivers of buses shall not smoke or use tobacco during the time they are driving such buses. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-22. - Drivers not to work more than twelve hours in twenty-four-hour period. 
No driver of a bus shall drive the bus for more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period and no owner of any bus shall permit any person to drive such bus more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-23. - Doors to be closed while in motion. 
The doors of a bus shall be securely closed at all times while the bus is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-24. - Receipt or discharge of passengers generally. 
Bus passengers shall not be received or discharged in the travelled portion of any street, but if passengers are to be received or discharged, the driver shall pull the bus to the curb and discharge the passengers on the side of the bus immediately against the curb. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-25. - Designation of loading points. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any license granted under this chapter, the city reserves the right, by ordinance or by rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to any ordinance in effect at this time or hereafter passed, to designate certain areas within the city and certain portions of certain streets within the city and upon which passengers may not be loaded or discharged by any bus except at loading points to be so designated and to provide by penal ordinance for the prevention of loading or unloading within such areas or upon such streets except at such designated loading points. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-26. - Intoxicated passengers; indecent language by passengers. 
No person who is intoxicated shall be permitted to enter or ride in a bus, and no person shall curse or swear or use any indecent language in any bus. It shall be the duty of the driver of any bus to eject from such bus any person violating this section or to report such violation to a peace officer at the first opportunity. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-27. - Passengers not to ride on outside or block driver's vision. 
No driver of a bus shall permit or allow passengers or employees to stand or ride on the running board, dash board, fender or any outside portion of the bus, nor shall he permit any passenger to stand in such a position that the driver's vision forward or to the right front or left is blocked. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-28. - Conversation between driver and passengers. 
No driver of any bus shall converse with any passenger while the bus is in motion except to give necessary information, but he shall give his entire attention to the operation of the bus while the same is in motion. A sign or poster shall be carried in plain view of all passengers on a bus stating: "No passenger shall converse with the driver while the bus is in motion." 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-29. - Accident reports. 
Bus operators shall make immediate report to the director of each and every accident in which any bus is involved. Such report shall give the time and place of the accident, the number and names of all persons injured or killed, both passengers and nonpassengers. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-30. - Chapter does not affect city's right to regulate operation of vehicles. 
Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter or any license granted under this chapter, the city reserves the right, by ordinance or any other lawful rule or regulation, to regulate the operation of all motor vehicles on the streets of the city. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Sec. 9½-31. - Appeals from and stay of orders, rules or regulations of director under chapter. 
(a)  Any person dissatisfied with any order, rule or regulation of the director made by him pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall have the same right of appeal to the city council which is provided by section 9½-10 for appeals from his refusal to grant a certificate of public necessity and convenience, all of which appeals shall be perfected in the manner therein provided and shall be acted upon by the city council in the manner therein provided. Any appeal from any order, rule or decision of the director shall be perfected within ten (10) days from the date of the order, rule or regulation appealed from, and not thereafter. 
(b)  Upon the application of any person aggrieved by or dissatisfied by a rule, order or regulation made by the director pursuant to any provision of this chapter, the mayor may, if in his opinion the public safety or welfare will not be endangered by a temporary stay thereof, stay the effect and force of such rule, regulation or order pending appeal therefrom as hereinabove provided or pending the lapse of time within which to perfect an appeal. 
(Ord. No. 81-247, § 1, 12-22-81)  
Chapter 10 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 2009-157, § 1, adopted August 4, 2009, amended chapter in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 10, §§ 10-1—10-10, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 03-22, §§ 1, 2, 2-4-03. 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Office of emergency management created. 
The Office of Emergency Management for the City of Pasadena is hereby created and constituted in accordance with state law as follows: 
(a)  The chief executive officer of the city, the mayor, is designated as the director of the office of emergency management. 
(b)  The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. The director may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the emergency management coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the director. 
(c)  The director hereby appoints the emergency management coordinator. The emergency management coordinator shall serve at the pleasure of the director and shall be charged with the preparation of an emergency management plan for the City of Pasadena, operational supervision of the office, and such other duties as may be authorized and prescribed by the director. 
(d)  The emergency management coordinator shall serve as the department head for the office of emergency management. 
(e)  The emergency management coordinator shall be assisted by deputy coordinators, who shall serve as employees of the city within the office of emergency management. 
(f)  The operational emergency management organization of the City of Pasadena may consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plans, as well as organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-2. - Emergency management director; powers and duties. 
The powers and duties of the office of emergency management shall be exercised by the director either directly or by delegation, and shall include the following: 
(a)  Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster was to occur. 
(b)  Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the City of Pasadena. 
(c)  The drafting, execution and recommendation for adoption by the city council of any and all mutual aid plans and agreements deemed essential or desirable for the implementation of the city's emergency plan and coordination of combined disaster services efforts. 
(d)  Authority to declare a local state of disaster. "Disaster" in this chapter shall mean the occurrence or imminent threat of widespread or severe damage, injury, or loss of life or property resulting from any natural or manmade cause, including fire, flood, earthquake, wind, storm, wave action, oil spill or other water contamination, volcanic activity, epidemic air contamination, blight, drought, infestation, explosion, riot, hostile military or paramilitary action, other public calamity requiring emergency action, or energy emergency. "Energy emergency" shall mean a temporary statewide, regional, or local shortage of petroleum, natural gas, or liquid fuel energy supplies that make emergency measures necessary to reduce demand or allocate supply. The declaration of a local state of disaster may not be continued, nor may it be extended, for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary. After the declaration of a local state of disaster, the director may in the interest of public safety and welfare, make orders for the following items, including but not limited to: 
(1)  A general curfew prohibiting any person or persons not officially authorized in connection with the civil emergency from walking, running, loitering, standing, motoring, or otherwise moving upon any alley, street, highway, public property, or vacant premises in the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena, applicable to such geographical areas and during such hours of the day or night as deemed necessary and advisable. 
(2)  The discontinuance of the sale of all alcoholic beverages and/or the closing of all establishments of portions thereof wherein the consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages is permitted. 
(3)  The discontinuance of the selling, distributing, or giving away of gasoline or other flammable or combustible products. 
(4)  The closing of gasoline stations and other establishments or portions thereof, the chief or a major activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable of combustible products. 
(5)  The discontinuance of the selling, distributing, dispensing or giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever. 
(6)  The closing of any or all establishments or portions thereof, a chief or major activity of which is the sale, distribution, dispensing or giving away of firearms and/or ammunition. 
(7)  The protection of life and property by such means as are imminently necessary and authorized under state law. 
(8)  The suspension or modification of the formal bidding requirements for purchase of goods and services as authorized by state law. 
(9)  The suspension or modification of the requirements for itinerant vendors' permits, electrician licenses, and similar regulations so as to give due consideration to the license, certificate, or other permit issued to a person by a state or any political subdivision of any state evidencing qualifications for professional, mechanical, or other skills, so that the person may render aid involving the skill to meet the emergency or disaster. 
(e)  Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations, or directives necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Proclamations, regulations, and directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their content to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede such action, promptly filed with the city secretary. 
(f)  The control and direction of all operations of the City of Pasadena emergency management organization. 
(g)  Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city. 
(h)  Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, or federal emergency management organizations. 
(i)  Marshalling of necessary personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city to aid in implementation of the provisions of the emergency management plan. 
(j)  Supervision over drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with representatives of the state and of other political subdivisions of the state, and drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county and other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management efforts. 
(k)  Supervision and final authorization for the procurement of necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city. 
(l)  Authorizing agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes. 
(m)  Survey the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a disaster provided for herein. 
(n)  Other requirements and powers as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (Chapter 418 Government Code, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes). 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-3. - Emergency management plan. 
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. 
(a)  The plan shall set forth the form of the organization, tasks, duties, and powers, and designation of officers and employees to carry out the provisions of the plan. 
(b)  As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the Governor's Division of Emergency Management for the State of Texas, and must include the following: 
(1)  Wage, price, and rent control and other economic stabilization methods in the event of disaster; and 
(2)  Curfews, blockades and limitations on utility usage in an area affected by disaster, rules governing ingress and egress to the affected area and other security measures. 
(c)  Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the governor's division of emergency management. 
(d)  City of Pasadena departments and agencies will perform the functions assigned by the plan and maintain their portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. 
(e)  City departments, officers, and employees will be trained in emergency management topics and procedures to carry-out the objectives of the plan, and to comply with all federal and state requirements for emergency management. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec 10-4. - Pasadena Security Council. 
(a)  The mayor hereby establishes the Pasadena Security Council to advise and assist the mayor and the office of emergency management in matters relating to disaster mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery. The council will also serve as an advisory entity for matters relating to Homeland Security, as they pertain to the City of Pasadena and its citizens. 
(b)  The Pasadena Security Council is composed of the heads of city departments, agencies, and private-sector partners, including organized volunteer groups. 
(c)  The council is comprised of the mayor, the emergency management coordinator, and the following positions within the City of Pasadena: 
(1)  City of Pasadena Mayor Pro Tem. 
(2)  City of Pasadena Chief of Police. 
(3)  City of Pasadena Fire Chief. 
(4)  City of Pasadena City Attorney. 
(5)  City of Pasadena Health Director. 
(6)  City of Pasadena Public Works Director. 
(7)  City of Pasadena Public Information Officer. 
(8)  Other City of Pasadena Department Heads or Managers as designated by the mayor. 
(d)  In addition, the council may include the following representatives and others as may be designated: 
(1)  Director of the entity providing EMS service for the City of Pasadena. 
(2)  Superintendent of Schools, Pasadena Independent School District. 
(3)  One (1) local hospital CEO, chosen and appointed by the mayor. 
(4)  Pasadena Chamber of Commerce President. 
(5)  East Harris County Manufacturer's Association Pasadena Outreach Group Chair. 
(6)  Southeast Regional LEPC President. 
(7)  San Jacinto College President. 
(8)  Representation from local VOAD (Volunteer Organizations Active in Disasters), such as Salvation Army, American Red Cross, etc. 
(9)  Representation from local utility companies, to include telephone, gas, and electric. 
(10)  Other local business and industry representatives, as appointed by the mayor. 
(e)  Administration. 
(1)  The Pasadena Security Council is an advisory entity administered by the office of emergency management. 
(2)  The mayor may adopt rules as necessary for the operation of the security council. 
(3)  The mayor hereby designates the emergency management coordinator as the presiding officer of the security council. 
(4)  The security council shall meet at the call of the mayor, and shall meet at least once per semi-annum in each calendar year. 
(f)  The Pasadena Security Council shall advise the mayor on: 
(1)  The improvement of the city's comprehensive emergency management plan through coordination of the plans of public and private entities throughout the city. 
(2)  The development and coordination of a city-wide critical infrastructure protection strategy. 
(3)  The implementation of the mayor's homeland security strategy. 
(4)  Other matters related to the planning, coordination, and implementation of initiatives to promote the city's emergency management plan or homeland security strategy. 
(g)  Special advisory committees. 
(1)  The mayor may appoint one or more special advisory committees composed of representatives from city departments or nongovernmental entities, whether or not those entities are represented on the council. 
(2)  The mayor shall determine the number of members and qualifications for membership on a special advisory committee under this section. 
(3)  A special advisory committee under this section shall assist the council in performing its duties. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-5. - Interjurisdictional program. 
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of Harris County and the mayors of the other cities in said county in the formation of an Emergency Management Council for the County of Harris, or a portion thereof, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management insofar as said program may affect the City of Pasadena. This would include the cooperation of the Pasadena Security Council in a joint Security Council for the County of Harris, or a portion thereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-6. - Override of existing regulations. 
To the extent allowed by law, at all times when orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-7. - Liability. 
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and neither the City of Pasadena, the agents and representatives of said city or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained by any persons as a result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the City of Pasadena a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or part of parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, practice emergency, may together with his successors in interest, if any, to the extent allowed by law, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege, or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-8. - Commitment of funds. 
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the director may expend and/or commit public funds of the city and execute mutual aid agreements when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-9. - Offenses; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to knowingly do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of identification as a member of the Emergency Management Organization of the City of Pasadena unless authority to do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to knowingly operate or cause to be operated a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal or the termination of a warning signal. 
(d)  With the exception of members of the emergency management organization who are working to carry out the objectives of their duties, each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Sec. 10-10. - Conflict; severability. 
This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute, or with any military or naval order, rule, or regulation. If any portion of this chapter shall, for any reason, be declared invalid, such validity shall not affect the remaining provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 09-157, § 1, 8-4-09)  
Chapter 11 - ELECTIONS 
 
Sec. 11-1. - State law and Charter to govern. 
All elections pertaining to municipal affairs shall be governed by the election laws of the state and the Charter of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 11-1) 
Charter reference— Elections, Art. IV. 
State Law reference— Elections generally, V.A.T.S. Election Code.  
Secs. 11-2—11-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 00-148, § 1, adopted October 3, 2000, deleted former §§ 11-2—11-6 in their entirety. These sections pertained to the following: city divided into councilmanic districts; means of qualification to accompany application to become candidate for mayor or councilman; residence requirements for candidates for council; general duties of mayor, city secretary and council; withdrawal of candidate; Code does not affect ordinances designating voting. Former §§ 11-2—11-6 were derived from the following: Ord. No 68-80, §§ 1, 2, 6-11-68; Ord. No. 76-95, §§ 1—4, 6-8-76; Ord. No. 80-124, § 1, 6-24-80; Ord. No. 73-44, § 1, 2-20-73; Ord. No. 68-80, § 3, 6-11-68; Code of 1964, § 11-2; Code of 1964, § 11-5.  
Chapter 12 - ELECTRICAL CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), adopted January 17, 2017, amended chapter 12 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 12, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Electrical installations in theaters, § 5-24; buildings containing defective wiring declared as fire hazards, § 13-118(1); buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; signs, Ch. 31. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 12-1. - Purpose. 
This Code is an ordinance providing minimum requirements and standards for the practical safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising from the installation of electrical systems and the use of electricity. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration to, use, or maintenance of electrical systems within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-3. - Adoption of codes and state laws. 
The City of Pasadena Mayor and City Council, with the recommendation of the City of Pasadena Electrical Board, does hereby adopt the most current edition of the National Electrical Code, as adopted by the Texas State Legislature in its most current form (excluding Article 80) and all relative elements of Chapter 12 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-4. - Administration and enforcement. 
Definitions. No terms in this electrical code are deemed as gender specific: 
Administrative "HOLD" prevents a contractor or location from acquisition of electrical or other permits pending a requested appeals review by the electrical board or other appropriate body, made to the permit department. 
Apprentice electrician* is a person undertaking "electrical work," as defined in this Code, under the direct, personal supervision and control of either a licensed master electrician, sign master electrician, journeyman electrician, journeyman lineman, sign journeyman electrician, residential journeyman electrician or maintenance electrician. 
Approved, as to materials, equipment and method of construction, refers to approval by the chief electrical inspector as the result of investigation and tests conducted by the chief electrical inspector or by reason of accepted principles or tests by recognized authorities or technical or scientific organizations. 
Building code is the City of Pasadena Building Code as currently adopted. 
Building official is the officer of the City of Pasadena charged with the administration and enforcement of the Building Department Codes of the City of Pasadena or his duly authorized representative. 
Chief and/or electrical inspector(s) is the person(s) designated by the building official to be the supervisor of the electrical inspections group and/or perform such inspections. These individuals will not be allowed to have any financial or advisory interests in any electrical company or project endeavor which could be determined a conflict of interests by the building official. Appeal available through electrical board. 
City is the City of Pasadena being the jurisdiction that has adopted this Code. 
City Code is the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
Contractor* is a person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of performing electrical maintenance work, electrical work, outside electrical work, residential electrical work or sign electrical work. 
Decorative structure. These installations shall not strobe, chase, flash, spin or in any way cause a problem with general traffic or be considered a public nuisance as determined by the permit department. Prior to installation; location and installation approvals from the permit department will be required. Additionally, certain types of these installations may be determined to be regulated under the city sign code. 
Electrical code is the most current edition of the National Electrical Code promulgated by the National Fire Protection Association, as adopted by the city. 
Electrical maintenance work is the keeping in safe repair of existing electrical installations, apparatus and equipment. The term "electrical maintenance work" shall include the repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers or fixed appliances of the same type and rating in the same location. The term does not include the installation of additional electrical work, electrical equipment or electrical apparatus. 
Electrical work is the installing, maintaining, altering, repairing or erecting of any wiring apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment for which a permit is required under the terms and provisions of this Code, except poles and guy anchors installed by a telephone, telegraph, signal and/or electric utility company as a part of its distribution system. 
Firewall is the same as that of a firewall or fire separation assembly as defined in the building code. 
Journeyman electrician* is a person undertaking "electrical work" as defined in this Code, under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed master electrician. 
Listed and listing are terms referring to equipment and materials that are shown in a list published by an approved agency, which states that the equipment complies with recognized safety standards. 
Maintenance electrician is a person regularly employed on a permanent basis at one or more facilities under common ownership or control when there is a current annual maintenance permit for the facilities where the person works, provided the person performs "electrical maintenance work," as defined in this Code, only on the premises under the ownership or control of the person's employer. Specifically, this type of license holder cannot work on any installations of any type over 600 VAC. 
Master electrician* is a person who is the holder of a master electrician license issued by the State of Texas Licensing and Regulations Department. 
Multiple occupancy building is a building that has more than one tenant regardless of whether the tenants' uses are of the same or different occupancy classifications or use groups as classified by the building code. 
Occupancy is the purpose for which a building, or part thereof, is used or intended to be used, as defined by the building code. 
Outside electrical work is the assembly, maintenance, installation and erection of all electrical equipment and appurtenances that are part of an outside distribution system generally located outside of any building. Work performed under this term shall include, but not be limited to, the installation, repair or maintenance of substations, street lighting, pole lines, underground duct banks, electrical decorations, traffic signals and parking lot lighting. 
Person is an individual, partnership, corporation or other legal entity. 
Residential electrical work is the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair or erection of any wiring apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment that by ordinance can be wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable. This work will be limited to single or multi-family dwellings (and their accessory structures) of wood frame construction not exceeding four (4) stories. 
Residential wireman* is a person undertaking "residential electrical work," as defined in this Code, under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed master electrician. 
Sign electrical work is the manufacture or installation, or both, of electric signs, conductors and equipment for signs, outline lighting, and inside lighting with high-voltage gas tubes as defined in the electrical code. 
Sign journeyman electrician* is a person undertaking "sign electrical work," as defined in this Code, under the supervision, direction and control of a licensed master or sign master electrician. 
Sign master electrician* is a person who is the holder of a sign master electrician license issued by the State of Texas Licensing and Regulations Department. 
*Indicates all State of Texas electrician license requirements, this shall include any City of Pasadena parallel requirements of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-5—12-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ELECTRICAL BOARD 
 
Sec. 12-26. - Electrical board created. 
There is hereby created an electrical board consisting of seven (7) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-27. - Members of electrical board. 
(a)  Positions one (1) and two (2) shall be filled by duly licensed master electricians of the State of Texas or Electrical Contractors registered with the City of Pasadena. 
(b)  Position three (3) shall be filled by an electrical engineer in the employ of an electric public utility company or retail electrical provider operating under a City of Pasadena franchise. 
(c)  Position four (4) and five (5) shall be filled by registered professional engineers of the State of Texas, who are proficient in the field of electricity or a master electrician licensed by the State of Texas. 
(d)  Position six (6) shall be filled by a representative from the city at large. 
(e)  Position seven (7) shall be filled by the chief electrical inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-28. - Appointments, terms, removal. 
Board member appointments shall be made on or before January 2 of each year and take effect on that date. All appointments shall be from the effective date of appointment until January 2 of the next year, but each member of the board shall serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Any appointed member of the board may be removed from office in accordance with Article III, Section 7 of the City of Pasadena Home Rule Charter. The existing board members are retained in service until such time as the established process would modify those appointments. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-29. - Quorum. 
Four (4) members of the electrical board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board, and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-30. - Officers, procedure, order of business. 
The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. The chairman, vice-chairman, and the secretary shall be nominated by the members of the board each year in its first meeting after January 2. Each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the then qualified and serving members of the board. Employees of the city shall not serve as officers of the board. The terms of all elective officers shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's board membership. The meeting procedure and order of business shall be as prescribed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-31. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The electrical board shall be responsible for making interpretations of this electrical code including the approval of equipment, material installation techniques, and granting special permission for the condition, material and installations not covered herein. 
(b)  The electrical board shall submit to the mayor, city council and the building official, written suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the city electrical code. 
(c)  The electrical board will review appeals requested on behalf of contractors, homeowners and citizens of the City of Pasadena and advise the permit department or mayor and council, as to specific rulings and/or opinions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-32. - Reports. 
The electrical board shall prepare a written report to the mayor and building official indicating herein the official actions of the board. Said report is to be submitted during January of each year or as may be requested with regard to specific appeals before the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-33. - Investigations. 
The inspector shall make such investigations regarding electrical work as deemed necessary or as requested by the mayor, chief electrical inspector, building official, or fire marshal of the city, and prepare a written report to requestor and correction requirements to owner or occupant. Inspectors shall have "right of entry" during reasonable hours for investigating the previous mentioned items in this Code and complaints as may be properly reported to the city. By adoption, this allows the city to recover an hourly amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) an hour for staff fees associated to any individual or company found at fault or responsible by determination of the board. This is separate and independent of fines that may result from the investigation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-34. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or organization dissatisfied with a decision of an electrical inspector shall have the right to appeal such decision. The appeal shall be in writing for review to the electrical board within two (2) working days after such decision. Thereupon, the electrical board within fifteen (15) working days, shall hear and determine said appeal. The board shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action of the electrical inspector, provided, that until such time as the inspector's action is reversed or modified, such action shall in all things be effective. The decision of the electrical board shall be subject to review by the city council as provided for in item (b) below. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or organization that questions a decision of the electrical board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city secretary within ten (10) days after the decision of the board. After receipt of such appeal, the city council shall set the date for a hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and the chairman of the electrical board. The electrical board, as well as the appellant, shall have the right to be heard. The city council shall affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision of the electrical board. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is not requested within the time and manner herein provided, the ruling of the electrical board shall be final. The action of the electrical board shall in all things be effective until reversed or modified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-35—12-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 12-41. - Electrical permit fees. 
All permit fees must comply with the provisions of the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 2006-322 or if the fee was unmodified, it defaults to any previous established fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-42. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-43. - Holds, fines, penalties, and disallowance of permits. 
(a)  Contractors or homeowners with two (2) or more outstanding re-inspect fees on any current project permit will not be extended any further inspections until re-inspect fees are paid, corrections are made and inspections are approved. 
(b)  Double fees plus twenty-five dollars ($25.00); all electrical fixture and appliance inspections permit fees shall apply except when application is made for a permit after the work has been started, or after the work has been partially completed or concealed, then all required fee or fees will be double plus an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid by the electrical contractor. This provision shall be cumulative of all other penalties provided by this chapter. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be fined in a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(d)  In item (c) above, each offense is independent and can be prosecuted separately. 
(e)  Contractors may be put on administrative "HOLD" by the permit department for violations of any provisions of local code or of the State of Texas License Program. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-44. - Permit suspension or revocation. 
A permit may be suspended or revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit. 
(2)  Violating either willfully or maliciously or by reason of incompetence, any provision of this electrical code or amendments thereto. 
(3)  Conviction of defrauding any person for whom he has rendered or contracted to render service. 
(4)  Acquisition of a permit for electrical work not actually controlled by the master electrician or performed by licensed employees under his control, supervision, and direction. 
(5)  Securing a permit under any pretext for which applicant has no valid contract. 
(6)  Contractors with three (3) or more outstanding re-fees on all permits in this jurisdiction shall be placed on administrative "HOLD" until recovery efforts are satisfied with the city permit department. Additionally, if the contractor fails to satisfy this requirement — the contractor will have all permits cancelled and the contractor registration revoked. If this transpires, all new applications and permit fees must be satisfied. 
(7)  Failure on the contractor to satisfy inspection requirements will result in the contractor being placed on administrative "HOLD" until all necessary inspections are satisfied with the city permit department. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-45—12-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - SPECIFIC POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 12-51. - Scheduled overtime or emergency inspections. 
All shall comply with the specific provisions in the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 2006-322. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-52. - Reserved.  
Sec. 12-53. - Electrical connection approval. 
This jurisdiction requires permits and inspection programs to be satisfied prior to utility service provider releases from the permit department. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-54. - Energy connections. 
Any electrical system or equipment regulated by this Code shall not be connected to a source of energy or power until approved by the chief electrical inspector or his representative. Failure to comply will result in additional burdens for inspections and/or the removal of service from structure or location by the permit department. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-55. - Generators. 
The owner or management of any building and/or place of assembly where an emergency, standby or supplemental generator is installed with a new or existing electrical system on a temporary or permanent basis shall obtain a permit and approval from the chief electrical inspector or his representative prior to operation of any such system. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-56. - Temporary connections. 
The chief electrical inspector or his representative may authorize the temporary connection, of electrical service to building(s) or system(s) for the purpose of construction activity, testing equipment and the cleaning or maintenance of that building or space. This requires proper contractor permits and inspections to be satisfied. Extensions allowed in excess of the ninety-day allowance will require additional permits for every ninety (90) days or portion thereof. 
No permit for temporary use shall be valid for a period more than ninety (90) calendar days. Except as otherwise provided below, at expiration of the authorized period, the chief electrical inspector or his representative shall issue written instructions to the electric utility company or other person having control of the supply of energy to the installation to disconnect service to the temporary installation, unless he or she has granted a permanent approval or an additional temporary approval. At least ten (10) calendar days prior to the proposed date of disconnection, the chief electrical inspector or his representative shall give written notice to the electric utility company or other person having control of the supply of power to the temporary installation and to the owner of the building, setting forth the date that the electricity will be disconnected unless permanent approval of the connection has been obtained or an additional permit for temporary use has been issued. The notice shall be posted on or in view of each principal entrance to building for the information of all persons who enter the building. Any person affected by the proposed disconnection of the electricity may request a hearing on the matter. The request shall be in writing and delivered to the office of the chief electrical inspector at least three (3) city work days prior to the proposed date of disconnection. If a hearing is requested, a hearing date shall be set by the chief electrical inspector and the hearing shall be held prior to the disconnection of electricity, unless person asking for hearing requests a delay in the hearing. 
Building or space occupancy or business operation of any type is specifically prohibited without written authorization of the permit department. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-57. - Electrical work by homeowner. 
A homeowner may perform electrical work (for which a permit is required) in and or on his legal homestead provided a permit is obtained, and the electrical work is installed in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter with inspections. The homeowner shall not employ, pay, or compensate in any manner an electrician or any other person to perform any part of the electrical work, and all electrical work shall be performed by the homeowner. Work allowance is not to be inclusive of any new or existing meter loop, service equipment and building additions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-58. - Enforcement. 
It shall be unlawful for a license holder to permit his license to be used in any manner contrary to any of the provisions adopted by this Code or to obtain a permit required under the provisions of this Code in his name or to allow the use of his name or company name directly or indirectly by another person for the purpose of obtaining a permit. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-59—12-65. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - ADDITIONAL PASADENA AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 12-66. - General. 
In general, any type of wiring systems may be used in the city limits of Pasadena as approved in the National Electrical Code, except where specifically prohibited herein, provided that all components are listed and properly installed. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-67. - Aluminum conductors. 
Aluminum conductors may be used for the meter loop and the distribution feeders. Branch wiring or connection(s) are not allowed in aluminum conductors. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-68. - Small appliances. 
For the appliance loads in the kitchen, breakfast and dining area, two (2) or more twenty (20) ampere branch circuit with not more than five (5) duplex receptacles per circuit shall be provided and shall have no other outlets connected to these branch circuits (clock outlets excepted). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-69. - Non-metallic sheathed cable. 
Non-metallic sheathed cable shall be used only for temporary work or within apartment houses and residential dwellings not exceeding four (4) stories in height. Conductors in or on all tile and masonry walls shall be installed in an approved method. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-70. - Code one for manufactured home. 
Existing manufactured homes on residential lots or in mobile home parks will require a minimum electrical safety inspection, known as a code one, under the permit application fee schedule. As vacancy occurs the new owner or occupant will be required to obtain a permit for this safety inspection prior to release of electrical service reconnect to the electrical service provider. 
If Code one inspection fails, a new electrical permit will be required for repairs or corrections to be performed by a licensed electrical contractor registered with the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-71. - Minimum grounding systems. 
As a minimum, two (2) vertically driven ground rods shall be provided for each electrical service to a building. If these ground rods project above grade, they shall be installed so as not to create personnel hazards from tripping or impalement and also to minimize likelihood of damage from lawn care equipment to the rods, grounding electrode conductors and connectors. 
Additional, supplemental grounding systems may be allowed. Specialized general grounding systems such as grid type and for specialized purposes such as lightning protection must be inspected and approved by a Texas Registered Professional Engineer. A project specific letter certifying acceptable design and installation of additional, supplemental grounding systems shall be submitted to the City of Pasadena Inspection Department. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-72. - Wiring of electrical devices. 
Wiring to all electrical devices equipped with screw terminals, including but not limited to outlets and switches, shall be installed using the screw terminals method. Quick-stab or back-stab type wiring installation is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-73. - Minimum wiring methods in residential occupancies. 
General purpose and lighting branch circuits shall be rated a minimum of twenty (20) amperes (twenty (20) amp breakers; no. 12 AWG conductors). Each such circuit shall not serve over twelve (12) outlets. For this purpose an outlet is a duplex or single receptacle or a luminaire. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-74. - Utility standards. 
Pasadena accepts with enforcement authority the most current installation standards of the electrical utility service provider. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-75. - Jobsite journeyman to apprentice ratio requirement. 
On each jobsite apprentice electricians shall work under the direct supervision of journeyman electrician(s). On each jobsite there shall be a ratio of at least one journeyman electrician to five (5) apprentice electricians. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-76. - Direct burial cable. 
For service entrance conductors, direct burial cable shall be prohibited unless it is run in a conduit. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-77—12-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - APPLICATION FOR ELECTRICAL PERMIT 
 
Sec. 12-81. - File an application in writing. 
To obtain an electrical permit, the licensed electrical contractor, or his duly authorized agent, shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application shall: 
(1)  Identify and describe the scope of work to be covered by the permit. 
(2)  Describe the location where the proposed work will take place by street address or similar description that will readily identify and locate the jobsite. 
(3)  Show the use, function or occupant of the building and/or project. 
(4)  Be accompanied by plans and specifications. 
(5)  Be signed by the licensed electrician, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(6)  State that the applicant requesting the issuance of a permit has read this chapter in its entirety and will supervise, direct and control all electrical work performed under it. 
NOTE: To establish an escrow account, the electrical contractor must contact the City of Pasadena Permit Department and make the necessary arrangements prior to request(s) for permit(s) to be billed in this method. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-82. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  With each application for an electrical permit, when required by the chief electrical inspector, the applicant must submit two (2) sets of plans and specifications. The chief electrical inspector may require that such plans and specifications bear the seal of a registered professional electrical engineer licensed by the State of Texas. 
(b)  Plan submittal will require an equipment layout, one-line diagram, panel schedules, electrical floor plan, and load analysis. 
(c)  All public buildings shall be required to submit plans and specifications before securing any permit, except minor additions or alterations to existing facilities when specifically exempted by the chief electrical inspector or his representative. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for all commercial buildings, places of assembly and where emergency electric systems are required, except minor building alterations to the existing facilities when specifically exempted by the chief electrical inspector. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-83. - Approval of plans and specifications. 
(a)  The applications, plans and specifications submitted shall be reviewed by the chief electrical inspector or his representative, such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city for compliance with laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the chief electrical inspector concurs that the work described in the specifications and plans conform to the requirements of the city, he shall authorize a permit to be issued. 
(b)  When the chief electrical inspector authorizes a permit, he shall stamp on both sets of plans and specifications, "approved", and affix his signature thereto. 
(c)  All stamps, approval notes or other requirement comments on the approved plans shall be required in the electrical project. 
(d)  The chief electrical inspector may authorize a permit for part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications have been submitted or approved, provided adequate and detailed information has been made which comply with all pertinent requirement of this chapter. The holder of such permit may proceed, but without assurance that the permit for the work in the entire building or structure will be granted. 
(e)  No work permit shall be transferred or assigned to any person by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-84. - Validity. 
(a)  To issue or grant a permit with approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter, except to authorize the work or use as lawful. 
(b)  To issue a permit based on plans and specifications shall not prevent the chief electrical inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans and specifications or from preventing building operations from being carried out when in violation of any provision of this chapter or other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-85. - Display of permit at jobsite. 
(a)  The permit on all new construction for electrical work shall be displayed on the jobsite in a readily accessible location throughout the period of such installation. 
(b)  A permit for an existing installation which has been approved or where additional electrical work is required on a job in progress, the permit for such installation or alteration shall be delivered to the person or firm for whom the installation is to be made and posted at the jobsite as directed by the chief electrical inspector before the addition or alteration is started. 
(c)  The permit document shall be protected from the elements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-86. - Expiration of permit. 
Each permit issued by the chief electrical inspector shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the project authorized has not started within sixty (60) days from the date of issue of such permit, or if the project is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work has started for a period of ninety (90) days. Before such work can be started again, a new permit shall be obtained. The fee shall be one-half (½) the amount of the original fee, if obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications. The permit shall be allowed to run concurrent with building permits, otherwise, a new full fee permit shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-87. - Correction of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  The chief electrical inspector or any electrical inspector shall investigate upon information or belief that faulty and/or unsafe conditions exist, a thorough inspection of any electrical workmanship, material or equipment now installed or that may hereafter be installed within the city. 
(b)  When the electrical work is found to be of a substandard installation or improperly connected, or to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, or that the electrical measuring device has been tampered with to create an unsafe condition, the owner, using or operating the same, shall be notified in writing. After notification, the owner shall have the necessary repairs or changes made to such equipment in safe condition and shall have such work completed per direction of the city chief electrical inspector or his representative. This will require contractor permits, fee collection and a subsequent satisfactory inspection process. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-88. - Re-inspection—Correction of unsafe conditions. 
(a)  If during the normal inspection process, violation(s) are identified, these violation(s) shall be subject to a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a re-inspection. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures, or equipment for the installation of which a permit is required until a certificate of approval has been issued by the chief electrical inspector. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make connection from a source of electrical energy to any electrical wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment which have been disconnected by an electrical inspector or to be discontinued until a certificate of approval has been granted by the city chief electrical inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-89. - Interference with or change of installation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with any electrical wiring installed or being installed in, or within or without, any structure or building. If, in the course of erection of a building or structure, the wiring is in such position as to interfere with the erection or completion of the building or structure as called for by plans, notice shall immediately be given the person installing the wiring and the needed change shall be made by such person. 
(1)  Installation of commercial and or residential exterior lighting shall not be projected onto another property or directed as to cause traffic problems or concerns, as determined by the city. 
(2)  Exterior flashing lights, strobe lights, pulsating lights, etc. shall not be allowed under this Code. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-90. - Insurance requirements for electrical contractors doing work. 
(a)  Every electrical contractor required to be registered as a business or entity under this Code shall keep in full force and effect, at all times, a policy or policies of insurance for the minimum limits of coverage as required by the State of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, and naming such contractor as an insured under the provisions of such policy or policies. 
(b)  The insurance required by this Code shall be written by an accredited company under the supervision of the state board of insurance commissioners. Evidence of compliance with such insurance requirements shall be considered as having been met when the policy or a certified copy thereof, or a properly executed certificate of insurance (Accord form), has been filed with and approved by the building official, and lists the City of Pasadena as the certificate holder. 
(c)  Each policy of insurance required by this Code shall include an endorsement thereon that the City of Pasadena Permit Department will be notified at least thirty (30) days in advance in the event the policy is cancelled or expires before the expiration date of the license issued under this Code to the insured. 
(d)  No electrical contractor's license shall be valid in the City of Pasadena, unless the applicant has complied with this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 12-91—12-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CONTRACTORS AND ELECTRICIANS REGISTRATION PROGRAM 
 
Sec. 12-101. - General. 
There is hereby established a city contractor registration requirement for contractors and for persons or other causing the performance of electrical work, electrical maintenance work, residential electrical work, and sign electrical work. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-102. - License requirements. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to employ or utilize any person who does not hold a current and valid electrical license issued by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation to perform electrical work, electrical maintenance work, residential electrical work or sign electrical work. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-103. - Registration fee schedule. 
Electrical contractor, annually ..... $100.00 
Electrical maintenance, annually ..... $100.00 
Electrical sign contractor, annually ..... $100.00 
Registration shall expire on anniversary of state license issue date. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-104. - Permit for maintenance electrician's employer. 
(a)  An annual permit is allowed for any person or firm employing a maintenance electrician licensed by the State of Texas to perform electrical maintenance work within the confines of a building in or on the premises where he is employed. (Exception: Work that may be contracted by licensed and registered contractors with the standard permit process) - No allowance for equipment or installation over 600 VAC. The application for the annual permit shall be made on the form provided by the city permit department and shall contain a description of the address location(s), number of structures, major equipment and the insurance information as required by all contractors. 
(b)  The fee of the annual permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) and shall expire on December 31 each year. This allows for general electrical maintenance to existing equipment only. 
(c)  The maintenance electrician shall be required to obtain a permit to move and relocate electrical equipment authorized to be completed as specifically allowed by the city chief electrical inspector or his representative. 
(d)  Each location will be required to post the permit to include the named state licensed maintenance electrician per the direction of the city chief electrical inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-105. - Project specific requirements. 
(a)  At the discretion of the chief electrical inspector or designated representative a maximum ratio of four (4) apprentice electricians per journeyman or master electrician can be required. 
(b)  The project master, contractor or permit signature party must be available at the request of the electrical inspections group within seventy-two (72) hours of notification to any electrical project personnel. Failure to comply may result in revocation of the project electrical permit. Thus new permits and fees would be required. Possible denials of the contractor from future permit availability in this jurisdiction. 
(c)  New or existing distribution, branch or feeder systems or equipment installations over 600 VAC shall be completed under the direction and supervision of a State of Texas Licensed Electrical Engineer. Emergency repairs must be permitted within two (2) business days with stamped and embossed letter of compliance by the electrical engineer on file with the permit department. Scheduled work must have specific design criteria by the project electrical engineer with a letter of installation certification upon project completion by the same electrical engineer. 
(d)  All work in item (c) above must be in compliance with all relative elements of the most current editions and versions of the NESC, NEC and all distribution and or service provider requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-106. - Permit(s) not required. 
(a)  No permit shall be required for replacing fuses or lamps or the connection of portable equipment to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed or for repairs to portable appliances. This shall be inclusive of listed seasonal decorative lighting for residential use only. 
(b)  No permit shall be required for any electrical work performed in this jurisdiction by employees of the U.S. Government, State of Texas, Harris County or city electrical department on building or property owned by such entities. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 12-107. - City issued electrician license program. 
The city electrician licensing program will run concurrent with the state program through December 31, 2004. The city electrician licensing program for new or renewal issuance will be dissolved September 1, 2004 and not issue any further licenses after that date. In the interim period, the State of Texas Electricians Licensing Program will be the primary for this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Chapter 13 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Fire extinguishing equipment in theaters, § 5-25; fire prevention and protection requirements at dance halls, § 5-112 et seq.; Strawberry Park fire ring, § 24-18 et seq.; signs not to interfere with exits or to be attached to fire escapes, §§ 31-11, 31-12; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; electrical code, Ch. 12; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 13-1. - Burning of trash and refuse. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided in subsection (b) or some other ordinance of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to kindle, maintain as a fire, ignite, or burn any paper, wood, organic matter, grass, weeds, brush, or other trash, refuse or rubbish within the corporate limits of the city outside any building, unless such fire is contained in a waste burner or incinerator, including a wire mesh cover of not more than one-quarter (¼) inch mesh, as a spark arrestor, on the incinerator stack or exhaust vent, approved by the fire marshal after inspection and the issuance by him of a certificate of incinerator approval, in such form as the fire marshal may from time to time prescribe. No incinerator shall be located within fifteen (15) feet of any other building or structure. Such certificate may be cancelled by the fire marshal at any time he finds a hitherto-approved incinerator to be in a condition substandard to the original approved condition as of the time of issuance of the certificate therefor. The fee for issuance of such certificate shall be two dollars ($2.00). 
(b)  Upon the payment of a fee of seventy-five cents ($0.75) and obtaining the approval of the fire marshal and his permit for open burning, to be in such form as the fire marshal may from time to time prescribe, a single bonfire or rubbish fire may be ignited and burned on a permitted date, on private land or a city easement, within not less than fifty (50) feet of any building or structure, provided the fire is precluded from spreading within fifty (50) feet of any building or structure. A competent person shall attend such fire at all times from ignition until extinguishment and shall maintain a garden hose connected to a water supply under pressure, or equivalent approved fire extinguishing equipment, during all such times. The fire marshal may prohibit any or all bonfires and outdoor rubbish fires when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances render such fire or fires hazardous. 
(c)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon final conviction therefor, shall be fined in a sum of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Code 1964, § 13-2; Ord. No. 1840, §§ 1, 2, 8-2-66; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90) 
Cross reference— Trash and rubbish generally, Ch. 14; regulations for use of Strawberry Park fire ring, § 24-22.  
Sec. 13-2. - Adoption of state law and rules and regulations relating to storage, handling and use of flammable liquids at retail service stations. 
The city council hereby adopts Article 9201, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, and the rules and regulations adopted by the State of Texas Board of Insurance, to insure uniform force and effect throughout the State of Texas in enforcing the rules and regulations for the safe storage, handling and use of flammable liquids at retail service stations. 
(Ord. No. 70-143, § 1, 7-21-70; Ord. No. 80-62, § 3, 4-8-80)  
Sec. 13-3. - Stopping or parking vehicles used for transportation of flammable liquids, gas or chemicals. 
(a)  The owner or operator of any commercial truck or vehicle equipped with tanks for the transportation of any type of flammable liquids, gas or gases, or chemicals, whether loaded or empty, is hereby prohibited from stopping or parking such truck or vehicle on any street, driveway, alley, vacant lot or public parking area near or by any home, residence, building or premises in the corporate limits of the city, at any time. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall not be applicable to trucks or vehicles stopped or parked in the observance of controlled traffic regulations, or to those trucks or vehicles stopped in and during the time of delivery of flammable liquids, gas or gases, or chemicals to a home, residence, building or premises. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the above provisions of this section, trucks or vehicles used exclusively for the transport of gasoline or automotive fuels or lubricants, or gases or chemicals of equal or higher flash points, shall be allowed to stop or park not less than ten (10) feet from the nearest point of any building, if such trucks or vehicles are on premises wholly owned or controlled by the owner or lessee of such trucks or vehicles; provided that such trucks or vehicles are, at all times while thus stopped or parked, equipped with regularly and properly operating Interstate Commerce Commission approved safety valves and necessary related appliances, if any, for the control of fire and explosion in the tank or tanks of such trucks or vehicles; and further provided, that at all times while the trucks or vehicles are thus stopped or parked, the same shall be completely surrounded by a chain link type fence, fitted with a lockable gate, that is at least six (6) feet in height with a minimum six (6) gauge wire, with three (3) barbed wire strands at the top angled out and away from the fenced enclosure. Additionally, such enclosure shall be well-illuminated by artificial light continuously between sunset and sunrise and during which interval such trucks or vehicles are stopped or parked therein. The fence gate or gates must be securely locked at all times except when a driver, owner, helper, loader or any authorized person or employee is on duty in the fenced enclosure. 
(d)  In case of a truck or vehicle governed by this section being stopped or parked due to mechanical or other breakdown thereof, the driver, owner or lessee of such truck or vehicle shall, after one (1) hour from the commencement of the breakdown, if the truck or vehicle remains disabled, notify the fire marshal of the breakdown, the description of the truck cargo, and its location in the city, unless such truck or vehicle is then stopped or parked in compliance with this section. In event of such stopping or parking not in compliance herewith, the fire marshal may order and arrange for the removal of such truck or vehicle to a safe place, at the expense of the owner thereof and without any liability on the part of the city, in the interest of public safety. 
(e)  Any truck or vehicle described in subsection (a) that has been left on any street, driveway, alley, vacant lot or public parking area in this city for a period in excess of one (1) hour shall be deemed abandoned, and the fire marshal or the chief of police or their designated representatives may have such truck or vehicle removed and impounded. 
(Ord. No. 67-2006, §§ 1, 2, 4, 8-22-67; Ord. No. 69-40, § 1, 2-18-69; Ord. No. 80-62, § 4, 4-8-80; Ord. No. 90-85, § 4, 5-15-90) 
Cross reference— Stopping and parking of vehicles generally, § 36-163 et seq.  
Sec. 13-4. - False fire alarms. 
(a)  If any person shall falsely or maliciously, by any means whatsoever, give an alarm of fire when there is no fire, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  The city hereby offers a reward of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be paid to any person furnishing information leading to the arrest and conviction of any other person for a violation of this section. Any person claiming the right to be paid such a reward must file a notice of such claim in writing with the city council not later than ninety (90) days from and after the date of the conviction of any person for violating this section in any court of competent jurisdiction, which notice shall fully state the circumstances under which such person laid the information before the authorities, leading to the arrest and conviction of the criminal, the full name of the claimant, and the names and addresses of any witnesses upon whom the claimant relies to verify his claim. 
(c)  The city council shall be the sole judge of whether or not any claimant is entitled to receive the reward provided for by this section, and the decision of the city council upon any claim for such reward shall be final and binding upon all parties. 
(d)  It is further a condition of this offer of reward that all persons taking notice of this offer shall also take notice that this offer may be revoked by the mere passage of an ordinance by the city council repealing this section and the passage of such repealing ordinance shall be held to give notice to all parties that the offer has been withdrawn. 
(Code 1964, § 13-6)  
Sec. 13-5. - Interfering with or injuring fire alarm system; maintenance of fire suppression equipment; sale of defective fire extinguishers. 
(a)  Any person who shall interfere with, cut or injure any of the boxes, wires or poles, or any of the appurtenances thereto, of the electric fire alarm system shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  No person shall obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging or making necessary repairs, or when permitted by the fire official. Whenever a fire appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or re-installed as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished. Defective and nonapproved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced or repaired as directed by the fire official. 
(c)  No person shall sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the fire official, or which is not in proper working order, or the contents of which do not meet the requirements of the fire official. The requirements of this section shall not apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for junk and said units are permanently disfigured or marked with permanent sign identifying the unit as junk. 
(Code 1964, § 13-7; Ord. No. 80-62, § 5, 4-8-80)  
Sec. 13-6. - Arson reward. 
(a)  A standing reward in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) is hereby established to be paid to any person furnishing evidence as a result of which any person is arrested and finally convicted of the crime of arson, as such crime is now or shall hereafter be defined in the penal code of the state, provided such crime is committed within the limits of the city. In the event more than one person furnishes evidence leading to the arrest and final conviction of such person for such crime as herein provided, the reward hereby offered shall be divided among such persons. 
(b)  A special fund is hereby created to be known as the "Arson Fund" and there shall be deposited to the credit of such fund, at all times, not less than the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Code 1964, § 13-8)  
Sec. 13-7. - Storage, handling and dispensing flammable liquids. 
The owner, operator, or person in charge of a service station is hereby held responsible for the compliance of the following requirements: 
(a)  All Class I flammable liquids shall be stored, handled, and/or dispensed from approved underground tanks, through approved pumping equipment. 
(b)  This section is intended to prohibit the use of so-called "portable service stations" ("mobile service units") or similar units construed to dispense flammable liquids and designed so that the unit can be easily picked up and moved, provided, however, tank trucks or tank wagons or other mobile tanks may deliver gasoline direct to approved aboveground and underground installations, provided further, that tank trucks or tank wagons, or other mobile tanks may deliver gasoline to persons engaged in street building excavations or in the construction of large buildings, provided such delivery is made into approved installations such as underground storage tanks or approved skid tanks of not over two hundred and fifty (250) gallon capacity, and provided further, that tank trucks or tank wagons or other mobile tanks may deliver gasoline directly into the supply tanks of heavy construction equipment which cannot feasibly be taken to an approved installation only after the point of delivery has been inspected and approved by the fire marshal or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 71-227, § 1, 8-10-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-227, § 1, amended the 1964 Code by adding the provisions included herein as § 13-7.  
Sec. 13-8. - Fire lanes. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  A "fire lane" is defined for the purpose of this section to mean an area appurtenant to entrances or exits of any assembly building, shopping center, hospital, apartment house or school which is deemed necessary by the fire official to remain free and clear of parked vehicles and other obstructions in order to provide access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by the fire official. 
Such lane shall be a width of not less than twenty (20) feet perpendicular to such exits and entrances and shall extend for the minimum length necessary to provide access for fire vehicles. 
Such lane may, at the discretion of the fire official, include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near the entrances or exits to such building; provided, however, that fifteen (15) feet on either side of a "fire protection device" is designated a "fire lane" without the necessity of a designation by the fire official. 
It is further provided that the fire official shall not designate a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet perpendicular to exits or entrances of buildings if the designation of a lane of more than fifteen (15) feet would necessitate structural changes to existing buildings. 
(2)  A "shopping center" is defined for the purposes of this section to mean a group of commercial business establishments planned, developed, owned or managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in location, size and types of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. 
(3)  A "hospital" is defined for the purposes of this section to mean any public or private hospital, convalescent home or nursing home. 
(4)  An "apartment house" is any building, or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of three (3) or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the said building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
(5)  "Assembly building" is a building or portion of a building used for the gathering together of fifty (50) or more persons for such purposes as deliberation, education, instruction, worship, entertainment, amusement or awaiting transportation, or of one hundred (100) or more persons in drinking or dining establishments. 
(6)  A "school" is a building, public or private, used for educational purposes, and having an attendance of fifty (50) or more persons. 
(7)  "Proper officer," for the purposes of this section, shall include the fire marshal, fire chief, chief of police, inspectors of the fire prevention department, and officers of the police department. 
(8)  A "fire protection device" shall mean a device such as sprinkler connections, standpipe connections and private fire hydrants. 
(b)  Fire official to designate. The fire official of the City of Pasadena is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on the property of shopping centers, hospitals, apartment houses, assembly buildings, and schools, as defined herein, appurtenant to buildings or the entrances or exits to stores, groups of stores or buildings, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready access in case of fire or other emergency. 
(c)  Erection of signs or painting fire lanes; maintenance. Every owner of a premise subject to this section shall, within thirty (30) days after designation of "fire lanes," erect signs and/or paint the "fire lane" in compliance with this section. Failure to erect signs and/or paint the "fire lanes" is a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided herein. The means by which fire lanes are designated shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. The designation by the fire marshal or his designee of such fire lanes shall never be held to make the City of Pasadena responsible for the maintenance of such fire lanes on private property, but the owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. 
(d)  Record of designated lanes; changes, cancellations, etc. Every designation, determination or location of a fire lane by the fire marshal or his designee pursuant to the authority granted in this section 13-8 shall be submitted to the office of the fire marshal for approval. Unless otherwise designated therein by the fire marshal or his designee, such designation, determination or location of a fire lane shall be deemed permanent. 
(e)  Marking of fire lanes. Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this section, the fire marshal or his designee shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such commercial building, to include shopping centers, hospitals, apartment houses, assembly buildings, or schools, directing the owner to identify the designated fire lane by erecting signage and/or surface painting at the expense of the owner. 
Posting of a designated fire lane shall be by the erection of signage and/or painted surface and shall be lettered, "FIRE LANE—NO PARKING." Such fire lane markings shall be of a standard size, color, lettering, and mounting as approved by the fire marshal or his designee. Samples and instructions for signage and surface markings may be obtained from the office of the fire marshal. 
(f)  Obstruction of fire lanes prohibited. Fire lanes shall not be obstructed in any manner, including but not limited to the standing and parking of vehicles. Such vehicles or obstructions shall be subject to a citation and/or being removed from said fire lanes at the owner's expense. 
(1)  Proper officers are hereby authorized to provide for the removal of vehicles in violation of this section when, in the opinion of such officers, the vehicles could constitute a hazard in regard to fire prevention and protection. 
Vehicles so removed shall be delivered to the nearest authorized garage or other place of impoundment designated by the city council. No vehicle impounded as herein provided shall be released until the charges for towing such vehicle and any accumulated storage charges have been paid. 
(2)  Citations for violation of this section may be issued by a proper officer. Such citation shall specify the location of the fire lane in which such violation occurred and the date and time of such violation. Any citation for violation shall be issued on the official form theretofore prescribed by the City of Pasadena. Such citation shall require the appearance of the violator before the municipal court and all fines paid by the violator shall be paid to the municipal court clerk. 
(g)  Presumption of violation. In any prosecution charging a vehicle violation of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle in the proscribed area. 
(h)  Defense to violation. It is hereby declared unlawful to park any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle of the City of Pasadena in any fire lane where the signs provided for herein have been erected; provided, however, if the signs are not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, it shall be a defense to any alleged violation thereof. 
(i)  Injuring, etc., of signs prohibited. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any sign designated a fire lane which has been erected under the terms of this section. 
(j)  Permission required to close lanes. No owner, manager, or person in charge of any premises served by a required fire lane shall abandon or close any such fire lane without the permission of the fire official; and such person shall keep the fire lanes clear of parked vehicles and/or objects that would impede escape from or access to said premises. 
(k)  Penalty for violation of article. Any violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person convicted of any such violation shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day and every day that such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 80-62, § 6, 4-8-80; Ord. No. 90-85, § 5, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 18-105, § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-18)  
Sec. 13-9. - Smoking regulations. 
(a)  Posting of "no smoking" signs. Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas of piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, schools, places of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or handled, the fire official is empowered and authorized to order the owner or occupant in writing to post "no smoking" signs in each building, structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. Such signs shall be conspicuously and suitably located. The fire official shall designate specific safe locations, if necessary, in any building, structure or place in which smoking may be permitted. 
(b)  General regulations. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person during that period of the year declared by the fire official as the hazardous season to light, ignite or otherwise set fire to or to smoke any tobacco, cigarette, pipe or cigar in or upon any road or trail traversing any such brush- or forest-covered land or land covered with flammable material; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall apply to the area within the boundaries of any established smoking areas as designated by the fire official. 
(2)  No person shall throw or drop or cause to be thrown or dropped an ignited match, cigar, cigarette, tobacco or other ignited material from any window or roof or balcony or any building or structure. Nor shall any person dispose of such materials in such a manner that they possibly would fall on combustible material of any nature. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke, or to carry or possess a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or any open flame, under, in or upon any bulkhead, dock, pier, wharfs, landing or buildings or structures, appurtenances or approaches within fifty (50) feet of such bulkheads, docks, piers, wharfs, landings or buildings or structures (including grain elevators, workhouses, storage annexes, or unloading shed), within the boundaries of the city limits of the City of Pasadena, or to smoke or carry or possess a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or any openflame, on any open deck or in the hold of any ship, lighter, barge or other floating vessels, craft or equipment, whether the same is berthed or moored at a dock, wharf or landing, or tied to another vessel made fast thereto, or to cast off or throw from any such ship, lighter, barge or other floating vessel, craft or equipment any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or match, or any open flame, except that the above prohibitions shall not apply in those areas specially designated and posted by proper authorities as "smoking areas." 
(c)  Lettering, size, color and location of "no smoking" signs. The lettering, size, color and location of legally required "no smoking" signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire official. The following sizes will be considered standard for the type of occupancy indicated; and where required in this code: 
(1)  Public assembly, stores, schools, institutions (inside). "No smoking," letters two (2) inches high, minimum, on contrasting background, Example: Red on white and the words, "by order of the fire marshal" in letters one-half inch high. 
(2)  Industrial plants (inside). 
(a)  "Danger—No smoking, matches or open flame," letters to be three (3) inches high minimum on contrasting background. 
(b)  Add: "Keep twenty-five (25) feet away," where flammable materials are stored, such as required in spray application process areas and flammable liquid storage areas and rooms. 
(3)  Industrial plants and outside storage areas. "Danger—No smoking, keep open flame or spark-producing devices twenty-five (25) feet away." Letters to be four (4) inches high, red on white background or approved contrasting color combination. 
(4)  Where signs are required by federal or state occupational safety laws, such signs may be used in lieu of the above when approved by the fire official or his representative. 
(d)  Removing, mutilating, destroying "no smoking" signs. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or mutilate or destroy any legally required "no smoking" sign. 
(e)  Smoking prohibited in "no smoking" areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or throw or deposit any lighted or smoldering substance in any place where "no smoking" signs are posted or in any other place where smoking would occasion or constitute a fire or life hazard. 
(f)  Receptacles and ashtrays to be provided where smoking permitted in specific areas; disposal of contents of ashtrays. Where specific areas are designated in certain occupancies, approved receptacles or ashtrays shall be readily available and in sufficient number for the number of persons intended. Disposal of the contents of ashtrays is to be done in closed metal containers with due regard for the hazard created by smoldering "butts." 
(Ord. No. 80-62, § 7, 4-8-80)  
Sec. 13-10. - Emergency access gates. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain, or cause to be constructed, installed or maintained, any blocking device, such as a gate, chains or other barrier, used for the purpose of blocking access from a public street to a private street or driveway of any multifamily residential property without first obtaining a permit approved by the fire marshal. 
(b)  Such gates or barriers on private street drives at entrances to multifamily residential property projects shall conform to the following standards: 
(1)  One fourteen-foot gate that opens to provide at least fourteen (14) feet of access width where the drive is less than twenty-eight (28) feet wide. 
(2)  Two (2) gates of minimum thirteen-foot width each where drive is twenty-eight (28) feet wide. 
(3)  One twenty-eight-foot gate that gives full access where drive is twenty-eight (28) feet wide. 
(c)  Existing gates 
(1)  "Approved" gates shall mean those gates approved, in writing, by the fire marshal. An applicant seeking such approval shall submit four (4) sets of plans to the building official with his application for a building permit. Gates approved prior to February 1, 1994 are not affected by this ordinance, unless gates prove inadequate during an actual emergency situation. Such unsatisfactory performance will require full compliance with all requirements of this section. Any remodeling or rebuilding of approved gates that changes the gate opening or opening device must be resubmitted to the fire marshal for approval. 
(2)  "Unapproved" gates shall mean those gates that do not have written fire marshal approval. Unapproved gates shall be submitted for the fire marshal's approval as specified in section 13-10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  All construction codes and permitting requirements of the City of Pasadena shall be applicable to the blocking devices described in section 13-10(a). Any such blocking device, shall be designed, constructed, installed or maintained to meet the following standards: 
(1)  An emergency vehicle of the fire department moving at a speed of one to seven (7) miles per hour can force open the blocking device without causing any damage to the emergency equipment, or fifty (50) pounds or less pressure exerted against such blocking device. 
(2)  All blocking devices (except break-away type chains) shall be so designed that once the blocking device is released, it will automatically open and remain so until it is closed manually. 
(3)  All locking, holding, or latching devices permitted shall be of the shear pin or shear-section type meeting the requirements set forth in paragraph one of this document. 
(4)  All blocking devices shall be so designed so that no damage will occur to an emergency vehicle when pressure is exerted to force such devices open. 
(5)  A blocking device may incorporate the above numbers one through four (4) or the equivalent as determined by the fire marshal or his representative using recognized industry standards. 
(6)  All blocking devices shall be equipped with a radio receiver compatible with police department and fire department radio equipment which allows emergency vehicles and other necessary on-duty city employees to open the blocking device by use of such equipment. 
(e)  Prior to any changes, alterations or blocking of private streets, plans detailing such change, accompanied by drawings, shall be submitted to the fire marshal for approval. The fire marshal or his representative shall inspect all such installations and shall be given the opportunity to be present when such blocking devices are tested for final approval. 
(Ord. No. 94-10, § 1, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 03-189, § 1, 9-2-03)  
Sec. 13-11. - Fire alarms. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by a fire alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
Automatic dialing device means a fire alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
False alarm means any fire alarm, which was discharged falsely, accidentally, through mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of maintenance, or by negligence of the owner or lessee of the alarm system or of his and/or her employees or agents. False alarms shall not include: 
(1)  Alarms that occur during electrical storms, tornadoes, hurricanes, ice storms, earthquakes, or other natural disaster or Acts of God. 
(2)  Disruption of the telephone circuits beyond the control of the alarm company and/or the alarm user. 
(3)  Electrical power or disruption or failure not caused by the user. 
(4)  Alarms which occur as a result of an actual fire or emergency condition. 
Fire alarm system(s) means any equipment, device or devices arranged to signal the presence of fire, smoke, heat or other hazards requiring urgent attention and to which the fire department is expected to respond. 
Fire alarm system user means the owner, agent or person in control of the property on which a fire alarm system or systems is maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
Fire department response means the dispatching of a fire unit to investigate a fire alarm. 
Health care occupancies are those occupancies used for the purposes of treatment or care of persons suffering from physical or mental illness, disease or infirmity; the care of infants, convalescents or aged persons. Health care occupancies provide sleeping facilities for the occupants and are occupied by persons who are mostly incapable of self-preservation because of age, physical or mental disability, or because of security measures not under the occupant's control. 
Non-residential occupancies are those occupancies used for or engaged in commerce, business, or manufacturing. 
Permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the City of Pasadena to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site. 
Permit holder means any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity to which an alarm system permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity. 
Residential occupancies are those private occupancies that provide living accommodations for persons not under medical care. 
(b)  Applicability. 
(1)  The provisions of this section applies to all fire alarm systems installed within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena, except for those fire alarm systems installed upon the premises occupied by the United States Government, the State of Texas, the City of Pasadena, or any county government or school districts. 
(c)  Permit application: issuance. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site unless a valid permit has been issued by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office for such system. Alarm sites in existence before the effective date of this section must be permitted within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective date of this section. A fire alarm system user shall be in violation of this section if he permits the operation of such system without a proper permit. 
(2)  A fire alarm system user or his agent shall obtain a permit for each alarm site. 
(3)  Application for a permit for the operation of a fire alarm system or systems at an alarm site shall be made with the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office by the owner, agent, or person having control over the property on which the fire alarm system is to be installed and operated. Application shall be made in writing on a form designated by the city. On such application form, the applicant shall set forth: 
a.  The name, address, and telephone number of the owner, agent, or person in control of the property to be protected; 
b.  The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
c.  A brief description of the type of property to be protected (i.e. commercial, residential, or industrial, etc.); 
d.  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
e.  Name, address, and telephone number of the alarm company or person who will install and service the alarm system; 
f.  Names and telephone numbers of two or more persons who are able to and have agreed to receive notification at any time from the fire department in order to deactivate the alarm system if it becomes necessary; 
g.  Any other pertinent information required by the fire department or the fire marshal's office, which is necessary for the enforcement of this section. 
(4)  The City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation or other legal entity in control of the property to be protected upon submission in person or by mail of a completed application and payment of the appropriate fee, unless any statement made in the application is incomplete or false. 
(5)  The City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office shall treat all information on the application as confidential. 
(6)  Any permit issued pursuant of this ordinance shall be applicable only to the permit holder and is not transferable. 
(7)  Each permit issued to a fire alarm system user shall be valid for the duration of the permit unless one of the following occurs earlier: 
a.  Control of protected property is transferred from the permit holder; 
b.  Permit holder voluntarily discontinues services provided by a particular alarm protective service, and/or disconnections and alarm system; 
c.  Revocation of the permit by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office pursuant to this section. 
(d)  Permit fee. 
(1)  The fee for a permit issued pursuant to this section shall be: 
a.  The fee for an initial permit issued to non-residential fire alarm system users shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). This permit shall be renewed bi-annually. The renewal fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
b.  The fee for an initial permit issued to residential fire alarm system users shall be ten dollars ($10.00). This permit shall be renewed bi-annually. The renewal fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). 
c.  The fee for an initial permit issued to health care occupancies pursuant to this section shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The permit shall be renewed annually for a fee of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). 
(e)  Service fee for fire department responses to excessive false alarms. 
(1)  The user of any fire alarm system, which upon activation elicits a fire department response from the City of Pasadena, shall be subject to the following answering fee schedule for each false alarm in the calendar year. 
(2)  The City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office shall impose a service fee for each fire department response to any false alarm. The owner of the property shall be subject to the fee schedule below. The fee schedule for each premises shall be as follows in a twelve month period: 
a.  First and second false alarms ..... No Charge 
b.  Third and fourth false alarms ..... $100.00 
c.  Fifth through tenth false alarms ..... $200.00 
d.  Eleventh and subsequent false alarms ..... $500.00 
(3)  This service fee shall be imposed whether the fire department received the alarm by direct connection or through an intermediary, such as an answering service or modified central station. If the fire marshal is notified in writing prior to the day of installation of a new alarm system, the fee imposed by this section shall be waived for a thirty-day period beginning with the date of the installation. 
(4)  Those subject to service fees for false alarms shall be notified, in writing, of such fees by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office. Failure to pay the fee within thirty (30) days of invoice shall be grounds for revocation of the fire alarm permit. 
(f)  Duty to respond. 
(1)  It shall be a violation of this section if a fire alarm system user cannot be contacted, or refuse to respond to the alarm site within one-half hour after receiving a request by fire department or a fire marshal's office officials. Fire alarm system user may be subject to a fine under the penalty section of this ordinance in addition to any applicable service fee. 
(g)  Revocation of permits. 
(1)  The fire marshal may revoke a fire alarm system permit if he determines that: 
a.  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit; 
b.  The permit holder has violated this ordinance or any of its provisions; or 
c.  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a service fee. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(h)  Appeal of service fee; denial or revocation of a permit. 
(1)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision to assess a service fee by the fire marshal or his designated representative as provided for in subsection (c), may appeal the decision to a five-member board appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after the fire marshal or his designated representative renders the decision. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city secretary stays an action of the fire marshal in assessing a service fee until the five-member board makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the fire marshal or his designated representative is final. 
(2)  If the fire marshal refuses to issue or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the fire marshal to the five-member board by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt or the notice from the fire marshal. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the board stays an action of the fire marshal in revoking a permit until the board makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the fire marshal is final. 
(i)  Defense of prosecution. 
(1)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that: 
a.  The activation of the fire alarm system was a result of an actual fire or emergency. 
b.  The alarm system was sounded solely for the purpose of testing the alarm and the person who tested the alarm took reasonable precautions to avoid any request being made to the Pasadena Fire Department to respond to such alarm. This section shall not apply to conduct which is in violation of Section 42.06 of the Penal Code of the State of Texas. 
(j)  Penalty for violation of section. Any violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a class C misdemeanor and any person convicted of any such violation shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day and every day that such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 13-12. - Fire and life safety operating permit, special use permits, and inspections fees. 
(a)  Definitions. For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
Assembly use occupancies are buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, used for the gathering of persons for purposes of recreation, food or drink consumption including, but not limited to: banquet halls, night clubs, restaurants, taverns and bars. 
Day care use occupancies are buildings and structures occupied by persons of any age who receive custodial care for less than twenty-four (24) hours by individuals other than parents or guardians, relatives by blood marriage, or adoption and in a place other than the home of the person cared for including but not limited to: Day care centers, after school programs and family/group day care homes. 
Emergency generators means an engine generator in commercial, not residential, occupancies supplying emergency or standby power to fire and life safety systems, fire alarms or fire pumps. 
Fire and life safety operating permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of certain occupancies which by virtue of their operation or clientele has an increased fire and life safety hazard. 
Foster homes or group foster home occupancies means a private residential dwelling and its surrounding grounds which is licensed or approved by the state to provide twenty-four (24) hour substitute foster care for children. 
High-hazard use occupancies are buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, which involves the manufacturing, processing, generation or storage of materials that constitute a physical or health hazard including, but not limited to: auto wrecking yards, automotive repair shops, fuel dispensing, hazardous materials storage, high pile storage, industrials ovens, lumberyards, service stations and tire storage facilities. 
Institutional use occupancies are buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, in which people are cared for or living in a supervised environment and having physical limitations because of health or age, are harbored for medical treatment or other care or treatment including but not limited to: alcohol and drug centers, assisted living facilities, congregate care facilities, convalescent facilities, group homes, half-way houses, residential board and care facilities, social rehabilitation facilities, hospitals, nursing homes (both intermediate care facilities and skilled nursing facilities), mental hospitals, detoxification facilities. 
Multi-family residential use occupancies are buildings or structures, or a portion thereof containing three (3) or more dwelling units including but not limited to: apartment houses, boarding houses, congregate living facilities, dormitories, fraternities and sororities, hotels, and motels. 
Special use permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property, which authorizes the operation of certain businesses which by the very nature of the operations constitute a special fire hazard. 
Tent means a structure, enclosure or shelter constructed of fabric or pliable material supported by any manner used for the gathering of persons for commercial purposes of recreation and entertainment including tents that are used for assemblies, carnivals or circuses. For the purpose of this section, "tent" does not include pop tents or tents used for personal use. 
(b)  Applicability. The provision of this section applies to all fire and life safety operating permits, special use permits and certain inspections conducted by the fire prevention department (fire marshal's office) within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena. 
(c)  Permit application: issuance. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an assembly use occupancy, a day care use occupancy, foster or group foster home occupancy, a high-hazard use occupancy, an institutional use occupancy, or a multi-family residential use occupancy unless a valid fire and life safety operating permit or a special use operating permit has been issued by the City of Pasadena Fire Marshal's Office for such business or operation. 
(d)  Existing occupancies. Occupancies in existence before the effective date of this section shall be required to obtain a fire and life safety permit or the special use operating permit upon their next scheduled yearly inspection unless a new certificate of occupancy is issued or a significant change in the occupancy use occurs. 
(e)  Separate permit for each place of business. Every person who desires to maintain and operate more than one (1) place of business or branch office or substitute place of business for which a permit is required by this section must designate in his application each and every such place of business, branch office or substitute place of business, giving each address, and pay a separate permit fee and secure a separate permit for each address. 
(f)  Display. A permit issued under this article shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office of each place of business maintained by the permit holder. 
(g)  Term; renewal. Permits issued under this section shall expire one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance. Such permits shall be renewed by filling an application for renewal at least ten (10) days prior to the expiration of the current permit with the fire marshal's office. 
(h)  Fee required. A fee shall be assessed for all annual fire and life safety operating permits, special use operating permit, certain types of inspections and plan reviews conducted by the fire marshal's office. Such fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the initial permit to an applicant and upon renewal of such permit annually thereafter. The fees shall be as listed: 
Assembly Use Occupancy 
1—99 person occupant load ..... $250.00 
99—299 person occupant load ..... $350.00 
300 or more person occupant load ..... $500.00 
Licensed Facilities Providing Less Than 24 Hour Care 
Licensed for 1—25 children ..... $100.00 
Licensed for 26—49 children ..... $150.00 
Licensed for 50—99 children ..... $200.00 
Licensed for 100—149 children ..... $250.00 
Licensed for 150 or more children ..... $300.00 
Group Home Day Care 
Licensed for 1—12 people ..... $100.00 
Foster Homes/Group Foster Homes 24 Hour Care 
Licensed for 1—6 children ..... $100.00 
Licensed for 7—12 children ..... $200.00 
Hospitals/Nursing Homes providing 24 Hour Care 
Licensed for 1—99 beds ..... $300.00 
Licensed for 100—199 beds ..... $400.00 
Licensed for 200—499 beds ..... $500.00 
Licensed for 500 or more beds ..... $600.00 
Other 24 Hour Care Facilities 
Licensed for 1—3 occupants ..... $100.00 
Licensed for 4—16 occupants ..... $175.00 
Licensed for 17—25 occupants ..... $250.00 
Licensed for 26 or more occupants ..... $325.00 
Multi-Family Residences/Hotels/Motels 
3—20 dwelling units ..... $200.00 
21 or more dwelling units ..... $400.00 
Annual Fire and Life Safety Inspections 
1 hour ..... $65.00 
2 hour ..... $130.00 
3 hour ..... $195.00 
4 hour ..... $260.00 
High Hazard Operations 
Hazardous materials storage tier I ..... $350.00 
Auto wrecking yards ..... $150.00 
Automotive repair ..... $100.00 
Industrial ovens ..... $225.00 
Lumberyards ..... $260.00 
Tire storage ..... $150.00 
High pile storage level I: 2,500 to 20,000 sq. ft. ..... $475.00 
High pile storage level II: Greater than 20,000 sq. ft. ..... $700.00 
Scrap metal yards ..... $150.00 
Motor vehicle fuel dispensing ..... $350.00 
Welding shops, iron works ..... $300.00 
SPECIAL USE PERMITS 
Burn Permits 
Fire extinguisher training ..... $150.00 
Commercial burn operations ..... $350.00 
Special Assembly Occupancies 
Carnivals/circus/car shows ..... $400.00 
Temporary membrane structures/tents ..... $125.00 
Explosives and pyrotechnics 
Explosives use/storage ..... $400.00 
Pyrotechnics use/storage ..... $300.00 
Fireworks displays ..... $600.00 
Miscellaneous Permits/Inspections 
Emergency generators ..... $125.00 
Access gates ..... $125.00 
After hours inspection (first 3 hours) ..... $375.00 
After hours inspection, additional hour or portion ..... $70.00 
Re-inspection fee (after initial and 1st re-inspect) ..... $150.00 
Occupant load evaluation ..... $100.00 
Product line inspection ..... $200.00 
Underground storage tank ..... $200.00 
Hot work (welding, asphalt kettles, roof torching) ..... $300.00 
Fire Alarm Permit 
Residential (1 year) ..... $50.00 
Residential renewal ..... $25.00 
Commercial (1 year) ..... $100.00 
Commercial renewal ..... $50.00 
Hospital/nursing home (1 year) ..... $500.00 
Hospital/nursing home renewal ..... $250.00 
Plan Review Building 
Up to 50,000 sq. ft. ..... $230.00 
50,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. ..... $345.00 
100,001 to 500,000 sq. ft. ..... $675.00 
500,001 sq. ft. or greater ..... $900.00 
Plan Review Fire Alarm 
100 or fewer initiating devices ..... $200.00 
101 or more devices $200.00 plus additional per ..... $1.00 
Plan Review Sprinkler 
100 or fewer heads ..... $200.00 
101 or more heads $200.00 plus additional ..... $1.00 
Underground fire line ..... $200.00 
Plan Review Miscellaneous 
Automatic extinguishing system ..... $200.00 
Emergency evacuation plan ..... $150.00 
Access control (mag locks) ..... $150.00 
(i)  Reinspections. If, after the 2nd inspection, it is necessary for the fire inspector to reinspect any work whether from a defect or the work not being ready a reinspection fee of ($25.00) shall be collected for each reinspection. 
(j)  Permit revocation. The fire marshal shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and the authority to revoke any and all permits authorized by this section for violation of the terms and provisions of city ordinances, fire codes adopted by the City of Pasadena and applicable state laws. 
(k)  Penalty. Any violation of any provision of this section shall be deemed a class C misdemeanor and any person, firm, corporation, or other entity convicted of any such violation shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10-012, § 1(Exh. A), 1-19-10; Ord. No. 18-043, § 1(Exh. A), 4-17-18; Ord. No. 18-106, § 1(Exh. A), 8-7-18)  
Secs. 13-13—13-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Sec. 1 of Ord. No. 79-67, adopted June 12, 1979, changed the title of Art. II from "Fire Marshal" to "Fire Prevention Department." Sec. 2 of said ordinance repealed § 13-19, which created the independent office of the fire marshal, derived from Code 1964, § 13-16. Sec. 3 enacted a new § 13-19 as herein set out. 
 
Sec. 13-19. - Fire prevention department created; composition. 
(a)  There is hereby created and re-created within the municipal government of the City of Pasadena a department to be known as the fire prevention department, consisting of the following positions, classifications, career codes and salary grades: 
Position 
No. 	Classification Title 	Career Code 	Salary Grade 
1 	Fire marshal 	CS 	E 	18 
2 	Assistant fire marshal 	CS 	E 	12 
3 	Fire inspector 	CS 	E 	8 
4 	Fire inspector 	CS 	E 	8 
5 	Fire inspector 	CS 	E 	8 
6 	Secretary I 	CS 		6 
 
(b)  The holder of a position herein created shall have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to him by the mayor of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the Charter and ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 79-67, § 3, 6-19-79) 
Cross reference— Duty of fire marshal to assist building commission, § 9-33.  
Sec. 13-20. - Appointment of fire marshal; qualifications. 
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, and he shall be properly qualified for the duties of his office. 
(Code 1964, § 13-17)  
Sec. 13-21. - Right of entry. 
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion. The fire marshal shall have the right to enter any other building or premises, with or without complaint of adjacent property owners, for the purpose of examining the same for fire hazards. 
(Code 1964, § 13-27)  
Sec. 13-22. - Duty of fire marshal to investigate fires. 
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be commenced within twenty-four (24) hours, not including Sundays, after the occurrence of such fire. 
(Code 1964, § 13-18)  
Sec. 13-23. - Taking of testimony, summoning witnesses, administration of oaths, etc. 
(a)  The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation of a fire is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a subject to inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any persons appearing as witnesses before him. 
(Code 1964, § 13-19)  
Sec. 13-24. - Investigations may be private; separation of witnesses. 
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined. 
(Code 1964, § 13-20)  
Sec. 13-25. - Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire. 
If the fire marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with an attempt to commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with a fire investigated by him, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the information obtained by him, including a copy of all the pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. 
(Code 1964, § 13-21)  
Sec. 13-26. - Periodic inspections of mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings. 
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal, monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 13-22)  
Sec. 13-27. - Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal. 
Any witness who refuses to be sworn or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to produce any book or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire marshal in the matter of such investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation as provided in this article, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. 
(Code 1964, § 13-24)  
Sec. 13-28. - Record of fires to be kept. 
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article. 
(Code 1964, § 13-25)  
Sec. 13-29. - Monthly reports to state fire marshal. 
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city during the month. 
(Code 1964, § 13-26)  
Secs. 13-30—13-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Fire department vehicles and private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen while answering fire alarms are designated as "authorized emergency vehicles" and exempt from certain traffic regulations, §§ 36-1, 36-13; authority of fire department officers to direct traffic at scene of fire, § 36-9. 
 
Sec. 13-41. - Created. 
There is hereby created an organization to be known as the Pasadena Volunteer Fire Department. 
(Code 1964, § 13-35)  
Sec. 13-42. - Purposes. 
The purposes of the volunteer fire department shall be: 
(1)  The systematic suppression and fighting of fires within the city limits. 
(2)  The training of members of such department in the methods of suppression and fighting of fires. 
(3)  The education of the citizens of the city in means and methods of the prevention of fires. 
(4)  The removal of fire hazards. 
(Code 1964, § 13-36)  
Sec. 13-43. - Composition. 
The membership of the volunteer fire department shall be divided into active and nonactive members. The membership in each category shall be limited to such number as is determined by the executive board of the department and this article. 
(1)  Active means those persons qualified and acceptable for active duty in the department. 
(2)  Nonactive means those persons, who, by reason of disability incurred after membership in the department has been established, are permitted to remain as members of the department in accordance with age and retirement benefit provisions, but are not permitted to participate actively in any fire scene service activities. This classification is intended to permit current volunteers who may be up to the age of sixty-five (65) retaining their membership in the department for pension purposes and other benefits. It will also permit new entry-level applicants to remain in the department as provided in Section 13-83. 
(Code 1964, § 13-37; Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83; Ord. No. 84-146, § 1, 7-10-84)  
Sec. 13-44. - Election of members. 
All members of the volunteer fire department, except the position of fire chief, may be elected by a majority vote of the membership of the department, but no member shall be eligible to election until his name has been submitted by the department officials to the city council and has been approved by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 13-38; Ord. No. 02-120, § 3, 5-14-02)  
Sec. 13-45. - Qualifications of members. 
(a)  Applicants for active membership in the volunteer fire department shall be twenty-one (21) years of age and under forty-five (45) years of age, shall be citizens of the city or reside in the vicinity of a city fire station, shall be sound in mind and members of good moral standing and good physical condition, and shall have such other qualifications as may be set by the executive board of the department. 
(b)  In the event normal recruitment activity fails to provide sufficient volunteers to man and operate a city fire station, the executive committee may waive the upper age limits required for active membership. Notification to the mayor shall be given of this event ten (10) days prior to the commencement of fire training for new recruits. Any fireman who is over the age of forty-five (45) and who has been recruited and trained in substantial compliance to the intent of this waiver prior to the adoption of this section shall be deemed to be so covered. 
(Code 1964, § 13-39; Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83; Ord. No. 84-146, § 1, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 91-101, § 1, 6-11-91; Ord. No. 94-29, § 1, 2-22-94)  
Sec. 13-46. - Agreement required of members. 
Any candidate for membership in the volunteer fire department, either active or honorary, must, before being admitted to such membership, sign an obligation agreeing to abide by and comply with any and all ordinances, rules, and regulations prescribed by the city council or by the volunteer fire department. Active members shall, in addition thereto, agree to attend any and all fire drills and regular or special meetings of the department, obey all rules and instructions of the officers thereof and attend and assist in the fighting of all fires within the city limits or adjacent thereto, when, as and if ordered so to do, illness or absence from the city not preventing. 
(Code 1964, § 13-40)  
Sec. 13-47. - Rules, regulations and bylaws. 
The volunteer fire department shall pass such rules and regulations and adopt such bylaws as the membership thereof shall deem wise, expedient and necessary for the government, control and benefit of such department, and such rules, regulations and bylaws, when and if approved by the city council, shall govern the procedure of such department, until the same are repealed or amended. 
(Code 1964, § 13-41)  
Sec. 13-48. - Authority of fire chief. 
(a)  The fire chief or his duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge at the scene of a fire or other emergency, and for a reasonable time subsequent thereto, involving the protection of life and/or property, are empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other hazardous conditions or situations or of taking any other action necessary in the reasonable performance of their duty. The fire chief may prohibit any person, vehicle or object from approaching the scene any may remove or cause to be removed from the scene any person, vehicle or object which may impede or interfere with the operations of the fire department. The fire chief may remove or cause to be removed any person, vehicle or object from hazardous areas. All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and shall not reenter the areas until authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(b)  The authority of the fire chief as described in subsection (a) of this section is subject to the authority of the safety coordinator of the City of Pasadena in regard to incidents involving hazardous or highly toxic materials. 
(Code 1964, § 13-42; Ord. No. 80-62, § 8, 4-8-80; Ord. No. 94-167, § 1, 9-6-94)  
Sec. 13-49. - Disposition of funds. 
No individual member or members of the volunteer fire department shall ever have any right, title, claim or interest in or to any of the funds of such department from whatsoever source derived, but such funds shall be for the sole and exclusive use and benefit of the individual members and the membership of such department as long as the department continues to exist. In the event of the department's abolition or disbarment from any cause whatsoever, any funds on hand to the credit of the department shall immediately revert to and become a part of the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 13-43)  
Sec. 13-50. - Death benefits. 
Members of the volunteer fire department are referred to Article 6228(f), Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes for Texas death benefits and 42 U. S. Code 3796 et seq. for federal death benefits, and such other ordinances of the city which have been or may be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83)  
Sec. 13-51. - Income protection. 
The city shall, for a period not to exceed twelve (12) months, pay to a volunteer fireman injured on duty and unable to return to employment by reason of such injury the amount of two-thirds of that person's average weekly base wage at the time of the injury. Provided, however, that such income protection shall be subject to the conditions and exceptions as follows: 
(1)  Any volunteer fireman not employed at the time of such injury shall receive only worker's compensation benefits. 
(2)  In computing the amount of two-thirds of a person's average weekly base wage, the city shall deduct from the amount paid the amount of the worker's compensation payment and any other income protection provided by the city. 
(3)  The fireman must qualify for membership in compliance with this article. 
(4)  The benefit shall in no event exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83)  
Sec. 13-52. - Training and education. 
All applicants shall successfully complete the cadet program established by the department and all members shall successfully complete such continuing education as is required by the rules, regulations and bylaws of the department. 
(Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83)  
Sec. 13-53. - Worker's compensation. 
The city, pursuant to Article 8309h, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes, elects to provide worker's compensation for volunteer firefighters who shall be added to the city's current self-insured insurance program upon compliance with the following conditions: 
(1)  New applicants. Due to the demanding physical and mental exertion involved in fire suppression, effective moral, medical, physical and mental screening is necessary. Physical, medical, moral and psychological standards shall be established by city council or the department in its bylaws. Applicants shall fulfill all qualifications upon completion of cadet classes. To determine eligibility, applicants shall provide the following: 
a.  Application. All volunteers shall complete an application which will be used as the basis for developing the personnel file. Applicants must complete a background investigation. 
(b)  Age requirements. All volunteers must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and must not have reached their forty-fifth (45th) birthday to be accepted for cadet training. Required retirement for all new entry-level applicants shall be age sixty (60), except new entrants to the department who are between their fortieth (40th) and forty-fifth (45th) birthday. Retirement for new entrants who join the department between their fortieth (40th) and forty-fifth (45th) birthday shall be on their twentieth (20th) anniversary of service in the department or their sixty-fifth (65th) birthday, whichever event occurs first. An annual physical will be required after the age of sixty (60) to determine whether the applicant shall have an active or inactive state. 
c.  Medical history. All applicants must furnish a complete medical history, listing all past injuries, physical disabilities and medication which may affect their performance and physical limitations. 
d.  Physical examination. Applicants must produce evidence that they have submitted to and passed a thorough physical examination required by the City of Pasadena prior to completion of cadet classes. 
e.  Physical agility. Applicants must successfully complete and pass a physical agility test as established by the volunteer department training standards. 
f.  Texas driver's license. Applicants must have a valid driver's license. 
g.  Psychological evaluation. All volunteer firemen will have a psychological evaluation paid for by the city upon completion of cadet classes. 
(2)  Current volunteers. Current volunteers must be physically and mentally capable of suppressing fires. Any volunteer unable to suppress fires shall be immediately placed on nonactive status by the department. The chief of the fire department shall notify the personnel department of all volunteer firemen on nonactive status. The executive board of the department shall order a physical examination of any fireman it determines may be physically unable to suppress fires; such examinations shall be paid for by the city. Additionally, current volunteers shall provide and be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Medical history. A complete medical history record will be completed by each volunteer fireman on forms furnished by the city. 
b.  Age requirements. Current volunteers may not be over the age of sixty (60). However, those current volunteers who require continuance in the department to receive twenty-year certification may do so up to the age of sixty-five (65), but an annual physical will be required after the age of sixty (60) to determine whether the volunteer shall have an active or nonactive status. 
c.  Psychological evaluation. Current volunteers will be required to pass a physical evaluation as a condition precedent to their retention in the department. Refusal to submit to the examination or failure to pass such examination will result in dismissal from the department. 
(3)  All volunteers. All volunteers shall be subject to the following conditions: 
a.  Report of injury or illness. Report to the department any injury received on regular employment or any illness. Present to the fire department copies of doctor's statement allowing them to return to work. If not able to return to normal employment, employee would not be able to return to fireman status. 
b.  Annual physical examination. An annual physical may be required for all volunteer fireman at city's expense. The city will select requirements and physicians. The city will provide details of such physical if such physical is required. 
c.  Accident reporting. Accident reporting shall be the responsibility of each fireman. He shall report to his supervisor immediately any accident occurring while in the process of training or covered department activities. All accidents must be reported within a twenty-four-hour period. Failure to do so may mean loss of benefits. All reports shall be submitted to the administrative head of the fire department with responsibility for transmission to the personnel department of the city immediately. 
(Ord. No. 83-95, § 1, 3-29-83; Ord. No. 84-38, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-84; Ord. No. 84-146, § 1, 7-10-84; Ord. No. 94-29, § 2, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 02-70, § 2, 3-5-02)  
Sec. 13-54. - Activities covered. 
(a)  The following activities are covered by the Income Protection Plan and Worker's Compensation: 
(1)  Travel to and from the scene of a fire, and all activities at the scene of a fire. 
(2)  On-duty status at the station houses. 
(3)  Training activities conducted by or for the benefit of the department. 
(4)  All scheduled physical training and conditioning programs or events. 
(5)  Events in which members participate which are conducted directly for the maintenance and promotion of the department and its assets. 
(b)  The following activities are not covered by the Income Protection Plan or Worker's Compensation: 
(1)  Social events conducted by the department. 
(2)  Events in which members participate which are conducted directly for the benefit of third-party organizations and promotions. 
(c)  Where inclusions in the Income Protection Plan or Worker's Compensation law, as interpreted by the courts, conflict with subsections (a) and/or (b) the law or plan, as the case may be, shall control. 
(Ord. No. 84-146, § 1, 7-10-84)  
Sec. 13-55. - Fire chief. 
(a)  There is hereby created and recreated the position of fire chief of the City of Pasadena, Texas. Such position shall be designated as salary grade PE-05. The fire chief shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(b)  The fire chief shall be head of the Pasadena Fire Department and shall have such duties and responsibilities as are assigned to him by the mayor of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the charter, ordinances of the City of Pasadena, and the laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 02-120, § 2, 5-14-02)  
Secs. 13-56—13-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - EXPLOSIVES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 13-61. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
Explosive; explosives. The terms "explosive" and "explosives" shall mean gunpowders, powders used for blasting, all forms of high explosives, blasting material, fuses (other than electric circuit breakers), detonators and other detonating agents, smokeless powders and any chemical compounds or mechanical mixture that contains any oxidizing any combustible units, or other ingredients, in such proportions, quantities or packing that ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion or by detonation of the compound or mixture of any part thereof may cause an explosion. The term "explosive" or "explosives" shall not include cartridges for small arms or shotguns, signaling devices or emergency equipment designated by the fire marshal. The terms "explosive" and "explosives" mean and include, among others, any of the following chemical compounds or mechanical mixtures: 
(1)  Amatol (mixture of ammonium nitrate and trinitrotoluene). 
(2)  Ammonal (mixture of ammonium nitrate, trinitrotoluene and powdered aluminum, with or without other ingredients). 
(3)  Azides. 
(4)  Black powder, all forms, except in completely assembled cartridges for small arms or shotguns. 
(5)  Caps, blasting (fuse and electric), detonating, all classes except percussion caps and small arms primers. 
(6)  Detonators. 
(7)  Dynamites. 
(8)  Fertilizers (ammonium sulfate with nitrogen). 
(9)  Fireworks, all kinds. 
(10)  Fulminates. 
(11)  Fuses of all varieties, used in connection with setting off explosives. 
(12)  Guncotton (see Nitrocellulose). 
(13)  Gunpowder and gunpowder mixtures (Except in completely assembled cartridges for small arms or shotguns). 
(14)  Hexanitrodiphonylamine (dipicrylamine, hexamine). 
(15)  Nitrocellulose exceeding 12.2 per cent nitrogen. 
(16)  Nitroglucose. 
(17)  Nitroglycerine (except in pharmacopoeia solution, or in form of pills, or granules, containing not more than one-fiftieth of a grain each, for pharmaceutical purposes). 
(18)  Nitrostarch. 
(19)  Nitrosugar. 
(20)  Pentaerythritetetranitrate (penthrite or pentrite, PETN). 
(21)  Permissible explosives. 
(22)  Picrates. 
(23)  Picric acid (except in solutions not exceeding 1.24 per cent at normal or room temperature, for medicinal use, in quantities not exceeding eight fluid ounces of such solution). 
(24)  Potassium nitrate powders (black saltpeter powder and nitro). 
(25)  Schnoiderite (mixture of ammonium nitrate and dinitronalphthene, with or without other ingredients). 
(26)  Smokeless powder (except in completely assembled cartridges for small arms or shotguns). 
(27)  Sodium nitrate powders (black soda powder). 
(28)  Squibs. 
(29)  Styphanates. 
(30)  Tetranitreaniline (TNA). 
(31)  Tetranitronaphthalene. 
(32)  Totryl (trinitrophonylmothylnitramine, totranitromethylaniline, tetralite, phronite). 
(33)  Trimethylene trinitramine (hexogon T4, cyclonite). 
(34)  Trinitroanisol (methyl picrate, trinitrophenylmethyl ether). 
(35)  Trinitrocresol (crysylite). 
(36)  Trinitrotoluene (triten, TNY). 
(37)  Trinitroxylene (TNX). 
Explosive permit. The term "explosive permit" shall be held to mean the written authority issued by the fire marshal for the keeping, storing or using of explosives, under such conditions as specified in this article. 
Fireworks. The term "fireworks" shall mean any device that can be used to produce or is intended to produce a striking display, such as light or noise or smoke, or a combination of those, by the combustion of explosive or flammable composition. 
Ingredients. The term "ingredients" shall mean phosphorus and active oxidizing and other chemicals, except those that are nonflammable gases at normal temperatures and under normal atmospheric conditions, that can be combined with one or more reducing materials to produce an explosive. The terms "ingredient" and "ingredients" mean any of the following chemicals (except in tablet, capsule or liquid form for medicinal purposes): 
(1)  Chlorates: 
Ammonium 
Barium 
Potassium 
Sodium 
(2)  Nitrates: 
Ammonium 
Potassium 
Sodium 
(3)  Perchlorates: 
Perchlorate acid and salts 
Phosphorus 
Relation in the ascending line. The term "relation in the ascending line" means the mother or father, either the natural parent or parent by marriage, of a minor. 
Special permit. The term "special permit" shall be held to mean the written authority issued by the fire marshal for the keeping, storing or using of explosives, under such unusual conditions as specified in this article. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 1, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-62. - Compliance with article. 
Explosives not expressly prohibited by this article may be kept, stored, sold or offered for sale, given away, used, transported or manufactured in the city only as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 2, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-63. - Prohibited explosives. 
No person shall have in his possession, keep, store, sell, offer for sale, give away, use, transport or manufacture any of the following explosives in any amount within the city: 
(1)  Liquid nitroglycerine. 
(2)  High explosives containing over sixty (60) per cent nitroglycerine, except gelatin dynamite. 
(3)  High explosives having an unsatisfactory absorbent or one that permits leakage of nitroglycerine under any conditions liable to exist during transportation or storage. 
(4)  Nitrocellulose in a dry condition in quantity greater than ten (10) pounds in one exterior package. 
(5)  Fulminate of mercury in bulk in a dry condition, and fulminate of all other metals in any condition, except as a component of manufactured articles not forbidden by this article. 
(6)  Fireworks of all kinds. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 2, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-64. - Exceptions from article—Small quantities of certain ingredients. 
There shall be excepted from the provisions of this article ingredients in small quantities and not used or intended to be used in the manufacture of explosives. The meaning of the term "small quantities," as used herein, is dependent upon the type of the ingredient and the classification of the person acquiring same, according to the following table: 
Type of 
ingredient 
(of each) 	Classification of person 
acquiring ingredient 	Meaning of 
small quantity 
Chlorate 	Industrial users ..... 	225 lb. 
	Colleges, universities ..... 	50 lb. 
	Wholesalers ..... 	25 lb. 
	High schools, hospitals, industrial research laboratories ..... 	10 lb. 
	Druggists ..... 	2 lb. 
	Others ..... 	¼ lb. 
Nitrate 	Industrial ..... 	200 lb. 
	Colleges, universities, wholesalers ..... 	50 lb. 
	High schools, druggists ..... 	10 lb. 
	Others ..... 	5 lb. 
Perchlorate 	Industrial users, industrial research laboratories ..... 	140 lb. 
	Colleges, Universities ..... 	70 lb. 
	Wholesalers ..... 	10 lb. 
	Druggists, high schools, hospitals ..... 	2 lb. 
	Others ..... 	¼ lb. 
Phosphorus 	Industrial users ..... 	50 lb. 
	Wholesalers, colleges, universities ..... 	10 lb. 
	Industrial research laboratories, high schools, hospitals ..... 	2 lb. 
	Others ..... 	¼ lb. 
 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 4, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-65. - Same—Explosives or ingredients in transit. 
There shall be excepted from the provisions of this article explosives or ingredients which are in transit upon railroad cars, when such transportation is regulated by acts of Congress, or rules and regulations of the Interstate Commerce Commission or any other federal or state governing agency. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 4, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-66. - Storage requirements. 
All explosives or ingredients of explosives, whether or not the possessor has a permit under this article, shall be stored in accordance with conditions not less stringent than those recommended by the American Insurance Association, the Interstate Commerce Commission or other recognized authorities. The fire marshal may place such additional restrictions upon the storage of ingredients as he may deem necessary for fire or explosion prevention purposes, without any modification of this article. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 8, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-67. - Packaging and marking requirements for delivery or transportation. 
No person shall deliver or transport explosives into the corporate limits of the city, unless they are packed and marked in compliance with the Interstate Commerce Commission regulations governing the transportation of explosives, as formulated and published from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 9, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-68. - Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives. 
No person shall operate a motor vehicle transporting explosives within the city, unless the same complies with all regulations which have been established by the Interstate Commerce Commission, the Civil Aeronautics Board, the state or the city, as such regulations may apply governing the construction or operation of such motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 10, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-69. - Aiding minors to purchase, use, etc., fireworks. 
No relation in the ascending line of a minor, or guardian of a minor, shall furnish money or a thing of value to a minor for the purchase of fireworks, or encourage, act in conjunction with or in any manner instigate or aid a minor in the commission of having, keeping, storing, selling, offering for sale, giving away, using, transporting, or manufacturing fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. This shall be an offense regardless of whether the minor has been found guilty of the offense. The commission of the offense by the minor on the property under the control or owned by the relation or guardian shall be prima facie evidence that the relation or guardian was instigating or aiding the minor. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 3, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-70. - Confiscation of explosives found in violation of article. 
All explosives or ingredients thereof which shall be kept, possessed or stored or in anywise handled in violation of this article may be confiscated and impounded by the fire marshal and disposed of by the fire marshal as provided for by the applicable laws of the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 13, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-71. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and any person convicted of any such violation shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day and every day that such violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 14, 5-30-67; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Secs. 13-72—13-80. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT TO MANUFACTURE, STORE, USE, ETC. 
 
Sec. 13-81. - Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Every person, company, partnership, corporation or branch of any government agency, except those excepted herein, manufacturing, storing, handling, using or transporting or otherwise possessing explosives or ingredients within the city must obtain a permit under the provisions of this division. 
(b)  Every person having individuals in his employ who manufacture, handle, store, use, transport or possess explosives for him must have an explosive permit issued under this division. 
(c)  Every person who possesses or has access to the keys or combination of the storage place or magazine, or who has custody of the explosives or ingredients, or who charges the explosives into a hole, or who detonates explosives, shall possess an individual explosive permit, except as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  No permit shall be required for the manufacture, distribution, storage, sale, purchase, possession, handling or use of explosives or ingredients by the Military or Naval Services of the United States or by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the city police department or the county sheriff, provided such explosives or ingredients are to be used for the purpose of law enforcement. Nor shall any permit be required by arsenals, depots, or other establishments owned wholly by the United States Department of Defense; provided, however, that a permit shall be required for private operators of such establishments who possess explosives or ingredients for shipment or who ship on other than government bills of lading. A permit shall also be required for persons who manufacture explosives under the authority of the United States for, or sell explosives to, the Military or Naval Services of the United States, or the Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 5, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-82. - Qualifications of applicant. 
Only those persons who have proven to the fire marshal or some person designated by him, by examination or actual test or by checked references of three (3) persons not related to the applicant, or by all these means, that they are qualified to manufacture, store, handle, use, transport or possess explosives and ingredients and who have proved to the satisfaction of the fire marshal that they have read, or have had read to them, and know the provisions of this article, shall be given an explosive permit. Every new applicant for a permit shall be checked through the records and identification bureau of the police department and any person convicted of a felony shall not be entitled to a permit. No permit shall be issued in time of war or riot to any person who is not a citizen of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(a, c), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-83. - Application; applicant to appear in person. 
The fire marshal shall require a written application for an explosive permit. Every person, including an authorized agent, applying for an explosive permit must appear in person before the fire marshal or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(j), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-84. - Fee. 
The fee for an explosive permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00), which fee shall be paid to the building official prior to issuance of the permit. Such fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall likewise apply to all renewals or extensions of all permits granted or issued under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 12, 5-30-67; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 13-85. - Investigation upon receipt of application; issuance or refusal generally. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for an explosive permit, the fire marshal shall make or cause to be made an investigation to determine if all conditions of this article and applying to the permit specified are fulfilled, and if the fire marshal shall find that such conditions are fulfilled and that the information set forth in the permit application is true, the permit shall be issued, subject, however, to all other provisions of this division. 
(b)  The fire marshal may refuse to issue an explosive permit to any person, without disclosing his reason, except as otherwise provided in this division. He may also defer the issuance of an explosive permit to make such investigation as he deems necessary. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(b, h), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-86. - Record of issuance. 
The fire marshal's office shall keep an accurate and complete record of all explosive permits issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(i), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-87. - Government departments, firms, etc., may obtain permit through authorized agent. 
Government departments, firms, corporations, partnerships, contractors and the like may obtain explosive permits through a person authorized to act for or to assume legal responsibility for them. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(j), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-88. - Employer's permit prerequisite to issuance or continuance of employee's permit. 
No employee of a government department, firm, partnership, corporation or individual shall be issued an explosive permit unless his employer first obtains an explosive permit. An employee's explosive permit becomes void if his employer's explosive permit expires or is revoked. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(k, l), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-89. - Council approval required for issuance in certain cases. 
The fire marshal shall not issue a permit for quantities to exceed one hundred (100) pounds of high or low explosives, five hundred (500) electric blasting caps, or twenty-five (25) pounds of black powder of any kind, without the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(f), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-90. - Not to issue over objection of fire or police chief. 
The fire marshal shall not issue an explosive permit if he receives a written objection from the chief of the fire department or the chief of the police department, or from persons authorized to act for them. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(e), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-91. - Police and fire chiefs to be notified of issuance in certain cases. 
The fire marshal may issue permits for any quantity of explosive ingredients, provided the chief of the fire department and the chief of the police department are advised by him in writing of permits issued for quantities in excess of five hundred (500) pounds. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(g), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-92. - Numbering; contents. 
Explosive permits shall be numbered consecutively and shall specify the purpose for which the explosives or their ingredients are to be manufactured, stored, handled, transported or possessed, and the maximum amount that will be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(c), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-93. - Term. 
An explosive permit shall not be issued for a period of longer than one (1) year from date of issuance. It shall be issued for a less period if deemed advisable by the fire marshal or if the purpose for which the permit is issued will not require a period of a year. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(d), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-94. - Notice of loss or destruction. 
The fire marshal shall be notified of the loss or destruction of any valid permit issued under this division. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(s), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-95. - To be presented to person delivering explosives. 
No person shall allow any substance which is labeled "Explosives" or which is known by the invoice or bill of lading to be explosives, and labeled in accordance with interstate regulations, to pass from his possession for delivery, or to be delivered by any person representing him, to any person required to have a permit under this division, unless such person presents to him, for examination, a valid permit issued under this division. A photostatic copy of the same size as the permit shall be considered the same as the permit for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 11, 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-96. - Permittee's statement as to disposition of unused ingredients or explosives. 
The fire marshal shall require a statement from any explosive permit holder regarding the disposition of unused ingredients or explosives from any job. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(m), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-97. - Procedure when permittee's ingredients become dangerous or hazardous. 
In case ingredients in the hands of the holder of an explosive permit shall, in the opinion and judgment of the fire marshal, become dangerous or hazardous, the fire marshal shall notify the permittee and shall allow forty-eight (48) hours to remove the ingredients to a safe location, except in the case of a serious hazard, shorter time for removal may be designated by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(t), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-98. - Assignment or transfer prohibited. 
Explosive permits cannot be assigned or in any way transferred, nor can any person operate under, or have the benefit of, another person's permit. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(o), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-99. - Procedure upon death or discharge from employment of permittee. 
In the event of the death of the holder of an explosive permit, the permit becomes immediately void, and the personal representative or heirs of the decedent must apply for a permit to cover remaining explosives or ingredients or uncompleted operations requiring a permit. If the permit holder is discharged from his employment, his permit becomes immediately void and shall be delivered to his employer, who must deface it by writing across the face thereof the word "Void", together with a notation of the date and reason for the voidance, and thereafter mail or deliver it to the fire marshal, and the employer must at once take possession and charge of any explosives or ingredients for which the permittee was accountable. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(p), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-100. - Procedure upon dissolution or transfer of permittee's business. 
In the event of the dissolution or transfer of the business of the holder of an explosive permit, the successor in interest of the permittee shall immediately apply for a permit to cover any explosives, ingredients or operations relating to same. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(p), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-101. - Procedure in event of permittee's bankruptcy. 
In the event of bankruptcy of the holder of an explosive permit, the trustee or receiver of his bankrupt estate shall immediately apply for a permit to cover any remaining explosives, ingredients or operations relating thereto. The permit shall not pass with any forced sale or other forced transfer of explosives, ingredients or operations covered by it, and the transferee must immediately apply for a permit to cover same. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(q), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-102. - Return of void permits. 
Any explosive permit that becomes void during the period for which it was issued shall be returned immediately to the office of the fire marshal and it shall be accompanied with all photostatic copies thereof and a list showing all photostatic copies that have been made. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(r), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-103. - Revocation generally. 
The fire marshal shall revoke an explosive permit for violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 6(n), 5-30-67)  
Sec. 13-104. - Appeal from refusal or revocation. 
Any person who has been refused issuance of an explosive permit by the fire marshal or who has had his explosive permit revoked by the fire marshal may appeal such action to the city council by notifying the city secretary in writing, within ten (10) days of such action of the fire marshal. Upon receipt of such notice of appeal, the mayor shall call a meeting of the council, within not less than ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice. Complete minutes shall be taken of all such proceedings of the council, and the findings and decision of the council shall be made in writing within ten (10) days after the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 67-1958, § 7, 5-30-67)  
Secs. 13-105—13-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - BUILDINGS CONSTITUTING FIRE HAZARDS GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Dangerous buildings generally, § 9-151 et seq. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to provide for the condemnation and removal of structures constituting fire hazards, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(25). 
 
Sec. 13-116. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
Building. The term "building" is used in its customary and ordinary meaning, but where a shed or attachment has been built onto an original structure, or where two (2) or more buildings have been joined together or where a second building has been built adjacent to the first and utilizes a wall of the first building as a party wall, all parts shall be considered one building. 
Combustible fiber. The term "combustible fiber" shall mean and include cotton, sisal, henequen, ixtle, jute, hemp, tow, cocoa fiber, oakum, baled waste, baled wastepaper, kapok, hay, straw, Spanish moss and excelsior. 
Lodging house. The term "lodging house" is used in its ordinary and customary meaning and shall also mean and include hotels, boardinghouses, rooming houses, tenement houses, or any other houses, by whatever name known, used and occupied, or designed and constructed so that the same may be used and occupied, for the permanent or temporary occupancy for living quarters for ten (10) or more persons. 
Owner. The term "owner" is used in its customary and ordinary meaning and in addition thereto: 
(1)  If the building is owned by two (2) or more persons, each shall be responsible hereunder as an owner. 
(2)  If the building is owned or leased by a corporation, the president, the general agent (if there is one), the general manager (if there is one), and each member of the board of directors shall be responsible hereunder as an owner. 
(3)  If the building is owned by one and leased to another, the responsibility hereunder shall be the responsibility of both the lessor and lessee and each or both may be held accountable for a violation hereof, and the term "owner" shall include "lessee." 
(4)  If the building is the property of an estate under administration, in custodia legis, or held in trust, the executor, administrator, guardian, receiver or trustee shall be responsible hereunder as an owner. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 1, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-117. - Powers of fire marshal and deputies in enforcing article. 
(a)  For the purpose of the enforcement of this article, the fire marshal and any assistant fire marshal, arson investigator or inspector of the fire prevention division of the fire department of the city shall be vested with all of the authority, duties and powers of a duly constituted police officer of this city. 
(b)  For the purpose of the enforcement of this article, any assistant fire marshal, city arson investigator or inspector of the fire prevention division of the fire department of the city shall be deemed to be a deputy of the fire marshal and any of the powers and duties herein given the fire marshal may be exercised by any such deputy on behalf of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 10, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-118. - Fire hazards enumerated. 
The following shall be considered fire hazards: 
(1)  Any building containing electrical wiring or appliances in a dangerous and defective condition likely to cause fire. Electrical wiring and appliances installed or in use which are not in compliance with the provisions of any ordinance of this city regulating such wiring and appliances and the installation thereof shall be deemed dangerous and defective. [5] 
(2)  Any building containing gas plumbing or appliances in a dangerous and defective condition likely to cause fire. Gas plumbing or appliances installed or in use which are not in compliance with the provisions of any ordinance of this city regulating such plumbing and appliances and the installation thereof shall be deemed dangerous and defective. [6] 
(3)  Any building of wooden frame construction wherein flammable liquids are used or stored in violation of any ordinance passed by the city council regulating the storage, handling, keeping and use of flammable liquids. 
(4)  Any building of wooden frame construction wherein any cafe or restaurant business is operated unless the walls and ceiling of that portion of the building in which the cafe or restaurant is operated are separated from the remainder of the building by one (1) hour fire resistive materials, as defined in the building code. [7] 
(5)  Any building of wooden frame construction wherein any automobile repair or service business is carried on, unless fire-resistive separation is installed as provided in paragraph (4) above. 
(6)  Any building of wooden frame construction wherein any combustible fibers are stored in excess of one hundred (100) cubic feet or wherein combustible fibers of less quantity than one hundred (100) cubic feet are stored other than in a metal-lined wooden bin, equipped with a self-closing metal cover. 
(7)  Any lodging house being operated in a two (2) story building of wooden frame construction; provided, however, that no such lodging house shall constitute a fire hazard if: 
(a)  The ceiling of the first floor is separated from the floor of the second floor by one (1) hour fire-resistive materials; and 
(b)  The walls between the rooms are insulated by one (1) hour fire-resistive materials and extend from ceiling to floor; and 
(c)  The floors, stairways, walls and frame of the house are in safe and sound structural condition; and 
(d)  The building does not otherwise constitute a fire hazard as provided herein. 
(8)  Any wooden frame building, a substantial portion of which is in a state of dilapidation and in an advanced stage of rot and deterioration, where the rotten, dilapidated and deteriorated condition of the building renders its occupancy extremely hazardous to human life due to the increased likelihood of the occurrence of fire and the increased danger of its rapid and violent spread. 
(9)  Though not otherwise defined herein, any building wherein exists a dangerous, defective and hazardous condition the nature of which renders the occupancy of such building an extreme risk to human life and the continued existence of which will, under all probabilities, result in a loss of human life. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 2, 5-2-67) 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Electrical code, Ch. 12. 

--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Plumbing, Ch. 29. 

--- (7) --- 
Cross reference— Building code, § 9-62 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13-119. - Initial placarding. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find that any building within the city constitutes a fire hazard, he shall forthwith cause to be posted on or near the front door of such building, in as conspicuous a manner as possible, a substantial placard upon which shall be printed in red in letters at least two and one-half (2½) inches high in words "WARNING—FIRE HAZARD," and on which placard there shall also appear the following words: 
"THE BUILDING IS A FIRE HAZARD. ITS OCCUPANCY IS DANGEROUS TO HUMAN LIFE. THE OWNER AND ALL OCCUPANTS ARE DIRECTED BY LAW TO COMMUNICATE IN PERSON OR BY TELEPHONE, IMMEDIATELY, WITH THE OFFICE OF THE FIRE MARSHAL OF THE CITY OF PASADENA." 
Such placard may contain other information deemed advisable by the fire marshal. Like placards shall be placed in or on other portions of the building as may be deemed necessary by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 3, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-120. - Notice to owner. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall give notice to the owner of the building placarded in accord with section 13-119 that the same constitutes a fire hazard, stating substantially what conditions exist giving rise to same and substantially what measures should be taken to abolish the hazard. Such notice shall normally be given in writing by mail or delivery, but may be given orally if the circumstances are urgent and delay would endanger life. 
(b)  The fire marshal shall find and determine from the existing facts what maximum amount of time may be safely permitted the owner to abolish the fire hazard, without materially increasing the danger to life and shall specify in his notice to the owner the extent of such time limit. 
(c)  Where the fire marshal cannot, by the exercise of reasonable diligence, ascertain the identity or the residence of the owner, or is wholly unable to communicate with him for any reason, it shall be sufficient for the fire marshal to post a written notice near his placard on the building. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 4, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-121. - Duty of owner to abolish hazard. 
(a)  Whenever any owner shall be given notice as provided in section 13-120, he shall forthwith take such action as may be necessary to abolish the fire hazard. He shall do so by either correcting the physical condition or conditions which cause fire, or by causing the building to be vacated of human occupancy. Purported or alleged inability to abolish the hazard in one way will not excuse failure to abolish it in the other. He shall take all necessary action and abolish the fire hazard within the time which the fire marshal has found from the facts may safely be allowed. 
(b)  Any owner of any building who shall receive notice from the fire marshal that it is a fire hazard, as provided in section 13-120, and shall fail or refuse to abolish the fire hazard within the maximum time limit found by the fire marshal, as provided in section 13-120, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such fire hazard continues to exist after the expiration of the time limit shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, §§ 5, 11(a), 5-2-67; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 13-122. - Acceptance of rent prohibited until hazard abolished. 
(a)  Any owner of any building who shall receive notice from the fire marshal that it is a fire hazard, as provided in section 13-120, and shall fail or refuse to abolish the fire hazard within the maximum time limit found by the fire marshal, as provided in section 13-120, and shall, after the expiration of such time limit, accept payment of rent from any person as consideration for occupying such building or any portion thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). This offense shall be separate and distinct from the offense denounced in section 13-121. Each acceptance of payment of rent shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Any owner of any building who has received a notice from the fire marshal that it is a fire hazard, as provided in section 13-120, and, without abolishing the fire hazard, thereafter rents any portion of the building to some person not theretofore renting or occupying same, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 11(b), (e), 5-2-67; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 13-123. - Discontinuing electrical service. 
When any fire hazard is permitted to continue in existence by the owner after receiving the notice provided for in section 13-120, and after the expiration of the time limit as determined under section 13-120, if the fire marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to human life is materially increased by the electrical wiring and appliances present in the building, he shall give notice to the public utility company supplying electrical current to such building, to disconnect its service and forthwith cease supplying electrical current thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the chief officer of the company in active charge of its operations to cause such service to be disconnected and the supply of electrical current discontinued, immediately. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 8, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-124. - Discontinuing gas service. 
When any fire hazard is permitted to continue to exist by the owner after receiving the notice provided for in section 13-120, and after the expiration of the time limit as determined under section 13-120, if the fire marshal shall find and determine from the facts that the danger to human life is materially increased by the gas plumbing and appliances present in the building, he shall give notice to the public utility company supplying gas to such building, to disconnect its service and forthwith cease supplying gas thereto. It shall thereupon be the duty of the chief officer of the company in active charge of its operations to cause such service to be disconnected and the supply of gas discontinued, immediately. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 9, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-125. - Second placarding. 
(a)  Whenever the fire marshal shall find that a fire hazard continues to exist after the giving of notice and the expiration of the time limits provided in sections 13-120 and 13-121, he shall cause to be posted on or near the front door of such building, in as conspicuous a manner as possible, a second substantial placard upon which shall be printed in red in letters at least two and one-half (2½) inches high the words, "SECOND WARNING—FIRE HAZARD," and on which placard there shall also appear the following words: 
"THE TIME LIMIT HAS EXPIRED FOR THE CORRECTION OF THE CONDITIONS WHICH MAKE THIS BUILDING A FIRE HAZARD, AND THEY HAVE NOT BEEN CORRECTED. 
THE FURTHER OCCUPANCY OF THIS BUILDING BY ANY PERSON IS PROHIBITED BY LAW AS IT IS DANGEROUS TO LIFE. 
THIS NOTICE IS POSTED (Here the notice shall show the date and hour). ALL PERSONS ARE REQUIRED BY LAW TO VACATE SAME NOT LATER THAN FORTY-EIGHT HOURS AFTER SUCH TIME, AND ARE PROHIBITED FROM RE-ENTERING SAME UNTIL THE FIRE MARSHAL FINDS THAT THE FIRE HAZARD HAS BEEN ABOLISHED. 
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, CALL THE FIRE MARSHAL OF THE CITY OF PASADENA." 
Such placard may contain other information deemed advisable by the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 6, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-126. - Unlawful occupancy or entry. 
After forty-eight (48) hours from the stated hour of the posting of the second placard in accord with section 13-125, as shown therein, it shall be unlawful for any person to occupy the building as living quarters or to enter or remain in same, except for short visits not exceeding thirty (30) minutes in any one day, during daylight hours, after first giving notice to the fire marshal's office of intention to enter; provided that, after first giving notice to the fire marshal and subject to his regulation, the owner may cause persons to enter the premises for the purpose of correcting the physical conditions which give rise to the hazard. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 7, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-127. - Allowing reoccupancy without correcting conditions. 
Any owner of any building who receives a notice from the fire marshal that it is a fire hazard as provided in section 13-120, and abolishes the fire hazard by causing the building to be vacated of human occupancy and thereafter reconstitutes the fire hazard by allowing or causing human occupancy to be resumed without correcting the hazardous physical condition of the building, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and each day that such reconstituted fire hazard continues to exist shall be a separate offense. No additional notice from the fire marshal shall be required in such case. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 11(c), 5-2-67; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 13-128. - Unlawful removal or defacing of placards. 
(a)  Any owner of any building who shall tear down or deface any placard posted by the fire marshal under the provisions of this article or cause the same to be done shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(b)  Any other person who shall tear down or deface any such placard shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 11(d), 5-2-67; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 13-129. - Removal of placards after conditions remedied. 
Whenever the fire marshal finds that the physical conditions causing the fire hazard no longer exist, he shall forthwith notify the owner and remove his placard or placards. After such finding, it shall be lawful to occupy the building. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 7, 5-2-67)  
Secs. 13-130—13-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FIRE HAZARD INSPECTION 
 
Sec. 13-141. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, the word "owner" shall mean the owner, occupant, lessee or other person interested in any building, whether one or more, and regardless of actual interest in the building. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 14, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-142. - Committee created; general functions and composition of committee. 
There is hereby created a fire hazard inspection committee to be an agency and instrumentality of the city to aid and assist the city in the protection of the lives and property of its citizens under its Charter powers. The committee shall consist of the director of public works, the fire marshal and the director of public health. In the absence of the director of public works or at any time when he is unable to act, the assistant director of public works may act in his place. In like manner, the assistant fire marshal or any deputy fire marshal may act in the place of the fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 12, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-143. - Investigation and hearing by committee—Motion of council; notice to owner. 
(a)  Whenever the city council shall receive information that any building situated within the city constitutes a serious fire hazard to life and property due to the construction of the building, the use or occupancy of it, or due to any other condition whatsoever, the city council shall, by motion, direct the fire hazard inspection committee to investigate the building, report the facts found by it, and make recommendations thereon. 
(b)  Upon the passage of such motion, the fire hazard inspection committee shall forthwith set a time, date and place for the holding of a hearing and inspection of the building. It shall give the owner a notice in writing, by United States mail, of the time, date and place of the hearing and the purpose of same. Such notice shall inform the owner that he has a right to be present at such hearing and to examine or cross-examine witnesses. Such notice shall be given to the owner at least twenty (20) days prior to the time set for the hearing. If the owner of the building is unknown, or cannot be found in the city, the fire hazard inspection committee shall cause such notice to be given by advertising same in a daily newspaper published within the city at least two (2) times prior to the date of the hearing. Such notice may be signed by any member of the fire hazard inspection committee or by the city secretary or the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 14, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-144. - Same—Conduct of hearing; inspection of building; report to council. 
The fire hazard inspection committee shall hold a hearing at the time, date and place set by it. The city attorney or one of his assistants, if requested, shall be present to advise the committee on legal matters and assist it in the examination of witnesses. During the course of the hearing, or subsequent thereto and prior to the filing of its report, the fire hazard inspection committee shall inspect the building in question. The committee shall fully determine the facts relative to such building and shall file a full report of same with the city council. Each report shall embrace, among others, the following fact findings: 
(1)  The fire district or zone in which the building is located. 
(2)  The names of any parties interested in the building as an owner, occupant, lessee, lien holder, or by virtue of any other claim, if the names of such parties can be ascertained. 
(3)  A description of the general type of the building, the construction of same, and the occupancy and use being made of it. 
(4)  The existence in such building of conditions rendering such building or the use being made thereof a serious fire hazard to life and property, setting forth the conditions in detail. 
(5)  In such report, if the fire hazard inspection committee has found facts showing that the building constitutes a serious fire hazard to life and property, the committee shall recommend to the council such measures, if any, as can be taken to remove such fire hazard and render the building safe. If the fire hazard inspection committee finds that the building constitutes a serious fire hazard to life and property and that the condition cannot be corrected, the committee shall so state in its report to the city council. A copy of the report shall be given or mailed to the owner, together with the probable time and date that the city council will consider the report. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 15, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-145. - Action of council on committee's report. 
(a)  The city council shall receive the report provided for in section 13-144 and consider the same at its first regular or special meeting thereafter or as soon as practicable. The owner shall be entitled at such meeting to be heard on the matters contained in the report and to present witnesses to the council, and shall be entitled to obtain the necessary process to summon such witnesses. The council shall also hear such other witnesses and consider such other facts as may be deemed necessary by it to arrive at proper conclusions concerning the building. 
(b)  Should the city council conclude that the facts show that the building constitutes a serious fire hazard to life and property, but that measures can be taken to remove the dangerous conditions and render the building safe, it shall specify the measures necessary to correct the dangerous conditions and shall order the owner, by ordinance, to take such measures and correct such conditions, setting forth the time in which the work is to be accomplished by him. The owner may, at his discretion, instead of complying with such order, demolish the building completely and remove same. 
(c)  If the city council should conclude that the facts show that the conditions rendering the building a serious fire hazard to life and property cannot be corrected by any measures, it shall find and declare the building to be a nuisance and shall order the owner, by ordinance, to proceed forthwith and within a specified time to demolish the building and remove same. 
(d)  A copy of the ordinance embodying the final decision and orders of the city council shall be mailed or delivered to the owner by the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 16, 5-2-67)  
Sec. 13-146. - Failure to comply with council's order. 
If the owner fails to comply with the order of the city council given pursuant to section 13-145, within the time specified in such order, and such time is not extended by the city council, the city attorney is authorized and directed to file suit in the proper court against such owner and obtain the necessary court orders and process to enforce the orders of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 67-1937, § 17, 5-2-67)  
Secs. 13-147—13-150. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 
 
Sec. 13-151. - Adoption. 
The city council of the City of Pasadena, Texas does hereby adopt the International Fire Code, 2015 Edition inclusive of all Appendices, as published by the International Code Council and all National Fire Protection Association current Standards, as the fire prevention code of the City of Pasadena, Texas for the control of buildings and structures as herein provided; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said 2015 International Fire Code are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, subject, however, to the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, set forth in section 13-152 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 80-62, § 1, 4-8-80; Ord. No. 90-85, § 2, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 99-175, § 1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 2007-169, § 2, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 17-010, § 2, 1-17-17)  
Sec. 13-152. - Additions, insertions and changes. 
The articles and sections of the International Fire Code 2006 edition, as adopted and specified in section 13-151 of the Pasadena Code of Ordinances shall be amended as read as follows: 
CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATION 
Section 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Fire Code of the City of Pasadena, hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
Sections 108 Board of Appeals through Section 108.3 shall be deleted in their entirety. 
Section 109.4 Violation penalties. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who violates a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000). Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 111.4 Failure to comply. Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person, firm, corporation, or other entity is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000). 
CHAPTER 5 FIRE SERVICE FEATURES 
Section 507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 300 feet from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official and shall not exceed 100 feet from any Fire Department Connection (FDC). 
CHAPTER 9 FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS 
901.5 Where required. Fire Detection and Alarm Systems, Fire Extinguishing Systems, Fire Hydrant Systems, Fire Pump Systems, Private Fire Service Mains and all other fire protection systems and appurtenances thereto, shall be subject to acceptance test as contained in the installation standards, with all Post Indicator Valves (PIV/WPIV) to be installed above ground and have exterior access as approved by the Fire Code Official. The Fire Code Official shall be notified before any required acceptance testing. 
903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures shall be provided in the locations described in this section or when the gross square footage of the building or structure exceeds 10,000 square feet. 
903.2.3 An Approved automatic sprinkler system shall be provided for all Group E Day Care occupancies where the occupant load exceeds 100 persons. 
905.3 Where Required and in addition to the requirements set forth in Chapter 9 of the Fire Code, the Fire Code Official may require the installation of a Class III standpipe system in any new premises where the gross square footage of the premises exceeds 200,000 square feet and its location shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. 
912.2 Where required. Fire Department Connections (FDC) shall be installed in accordance with NFPA Standards at a remote location with all standards applicable to system design and shall comply with 912.2 through 912.7 and upon approval and acceptance by the Fire Code Official. 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A. Board of Appeals shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Appendix B. Fire-Flow Requirements for Buildings shall be adopted in its entirety. 
Appendix C. Fire Hydrant Locations and Distribution shall be adopted in its entirety. 
Appendix D. Fire Apparatus Access Roads shall be adopted in its entirety. 
Appendix E. Hazard Categories shall be adopted in its entirety. 
Section 102.3 Change of Use or Occupancy, shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section 102.4 Application of New Building Code, shall be deleted in its entirety. 
Section 103 Department of Fire Prevention, shall be deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 80-62, § 2, 4-8-80; Ord. No. 90-85, § 3, 5-15-90; Ord. No. 99-175, § 2, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 03-210, § 2, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 2007-169, § 1, 5-15-07; Ord. No. 17-010, § 3, 1-17-17)  
Secs. 13-153—13-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - SPECIFIC OCCUPANCIES REGULATIONS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 13-156—13-160. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-253, § 1, adopted October 18, 2005, repealed §§ 13-161—13-172, which pertained to health care occupancies and derived from Ord. No. 84-230, § 1, 9-25-84. 
 
Secs. 13-161—13-172. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - FEES 
 
Sec. 13-173. - Emergency services fees. 
The following fees shall apply to the recovery of costs associated with emergency services response to releases of hazardous substances conducted inside and outside the city limits of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
The fire department, or its authorized agent, shall send an invoice to the "responsible party." The "responsible party" shall remit full payment of such fees immediately upon receipt for the following emergency services: 
(1)  Incident stabilization and remediation of spilled hazardous substances including but not limited to fuel products. 
a.  Response. The National Oil and Hazardous Substances Pollution Contingency Plan (NCP) is required by section 105 of CERCLA of 1980, as amended by SARA of 1986, and by the Clean Water Act (CWA), as amended by the Oil Pollution Act (OPA) of 1990. The NCP is applicable to response actions taken pursuant to the authorities of CERCLA and section 311 of the CWA, as amended. Specifically, the NCP makes clear in 40 CFR Part 300.700 (Activities by Other Persons) "(b)(1) … The Mechanisms available to recover the costs of response actions under CERCLA are, in summary: (1) Section 107(a) wherein any person may receive a court award of his or her response costs, plus interest, from the party or parties found liable;" (b)(4) "Section 123, wherein a general purpose unit of local government may apply to the Fund" (Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund - OSLTF) "under 40 CFR part 310 for reimbursement of the costs of temporary emergency measures that are necessary to prevent or mitigate injury to human health or the environment associated with a release," (c)(1) "Responsible parties shall be liable for all response costs incurred by the United States government or a state or an Indian tribe not inconsistent with the NCP," and (c)(2)" Responsible parties shall be liable for necessary costs of response actions to releases of hazardous substances incurred by any other person consistent with the NCP." 
b.  Response to spilled or released hazardous substances by Emergency Services of the City of Pasadena shall be invoiced at one thousand two hundred dollars ($1,200.00) for up to sixty (60) minutes and twenty dollars ($20.00) per minute thereafter until the incident has been stabilized and remediated. Emergency services include but are not limited to fire department, law enforcement and/or public works personnel and/or equipment utilized for site stabilization, public protective actions, traffic control, etc. 
(2)  Site control and standby for leaking or spilled hazardous substances including, but not limited to, fuel products. 
a.  Activation of public emergency notification systems. The Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA), also known as SARA Title III, was enacted in November 1986. This law provided an infrastructure at the state and local levels to plan for chemical emergencies. Facilities that have spilled hazardous substances, or that store, use, or release certain chemicals are subject to various reporting requirements. All of this information is made publicly available so that interested parties may become informed about potentially dangerous chemicals in their community. Common EPCRA topics include: Emergency planning; hazardous chemical inventory reporting; public access to chemical information; toxic chemical release reporting and the Form R; and the toxics release inventory (TRI) database. 
Under the Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA) of 1986, the federal government has designated several hundred chemicals as "extremely hazardous substances" based on their acute lethal toxicity. Under the law, releases of these extremely hazardous substances trigger reporting requirements to state and local authorities. Specifically, EPA requires that the owner or operator of a facility that releases an extremely hazardous substance in an amount greater than its established RQ notify the state emergency response commission and the local emergency planning committee established for the location where the incident occurs. 
There are over one hundred (100) chemicals that are designated as both a Superfund hazardous substance and an EPCRA extremely hazardous substance. In the event of a release of any of these substances, the person responsible (responsible party) for the release is required to contact all of the appropriate federal, state, and local authorities. 
b.  The "responsible party" shall also be invoiced at cost for the associated activation of the public emergency notification system and Reverse 911 for shelter in place and public information dissemination if applicable to the incident under EPCRA. 
(Ord. No. 10-148, § 1(Exh. A), 7-13-10)  
Chapter 13½ - FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— General building regulations, Ch. 9; fences on drainage easements, § 9-6; civil defense and disaster relief, Ch. 10; planning, Ch. 28; water and sewer, Ch. 37; Subdivisions, App. A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 13½-1—13½-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION ON FLOOD CONTROL AND DRAINAGE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-80, §§ 1—12, adopted July 17, 1979, did not expressly amend the Code; therefore, codification as Art. II of Ch. 13½, §§ 13½-21—13½-32, has been at the editor's discretion. 
Cross reference— Public works department, § 2-84 et seq. 
 
Sec. 13½-21. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created and established, within and for the city, the City of Pasadena Commission on Flood Control and Drainage, composed of ten (10) members, appointed by the mayor whose offices are hereby created and established as an advisory commission to assist and advise the mayor and city council on all matters relative to drainage and flood control as they would affect the citizens and/or property of Pasadena, Texas. The commission will be composed of the following members: The directors of public works, planning, and civil defense, three (3) citizens of the City of Pasadena, and four (4) additional individuals from Pasadena who have engineering background or experience. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 1, 7-19-79)  
Sec. 13½-22. - Appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Seven (7) members of the commission on flood control and drainage will be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  The directors of planning, public works, and civil defense are hereby appointed to the commission by office and will serve until they either no longer hold their offices or until the office is deleted from the commission by act of the governing body of the city. Each new director or acting director of planning, public works, and civil defense shall automatically assume the place of his or her predecessor on the commission but will not, ipso facto, assume any office the predecessor may have held on the commission. 
(c)  Four (4) of the commissioners who are first so appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of three (3) years and the remaining commissioners shall be designated to serve for two (2) years respectively from the date of their appointment, but thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of office of two (2) years, unless sooner terminated. 
(d)  All vacancies in membership of the commission other than those designated members by office shall be filled by the mayor (subject to confirmation by city council) for the unexpired terms as soon as practicable after the position becomes vacant. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 2, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-23. - Members to serve without compensation. 
The members of the commission on flood control and drainage, in the performance of their official duties, shall serve without compensation for office. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 3, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-24. - Officers designated. 
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The mayor is empowered to appoint appropriate ex officio members of the commission. The director of public works shall serve as the executive officer of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 4, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-25. - Election and terms of officers. 
The chairman shall be appointed by the mayor, and the vice-chairman and the secretary of the commission shall be nominated by the members of the commission in such a manner as the commission shall prescribe at its first meeting as a committee of the whole, and each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified and serving members of the commission. The terms of all elected offices shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's commission membership appointment, except that the directors of planning, public works, and civil defense shall hold no elected office for a period in excess of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 5, 7-19-79) 
Editor's note— The city has advised that the offices of chairman and vice-chairman are appointive; that the secretary is to be nominated by the commission and that "each other" officer is elective.  
Sec. 13½-26. - Attendance at meetings. 
The commission may establish its own rules as to attendance of its members at meetings and, in furtherance of such, the commission may by a majority vote, expel any member who, in the opinion of the commission, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 6, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-27. - Procedure. 
The commission is hereby empowered to establish its own parliamentary procedure; provided, that such procedures shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law, or the following: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the commission; and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those members present. The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 7, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-28. - General powers and duties. 
The commission on flood control and drainage is hereby generally authorized to work with the mayor and council to provide a long-range flood control and drainage plan for Pasadena and to make recommendations as it deems beneficial within the scope of its function and purpose aforesaid, provided that it shall undertake no task in contravention of the City of Pasadena Charter or any other law or ordinance, and its function is to be considered advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 8, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-29. - Scope of function. 
Within the general powers and duties aforesaid, the commission is specifically authorized: 
(a)  To coordinate and interact with the Harris County Flood Control District, the Corps of Engineers and with the similar commissions of sister cities, as such may be, to harmonize its efforts with the overall plan for southeast Harris County. 
(b)  To inspect various drainage and flood control facilities throughout the City of Pasadena and report its findings to mayor and council. 
(c)  To advise and recommend to mayor and council new programs, methodology and/or facilities which the commission may deem beneficial to the city's program of drainage and flood control. 
(d)  To publicize and provide information, subject to approval of the mayor and council, which is beneficial to the public in connection with drainage and flood control. 
(e)  Coordinate with the Civil Defense and other disaster relief agencies in an exchange of information for the general benefit of the populace. 
(f)  To make, and from time to time, amend and repeal bylaws subject to the approval of mayor and council. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 9, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-30. - Obligation of city. 
The commission shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever; its finances shall be administered in the same manner as any department of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 10, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-31. - Coordinator. 
An official of the city designated by the mayor shall serve as coordinator for the commission and shall prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the commission as may be assigned. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 11, 7-17-79)  
Sec. 13½-32. - Finances; construction of commission's authority. 
The city council declares its purpose and intention (but does not in any way obligate itself or attempt to obligate any future city council) to, from time to time, appropriate and cause to be paid over to the commission (or upon the commission's recommendation) such sums as the council may deem proper and appropriate to aid in defraying the expenses of operation, maintenance and development. 
By virtue of this article, there shall not be vested in the commission or in the members of the commission any right, except it be subject to termination by the city by repeal or amendment of this article or other appropriate action of its governing body. 
(Ord. No. 79-80, § 12, 7-17-79)  
Chapter 14 - GARBAGE, TRASH AND RUBBISH[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, adopted February 27, 2001, deleted former §§ 14-1—14-25 in their entirety, and added new §§ 14-1—14-25 as set out herein. Former §§ 14-1—14-25 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the following: Ord. No. 67-1974, §§ 1(14-1)—1(14-18), 7-25-67; Ord. No. 67-2068, § 1, 11-21-67; Ord. No. 68-26, 2-13-68; Ord. No. 68-112, 8-6-68; Ord. No. 68-146, §§ 1, 2, 10-8-68; Ord. No. 69-146, § 1, 7-1-69; Ord. No. 69-215, §§ 1—4, 9-30-69; Ord. No. 71-159, § 1, 6-1-71; Ord. No. 71-274, § 1, 9-7-71; Ord. No. 71-370, §§ 1, 2, 12-7-71; Ord. No. 77-206, § 1, 11-1-77; Ord. No. 77-224, § 2, 11-29-77; Ord. No. 77-274, § 1, 11-29-77; Ord. o. 79-87, § 1, 7-24-79; Ord. No. 83-269, § 1, 9-27-83; Ord. No. 83-366, §§ 1—3, 12-6-83; Ord. No. 90-124, § 1, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 97-138, § 1, 8-5-97; Ord. No. 99-217, § 1, 11-30-99. 
State Law reference— Accumulation and removal of garbage and trash, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-1, § 4. 
 
Sec. 14-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Generally. All words not expressly defined shall be understood and construed in their ordinary signification. 
Commercial. Whether used as a noun, adjective or adverb, the word "commercial" refers to a business enterprise or activity, wherein gross revenue is derived from services other than the furnishing of residential accommodations. Whenever the superintendent of sanitation or the water division of the department of public works has designated a business enterprise or activity as "commercial," such designation shall be presumed correct hereunder, and if disputed, the burden shall be upon the owner or duly authorized agent to disprove it, by sworn, audited records of such business enterprise or activity. An activity or enterprise shall also be deemed "commercial," whenever the garbage, trash and rubbish collection policies under this chapter require use of sanitation container units. 
Dry kitchen refuse. The solids remaining from the preparation of food for immediate consumption, with all liquids or slop drained off, shall constitute "dry kitchen refuse." 
Freon free. Items which contained freon such as refrigerators, freezers or air conditioners must be certified by the appropriate authority as free of freon before that item can be collected. 
Kitchen garbage. "Kitchen garbage" includes dry kitchen refuse and all meat, vegetable and fruit refuse, small dead fowl, and edible domesticated animal carcasses, collectible subject to health department rules and regulations. 
Premises. The term "premises" includes business houses, boardinghouses, offices, theaters, hotels, restaurants, cafes, cafeterias, tourist camps, mobile home parks, trailer courts, apartments, apartment houses, town houses, condominiums, hospitals, medical clinics, rooming houses, schools, nursing homes, day-care nurseries, charitable and religious institutions, private residences, manufacturing plants, processing plants and the grounds upon which the same are located, vacant lots, and all other places where garbage, trash, rubbish or waste accumulates. 
Residential. Whether used as a noun, adjective or adverb, the term "residential" refers to a building, room or rooms fitted or used, in whole or in part, for human sleeping accommodations, including, but not limited to, except as otherwise expressly provided for herein, residential subdivision houses, garage apartments, and duplex, triplex and quadplex residential apartments. It comprehends household and household activity. 
Rubbish or household rubbish. "Rubbish" or "household rubbish" means tin cans, paper, empty bottles or glass containers of not more than five-gallon capacity, fragmented glass, scraps of iron or other metal, wire, used plastic articles, vacuum cleaning lint, empty dry-food, drug and notion boxes and like waste products of normal household activity able to be deposited in containers in accordance with this chapter. 
Sanitation container unit. The term "sanitation container unit" means a wood or metal, or combination thereof, box or container, fixed with a lid and equipped for handling by city sanitation vehicles, owned by the city and furnished to a commercial customer for sanitary use at fees prescribed in this chapter. 
Trash. The word "trash" means containered or non-containered used rubber articles, except automotive tires, pieces of wood, rope, feathers, fiberboard containers, empty used boxes, barrels and crates, weeds, grass and trimmings from shrubs. 
White goods. Freon-free appliances and other metals that are recyclable including, but not limited to, refrigerators, freezers, stoves, and dishwashers. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-2. - Office of superintendent of sanitation created; general duties of superintendent. 
There is hereby created the office of the superintendent of sanitation. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to direct the operations of city sanitation, including the collection, removal and disposal of garbage, rubbish and trash within the city, and oversee the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-3. - Disposal generally. 
It shall be the duty of every person in charge of inhabited premises within the city to prepare the garbage, trash and rubbish from such premises and timely place the same for collection by the city in accordance with the terms and conditions of the chapter; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to persons removing from premises garbage, trash and rubbish under a contract issued by the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-4. - Disposable containers required. 
(a)  The City of Pasadena shall provide each residential premises with sufficient garbage bags for biweekly collection for the disposal of accumulated dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and rubbish. Cardboard boxes and other disposal containers may be used in addition to the bags, provided that they are tightly sealed and disposable. No containers of any shape, size or form will be emptied and returned to the curb. Containers having a total loaded weight in excess of fifty (50) pounds will not be handled by city crews. 
(b)  All loose trash and rubbish accumulations shall be deposited in receptacles as specified in subsection (a) above, and set out for collection. No item or trash subject to being blown by winds from its place of deposit for collection on the premises shall be deposited loose on the premises, but shall be placed in the required receptacle. 
(c)  White goods may be collected separately in a manner to be prescribed by the superintendent of sanitation. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, or section 14-9 regarding the number of collections per week, the city may, at its discretion, purchase and furnish containers other than bags for garbage service customers and, further, may adjust the numbers and times of weekly collections. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 05-233, § 2, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 10-215, § 1, 10-12-10)  
Sec. 14-5. - Maintenance of containers; defective cans and containers not to be handled by city personnel. 
(a)  Garbage sacks and other disposable containers used for dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and rubbish shall be maintained in sanitary condition and closed tightly when containing any dry kitchen refuse, kitchen garbage and/or rubbish. 
(b)  Garbage cans or other nondisposable containers and containers which are broken, split or open, or which are capable of causing injury to city handling personnel, shall not be touched by city personnel or the contents of such cans or receptacles collected. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-6. - Placement of containers for city collectors. 
Garbage sacks and other disposable containers to be collected by city personnel shall be placed inside the curb line or drain ditch line of the street near the front property line of the premises unless otherwise instructed by the superintendent of sanitation, no later than 7:30 a.m. on those days designated from time to time by the superintendent of sanitation for residential collections. Garbage sacks and other disposable containers to be collected by city personnel shall not be placed at such location prior to 9:00 p.m. the evening before such pickup day. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-7. - Sacks, other containers and city sanitation container units; pilfering and tampering. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with garbage sacks, other containers, trash receptacles or city sanitation container units or to pilfer or scatter the contents thereof in any city street, alley or easement. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-8. - Preparation of tree limbs and shrubbery for collection. 
(a)  Accumulations of tree limbs or shrubbery shall be stacked neatly in a location easily accessible to city crews for removal. 
(b)  Excluding tree limbs, no single item of trash shall exceed four (4) feet in length and two (2) feet in diameter. 
(c)  Tree limbs and trunks may not exceed one (1) foot in diameter and ten (10) feet long. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-9. - City's collection schedule; integration of commercial and residential routes. 
(a)  Every residential user of the city's garbage and rubbish collection service shall normally receive two (2) collections each week according to a standard schedule determined by the superintendent of sanitation. Garbage and household rubbish will be collected at the same time. Separate trash and white goods collections will be made according to a schedule determined by the superintendent of sanitation. Special annual or semiannual collections of junk, trash or rubbish may be made as determined by the city council. No extra fee will be charged for the regularly scheduled trash collection. 
(b)  Garbage, rubbish and trash collection service to commercial users shall be limited to the terms and provisions of the "City of Pasadena Commercial Refuse Disposal Contract" approved by the city council. 
(c)  Residential and commercial services may be operated on integrated routes, if the superintendent of sanitation certifies such integration to be economical and not in violation of this chapter, but no person is entitled as a matter of right to commercial service on a residential route or to residential service on a commercial route. 
(d)  Hereafter the city will not use its collection trucks on private streets to collect garbage, trash and rubbish as set out herein, except for those private streets upon which it now collects from single-family privately-owned residences and such residence and its lot is individually and privately owned. 
(e)  The superintendent will as soon as possible identify and notify those areas where the service will be discontinued. He will then notify the authorized commercial collectors of garbage, trash and rubbish of the intended change in service and discontinue the city service as soon as the authorized commercial collectors assume this service. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-10. - Charges for collection by city—Rates prescribed. 
(a)  Definitions. 
(1)  Commercial shall mean all premises from which garbage, refuse and trash are collected except those defined as "residential" in (2) below, and shall specifically, but not limited to, include mobile home parks, apartments, townhouses and condominiums. 
(2)  Residential shall mean a single-family dwelling and/or household. 
(b)  Charges. 
(1)  There shall be charged, assessed and collected, a monthly service charge for collection and disposal by the city of residential garbage, refuse and trash in the amount of twenty-four dollars and fifty cents ($24.50) per single residence. 
(2)  For those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over the rate shall be fifteen dollars and thirty cents ($15.30) per single residence. 
(3)  There shall be charged, assessed and collected a monthly service charge for collection and disposal of commercial garbage, refuse and trash, by private haulers licensed under the provisions of the "City of Pasadena Commercial Refuse Disposal Contract" approved by the city council. 
(c)  Annual adjustment of water and sewer rates. The rates to which this section applies shall be adjusted according to this provision and automatically increased each year on October 1 using the U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all Urban Consumers for the Houston-Galveston-Brazoria Texas Metropolitan Area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The year over year percent change in the April index will be issued as the basis for this charge. If there is a decrease in the CPI, or if there is no increase in the period measured, the rates then existing shall remain unchanged. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 05-233, § 2, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 10-215, § 2, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 18-045, § 2, 4-3-18)  
Sec. 14-11. - Billing and collection. 
(a)  The water division of the department of public works shall be responsible for the billing and collection of the charges prescribed by section 14-10(b)(1). Such charges shall be paid to the water division each month, with the water and sewer charges, if either or both such city services are had. Unless otherwise expressly provided by written agreement between the person to be billed and the city, which agreement shall be approved by the superintendent of sanitation and filed with the water division, such charges shall be assessed against the person to whom the city is furnishing water and in whose name a water meter is registered. The amount of the monthly sanitation charge shall be mailed to such person by the water division on the same card with the statement of charges for the monthly water or sewer services. 
(b)  In the event any person accepts city sanitation service and is not being served by either the water or sewer systems of the city, and no specially approved written agreement for billing has been filed with the water division, then the sanitation charges shall be assessed and billed in the name of the person who requests or accepts such service. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-12. - Assessment against multiple-family dwellings and motels and hotels. 
(a)  Multiple-family dwellings of more than four (4) units, including but not limited to apartment house and town house projects and condominiums, shall be assessed, for sanitation service purposes, as individual residences on a basis of one hundred (100) per cent occupancy. If the owner desires containerized service, he shall pay the service charge prescribed in section 14-10 (b)(2), without regard to the number of units occupied. 
(b)  All motels and hotels shall be assessed for city commercial sanitation services in accordance with section 14-10(b)(2). 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-13. - Failure to pay. 
(a)  If the charges billed under section 14-11 are not paid by the twelfth day of the month following that in which the service was rendered, the sanitation service for that customer shall be discontinued and shall not be resumed until all such charges have been paid in full. 
(b)  No garbage, rubbish or trash shall be collected by the city from any vacant lot or from premises occupied by any vacant house or building, unless all city water, garbage, rubbish and trash charges accrued therefor are fully paid. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-14. - Duty of water division and superintendent of sanitation with regard to new commercial accounts. 
If a question should arise whether an account is to be classified as commercial or residential, it shall be the duty of the superintendent of sanitation to determine the classification of service requested and notify the water billing division of the classification. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-15. - City not to collect if chapter violated. 
The city shall not collect kitchen garbage, rubbish, trash or tree limbs where the same are not prepared for collection and placed in accordance with this chapter. The city's failure to collect shall not excuse the violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-16. - Disposal of heavy or dangerous accumulations. 
The city sanitation service shall not collect dangerous accumulations of explosives, fireworks, ammunition, bottled acids, corrosive chemicals, insecticides, paint, oil or other hydrocarbon accumulations, heavy or dangerous accumulations of concrete, dirt, sand, tree stumps, creosote-treated timber, roofing material, automotive bodies or other accumulations deemed dangerous by the sanitation department, but same such shall be disposed of by the resident/owner. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-17. - Unlawful collection or transportation generally. 
No person, except a duly authorized agent and employee of the City of Pasadena or a person hauling and transporting his own garbage, rubbish or trash, or a private hauler holding a contract with the City of Pasadena, shall collect, haul, transport or empty garbage or trash receptacles or convey or transport garbage, rubbish or trash on the streets, alleys or easements of the city.  
Sec. 14-18. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-19. - Unlawful deposits generally. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, unload, discharge, or in any manner place or cause to be placed any garbage, trash or other waste materials of any kind or description whatsoever on any lot, tract or parcel of land located within the city limits, except at such places as permitted by the State of Texas for garbage disposal. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-20. - Spilling from vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or for any person to permit any employee, agent, servant, or other person under his general supervision or control, to drive any vehicle carrying, hauling or transporting trash, dirt or debris, wastepaper, rags, rubbish, refuse, garbage, manure, slop, ashes or other loose materials of a similar nature, on the public streets and alleys of the city, unless such vehicle is loaded, equipped and operated in such a manner as to prevent such materials from falling out of, spilling from or blowing out of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-21. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-22. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-23. - Reserved.  
Sec. 14-24. - Restrictions on placement, use or operation of solid waste facilities near private residences. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context requires a different definition: 
(1)  City means City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(2)  Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic solid waste under aerobic conditions. 
(3)  Disposal means the discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking, or placing of any solid waste or hazardous waste (whether containered or non-containered) into or on any land or water so that such solid waste or hazardous waste or any constituent thereof may enter the environment or be emitted into the air or discharged into any waters, including groundwaters. 
(4)  Garbage means solid waste consisting of putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, handling, and sale of produce and other food products. 
(5)  Hazardous waste means any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) pursuant to the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901 et seq., as amended. 
(6)  Industrial solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to any process of industry or manufacturing, or mining or agricultural operations. 
(7)  Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, and recreational activities, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and all other solid waste other than industrial solid waste. 
(8)  Person means individual, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, partnership, association, or any other legal entity. 
(9)  Private residence means any structure designed or intended for human occupancy and which has actually been occupied for a continuous period of ninety (90) days within two (2) years of commencement of operation of the solid waste facility. 
(10)  Processing means the extraction of materials, transfer, volume reduction, conversion to energy, or other separation and preparation of solid waste for reuse or disposal, including the treatment or neutralization of hazardous waste, designed to change the physical, chemical, or biological character or composition of any hazardous waste so as to neutralize such waste, or so as to recover energy or material from the waste, or so as to render such waste nonhazardous, or less hazardous, safer to transport, store, or dispose of, or amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume. Unless the state agency determines that regulation of such activity under the Solid Waste Disposal Act is necessary to protect human health or the environment, the definition of "processing" does not include activities relating to those materials exempted by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq., as amended. 
(11)  Radioactive waste means that waste which requires specific licensing under Chapter 72, Acts of the 57th Legislature, Regular Session, 1961, as amended (Article 4590f, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes), and the rules adopted by the Texas Board of Health under that law. 
(12)  Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste (excluding ashes), consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste materials; combustible rubbish includes paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar materials; noncombustible rubbish includes glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and like materials which will not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (sixteen hundred (1600) degrees Fahrenheit to eighteen hundred (1800) degrees Fahrenheit). 
(13)  Sanitary landfill means a controlled area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of in accordance with standards, rules, or orders established by the TNRCC. 
(14)  Sludge means any solid, semisolid, or liquid waste generated from a municipal, commercial, or industrial wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility exclusive of the treated effluent from a wastewater treatment plant. 
(15)  Solid waste means any garbage, refuse, sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities, but does not include: (i) solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage, or solid or dissolved material in irrigation return flows, or industrial discharges subject to regulation by permit issued pursuant to Chapter 26, Water Code; (ii) soil, dirt, rock, sand and other natural or man-made inert solid materials used to fill land if the object of the fill is to make the land suitable for the construction of surface improvements; or (iii) waste materials which result from activities associated with the exploration, development, or production of oil or gas and are subject to control by the Texas Railroad Commission. 
(16)  Solid waste facility means all contiguous land, structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, used for processing, storing, or disposing of solid waste. A facility may be publicly or privately owned and consist of several processing, storage, or disposal operational units; e.g., one (1) or more landfills, surface impoundments, or combinations of them. 
(17)  Solid waste technician means an individual who is trained in the practical aspects of the design, operation, and maintenance of a solid waste facility in accordance with standards, rules, or orders established by TNRCC. 
(18)  Storage means the holding of solid waste for a temporary period, at the end of which the solid waste is processed, disposed of, or stored elsewhere. 
(b)  Location. 
(1)  No person shall establish, use, or operate a solid waste facility within the city which is within one thousand (1,000) feet of a private residence. 
(2)  The measurement of the one thousand (1,000) feet distance prescribed by subsection (b)(1) hereof shall be straight line distance from the point of the solid waste facility nearest the private residence to the point on the private residence nearest the solid waste facility. 
(c)  Defense to prosecution. It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the solid waste facility: 
(1)  Was in existence at the time the city was incorporated or at the time the city annexed the area where it is located. 
(2)  Is operated in substantial compliance with all applicable state and county regulations. 
(d)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to all waste facilities permitted by the state after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derived. 
(e)  Penalty. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of such violation shall be fined in a sum not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day that a violation continues or occurs shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Sec. 14-25. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
Any person convicted for a violation of any provision, restriction, requirement or prohibition of this chapter, for which no specific penalty is provided, shall be fined in a sum of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 01-37, § 1, 2-27-01)  
Chapter 15 - HEALTH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Ambulances, Ch. 4; maintenance of premises where livestock and fowl are kept, §§ 6-1, 6-9, 6-11; rabies inoculation for dogs and cats, § 6-38; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; buildings with conditions detrimental to health declared to be dangerous buildings, § 9-151; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; protection of used bedding, clothing, etc., § 17-69; health provisions relative to massage establishments, Ch. 19; plumbing, Ch. 29; swimming pools, Ch. 33; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Public health generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. arts. 4414 et seq.; authority of city relative to health regulations, art. 1175 (28), (34). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 15-1. - Board of health—Created; composition; appointment of members. 
There is hereby created a board of health for the city, which board shall be appointed annually by the mayor with the consent of the city council and shall consist of the following five (5) members whose terms of office shall consist of one (1) year: A licensed physician, a licensed veterinarian, a representative of the Pasadena Independent School District, a representative of the hospitals in the city and a representative of the food establishment owners in the city. The physician member shall be the chairman of the board of health. The director of public health shall be an ex officio member, without vote, of the board of health. 
(Code 1964, § 15-1; Ord. No. 82-161, § 1, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 86-32, § 1, 3-4-86)  
Sec. 15-2. - Same—Subcommittees created. 
There shall be two (2) subcommittees to the board of health appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(1)  The subcommittee for the humane department shall consist of the following three (3) members: The veterinarian who sits on the board of health, the chief humane officer for the city and a representative of an animal welfare organization. The veterinarian member of the subcommittee shall act as chairman. 
(2)  [Emergency ambulance consultant subcommittee:] 
(a)  The emergency ambulance consultant subcommittee shall consist of the following members: 
1.  The chairperson of the board of health who will serve as the chairperson of this subcommittee and shall receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each monthly meeting actually attended by said chairperson. 
2.  Four (4) licensed physicians appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council for one year terms. Of the four (4), one physician shall be appointed from each of the following hospitals and based on the recommendations given by the hospital administrators: Pasadena Bayshore Hospital, Pasadena General Hospital, Beltway Community Hospital, and Humana Hospital Southmore. As compensation for service thereon these four (4) physicians shall receive the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each monthly meeting actually attended by said appointed physician. If such physician is unavailable for a given meeting, the respective hospital may send a representative that will not be compensated. Three (3) consecutive absences from monthly meetings constitutes a resignation from the subcommittee. 
3.  The following will serve as ex-officio members: 
The Director of the City of Pasadena Health Department; 
The paramedic supervisor; and 
The medical director of the ambulance company performing emergency service. 
(b)  The functions of this subcommittee shall include the following: 
1.  A general review of the activities and quality of health care provided by the ambulance company performing emergency medical services. This shall include approval of the ambulance company's protocols; and 
2.  Recommendations to the city council regarding areas of general concern in connection with the quality of care provided. 
(Code 1964, § 15-2; Ord. No. 82-161, § 1, 7-20-82; Ord. No. 86-261, § 1, 12-16-86)  
Sec. 15-3. - Same—Meetings; quorum. 
The board of health shall meet in regular attendance at least one time per quarter, three (3) members constituting a quorum. Subcommittees shall meet as often as necessary as determined by the chairman or the board of health, three (3) members constituting a quorum. 
(Code 1964, § 15-3; Ord. No. 82-161, § 1, 7-20-82)  
Sec. 15-4. - Same—General powers and duties. 
The duties of the board of health will be to set policy and effect general regulations of the health department. The board of health shall have supervision of the enforcement of this chapter and all other health and sanitary ordinances of the city. The board of health shall have general powers over all matters pertaining to sanitary conditions in the city and to the health of its inhabitants. 
(Code 1964, § 15-4) 
Cross reference— Authority of board of health to promulgate rules and regulations governing public swimming pools, § 33-20.  
Sec. 15-5. - Same—Powers and duties of chairman. 
The duties of the chairman of the board of health shall be to preside at the meetings of the board, select committees, and work with the other members of the board toward the betterment of the department of health for the benefit of the people of the city. The chairman shall have the same voting rights as other members of the board. 
(Code 1964, § 15-5)  
Sec. 15-6. - Health department and health officer. 
There is hereby created a health department, the officers and employees of which are charged with the duty of enforcing all the laws and ordinances relating to health and such other duties as are now or may hereafter be placed upon them by the city council or the board of health. The mayor shall appoint, with the consent of city council, a physician who will be the city health officer. The health officer of the city shall have the duties and powers granted by state laws and city ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 15-6; Ord. No. 82-161, § 1, 7-20-82)  
Sec. 15-7. - Director of public health. 
(a)  There is hereby created the office of the director of public health, and such officer is charged with the responsibility of supervising the activities of the health department and its employees. The director of public health shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council, and shall carry out the general duties of the health department in accordance with the policies and regulations promulgated by the board of health and the city council, and he shall have the powers conferred upon him in this chapter and other ordinances. He shall have the power to supervise all inspections provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  The director of public health shall act in an advisory capacity to any city department, office or employee concerned with the care, treatment or welfare of animals and shall, when he deems it necessary, render aid and assistance in all matters which may improve the condition of animals in the city. [2] He shall cooperate with all county, state and federal agencies in improving the health and sanitary conditions of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 15-7; Ord. No. 67-2051, 10-24-67) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6. 
 
Sec. 15-8. - Interference with enforcement of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the chief of police, or any of his subordinates, the health officer, the director of public health, or any health inspector or health employee from entering into any building or enclosure or upon any premises, for the purpose of performing and executing any of the powers and duties conferred upon such officers, or either of them, by this chapter, or to resist any of such officers or employees in the execution of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1964, § 15-8)  
Sec. 15-9. - Penalty for violations of chapter. 
Any person convicted for a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be fined in a sum not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 1635, § 3, 6-9-64; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Secs. 15-10—15-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
Sec. 15-21. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section when used in this article: 
Commissary means a catering establishment, restaurant, or any other place in which food, containers, or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored. 
Farm produce shall mean and include vegetables, fruits, nuts, berries, and melons in their natural state, but shall not include food or food stuffs processed or manufactured from such named items. 
Food establishments shall include any premises, restaurant, soda fountain, cafe, diner, grocery store, fruit stand, vegetable stand, bakery, abattoir, meat processing or packing plant, dairy, ice cream parlor, and any other place where food or drink is sold or offered for sale, processed, stored, prepared or otherwise handled for sale or distribution within the city. Such term shall include any vehicle or mobile unit, shed, stand, building or structure used for the purposes of selling, distribution, processing, preparing or otherwise handling food or drink. This term shall also include frozen desserts retail preparation establishments, mobile food service units, mobile frozen dessert units, prepackaged food establishments, supermarkets, and temporary food establishments. 
Frozen desserts means any of the following: ice cream, ice milk, fruit sherbet, water ice, non-fruit sherbet, non-fruit water ice, frozen dietary dairy desserts, frozen yogurt, quiescently frozen confection, quiescently frozen dairy confection, mellorine, lorine, parevine, freezer-made milk shake, freezer-made shake, or non-dairy frozen dessert. The term includes the mix used in the freezing of one of those frozen desserts. 
Frozen desserts retail preparation establishment shall mean any food establishment where frozen dessert mixes are frozen or partially frozen and dispensed from freezing cylinder for retail sale or distribution. Permits for such establishments will be required for each freezing cylinder. 
Mobile food service unit means a vehicle-mounted food service establishment designed to be readily movable which does not serve frozen dessert products. 
Mobile frozen dessert unit means a vehicle-mounted food service establishment designed for the purpose of selling or dispensing refrigerated frozen dessert products that are prepackaged, fully wrapped, enclosed and contained in individual wrappers or containers. 
Person in charge means the individual present in a food service establishment who is the apparent supervisor of the food service establishment at the time of inspection. If no individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the person in charge. 
Prepackaged food establishment means any establishment where food and food products that are fully wrapped and contained in individual wrappers or containers are offered for sale to the ultimate consumer and intended for off-premise consumption. 
Prepackaged food shall mean food or beverage products that are packaged by an approved manufacturer for retail sale to the public without any further processing. 
Supermarket shall mean a self-service retail market where food and food products are offered to the consumer and intended for off-premise consumption and contains two (2) or more of the following departments: bakery, delicatessen, meat, produce, seafood, snack bar (on-premise consumption). 
Temporary food establishment shall mean any food establishment that operates at a fixed location for a period of time of not more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a single event or celebration. 
(Code 1964, § 15-16; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 1-30-90)  
Sec. 15-22. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, or maintain any food establishment as defined by this article within the city unless a permit for that establishment has been issued by the health department. 
(b)  All food establishments shall be inspected and approved by all city departments necessary to obtaining a certificate of occupancy including, but not limited to, fire, health, fire marshal, permit, and sign administration. A certificate of occupancy must be obtained for the placement and operation of such establishments. Provided, however, mobile frozen dessert units shall not be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  Food establishments fixed at a particular location for more than twenty-four (24) hours shall conform to all building, plumbing, electrical codes and city ordinances including, but not limited to, requirement of paved parking, grease traps, sanitary sewer connections, restroom facilities, and connection to city water supply. Such establishments shall be required to obtain a certificate of occupancy. As used herein, the word "fixed" shall apply to all classes of food establishments without regard to their mobile capability and shall include all types of vehicles and structures whether moved by wheels or otherwise. Such establishments shall further be limited to operating for no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days at said location. 
(d)  There shall be seven (7) classes of food establishment permits issued by the director of public health or his designee(s) according to the type of establishment permitted: a farm produce permit, a food establishment permit, a frozen dessert retail preparation permit, a mobile food unit permit, a mobile frozen dessert unit permit, a prepackaged food establishment permit and a temporary food establishment permit. 
(e)  No more than two (2) temporary food establishment permits or two (2) farm produce permits, each valid for fourteen (14) consecutive days only, will be issued to any temporary food establishment per calendar year. This limitation shall not apply to temporary food establishments operating at city or community sponsored events. 
(Code 1964, § 15-17; Ord. No. 81-228, § 1, 12-1-81; Ord. No. 85-210, § 1, 10-29-85; Ord. No. 90-9, § 1, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 01-64, § 1, 4-4-01)  
Sec. 15-22.1. - Applications. 
Application for all original or renewal permit or permits shall be made on a city health department form provided for that purpose and shall be filed with the director of public health or his designee(s). No such permit shall be issued unless the director of public health or his authorized designee(s) determines that the food establishment is constructed, operated and maintained in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws and regulations. All permits issued shall remain the property of the city and shall be displayed in public view when the food establishment is open for business. 
Renewal applications received by the city health department after the expiration date of the permit to be renewed shall be charged an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee. 
Renewal applications received by the department not in completed form or with insufficient fonds to cover the required permit tees shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall resubmit the application in completed form with all applicable fees. There shall be an additional late fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) imposed for all incomplete or insufficient fund applications. 
Such late fees are imposed to help defray the additional administrative costs related to late or incomplete applications and shall not be considered to be a civil or criminal penalty. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 1-30-90)  
Sec. 15-22.2. - Lost permits. 
A food establishment permittee who has lost a valid permit may obtain a replacement permit from the city health department for a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 94-1, § 5, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 15-22.3. - Permit fees. 
(a)  All food establishments in the city are required to obtain the proper permit or permits for such establishments. Such fees are set forth as follows: 
(1)  Farm produce permit, per year ..... $75.00 
(2)  Food establishment permit (other than supermarket), per year ..... 150.00 
(3)  Supermarket food establishment permit, per year: 
1—9 employees ..... 200.00 
10—25 employees ..... 250.00 
26—50 employees ..... 375.00 
51—99 employees ..... 500.00 
100 or more employees ..... 700.00 
(4)  Frozen dessert retail preparation permit, per freezing cylinder, per year ..... 100.00 
(5)  Mobile food service unit permit, per year ..... 100.00 
(6)  Mobile frozen dessert unit permit, per year ..... 100.00 
(7)  Prepackaged food establishment permit, per year ..... 100.00 
(8)  Temporary food establishment permit, per event for ten (10) days or $20.00 per day, whichever is less, plus a fifteen-dollar registration fee. ..... 75.00 
(b)  A frozen dessert retail preparation permit is required, in addition to a food establishment permit, when frozen dessert mixes are frozen or partially frozen and dispensed from a freezing cylinder for retail sale or distribution. 
(c)  A mobile food service unit permit or a mobile frozen dessert unit permit is required for each mobile unit operating within the city in addition to the food establishment permit required by the jurisdiction in which the commissary or manufacturing plant providing the merchandise for these units lies. Proof of such permit will be required upon application for either of these permits. 
(d)  Those food establishments operating as nonprofit organizations or as part of a nonprofit organization shall be required to obtain the proper food establishment permit(s); however, no permit fee will be required of such organization. 
(e)  All permits shall expire on the fifteenth day of February next after their issuance. 
(f)  In the event that a food establishment permit, a supermarket food establishment permit, a frozen dessert retail preparation permit, or a prepackaged food establishment permit is issued after February 15, the permit fee shall be prorated. For a food establishment permit, a frozen dessert retail preparation permit, or a prepackaged food establishment permit, the prorated fee shall be twelve dollars ($12.00) per month for every month or portion of a month left. For a supermarket food establishment permit, the prorated fee shall be the permit fee divided by twelve (12) months rounded to the nearest dollar for every month or portion of a month left. However, the minimum prorated fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Establishments found operating without a permit shall pay the full permitting fee. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 92-4, § 1, 1-14-92; Ord. No. 94-1, § 5, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 15-22.4. - Penalty clause. 
Any person who as an owner or a person in charge intentionally or knowingly violates any of the provisions contained in the article shall be guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 90-9, § 2, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 02-80, § 1, 3-12-02)  
Sec. 15-23. - Employees to be free from disease. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in charge or control of any food establishment to work, employ or keep in his employ, or permit to work in or about any such place, whether employed or not, any person who is infected with or affected by any infectious or contagious disease. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to work in or about any food establishment when he is so infected or affected. 
(Code 1964, § 15-19)  
Sec. 15-24. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-82, § 1, adopted July 17, 1979, repealed § 15-24, which required health cards for employees of food establishments, derived from Code 1964, § 15-20.  
Sec. 15-25. - U.S. Public Health Service's "Food Code" adopted and incorporated by reference. 
(a)  The standards for, inspection of, and enforcement of the provisions of this article for all food handling establishments located in the City of Pasadena shall be in compliance with the provisions of the latest edition of the "Food Code" of the U. S. Public Health Service. A copy of the "Food Code" will be in the office of the Department of Health of the City of Pasadena for public inspection. 
(b)  The "Food Code" is adopted as the regulations for food handling establishments by the City of Pasadena just as if it were copied herein verbatim. 
(c)  The State of Texas also publishes regulations for food handling services and such standards are also adopted by the City; however, the standard of the "Food Code" shall be followed unless and except the director of public health for the City of Pasadena shall in writing designate some specific provision of the state code as controlling. 
(d)  The state regulations as they now exist or as they may from time to time be altered, amended, supplemented or changed in the future are adopted by the City of Pasadena and a copy of such regulations if designated as provided shall be on file with the department of health of the City of Pasadena. 
(e)  The regulatory authority referred to in the "Food Code" shall be interpreted to mean the Health Department of the City of Pasadena. 
(Code 1964, § 15-21; Ord. No. 1635, § 1, 6-9-64; Ord. No. 86-34, § 1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 94-188, § 1, 9-27-94; Ord. No. 98-78, § 1, 5-19-98)  
Sec. 15-26. - Retail and wholesale food store sanitation, examination and condemnation of food or drink. 
(a)  Food or drink may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authority as often as he deems necessary for enforcement of this section. The regulatory authority may, upon written notice to the owner, the permit holder or person in charge specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food or drink which it believes is in violation of this section or any state or federal law. The regulatory authority shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food or drink subject to the hold order. No food or drink subject to a hold order shall be used, served, or moved from the establishment. The regulatory authority shall permit storage of the food or drink under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed with the regulatory authority within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food or drink shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested, and on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated, or the owner or permit holder or person in charge of the food or drink may be directed by written order to destroy such food or drink or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this section to display, give sell or offer for sale any food or drink which is in part or whole mislabeled, adulterated, contaminated, spoiled or whose package or container has been dented, punctured, or otherwise damaged to an extent where its contents may have been exposed to possible contamination. 
(c)  Dates placed on containers or packages by the manufacturer, packer, repacker, wholesaler or retailer shall not be removed, covered or concealed. 
(d)  Food determined to be in violation of this section shall not be returned to inventory for sale without prior written approval of the regulatory authority. Destruction of food determined to be unfit for human consumption will be accomplished under the supervision of the regulatory authority. 
(e)  Food determined to be in violation of this section shall not be returned to inventory for sale without prior written approval of the regulatory authority. Destruction of food determined to be unfit for human consumption will be accomplished under the supervisions of the regulatory authority. 
(Ord. No. 86-36, § 1, 3-4-86; Ord. No. 14-190, § 2, 11-4-14)  
Secs. 15-27—15-36. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MEAT 
 
Sec. 15-37. - State rules and regulations adopted. 
The rules and regulations and standards for the inspection of meat, meat products, and meat food products, promulgated by the Commissioner of Health of the State of Texas, under authority of article 4418d, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as approved by the State Board of Health, as authorized by article 4476-3, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, dated April, 1959, as amended by amendments dated December 14, 1959, and all future amendments made thereto, are hereby in all things adopted and made a part of this article as if set forth in full herein, and the provisions, standards, rules and regulations contained therein are made mandatory requirements for the inspection and labeling of meat and meat food products produced, sold or offered for sale within the limits of the city with the "Texas State Approved Meat for Human Food" label thereon. Any establishment desiring to sell or offer for sale meat, meat products and meat food products in the city containing thereon the "Texas State Approved Meat for Human Food" label on such meat, meat products and meat food products shall be governed by the specifications and regulations promulgated by the state commissioner of health as approved by the state board of health adopted herein, and all requirements specified therein shall be complied with. 
(Ord. No. 1635, § 2, 6-9-64)  
Sec. 15-38. - Permit for abattoirs. 
No person shall construct or establish any abattoir or other place for the slaughter of animals within the city without first obtaining a permit from the city council. No such permit shall be issued unless plans and specifications are submitted showing that such abattoir or other slaughtering place will be constructed, operated and maintained in accord with all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. The permit required by this section shall be in addition to the permit required by section 15-22. 
(Code 1964, § 15-18)  
Sec. 15-39. - Meat to be from animals slaughtered at approved abattoir. 
No meat from any animal shall be sold or offered for sale for human consumption in the city, unless such animal shall have been slaughtered in an abattoir approved by the State Department of Health or the United States government. 
(Code 1964, § 15-33; Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 10-25-66)  
Sec. 15-40. - Approval of wholesale processing or storage establishments. 
No person shall operate a wholesale establishment for the processing or storage of meat or meat food products, unless the establishment has been approved by the state department of health or the United States government. 
(Ord. No. 67-1965, § 1, 6-20-67)  
Sec. 15-41. - Meat must be stamped. 
All meat or meat food products used for food or sold for food in the city must carry the stamp of approval of the State Department of Health, or of an establishment that is Texas State approved, or of the United States government. 
(Code 1964, § 15-34; Ord. No. 1874, § 2, 10-25-66)  
Sec. 15-42. - Diseased animals and meat therefrom not to be brought into or sold in city. 
No person shall bring within the city or offer or expose for sale or sell within the city any sick or diseased animal commonly used for food purposes, or any part of the flesh thereof, or the flesh or any part of any animal which, when killed, was sick or diseased, or which died a natural or accidental death. 
(Ord. No. 67-1965, § 1, 6-20-67)  
Sec. 15-43. - Protection of meat being transported. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport or cause to be transported in any vehicle through the streets or public ways of the city any meat or meat products unless the same are securely wrapped in paper or tightly woven cloth covering, or unless the same are carried in a refrigeration compartment in such vehicle, so as not to expose the meat to dust, dirt, filth or any other deleterious substance. 
(Code 1964, § 15-36)  
Secs. 15-44—15-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INSANITARY, UNSIGHTLY, ETC., CONDITIONS ON PRIVATE PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prohibit conditions described in this article, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4436. 
 
Sec. 15-56. - Prohibited conditions designated—Stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on any lot owned or occupied by him within the city or to permit stagnant water to remain thereon. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit or allow holes or places on such lots where water may accumulate and become stagnant or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 15-44)  
Sec. 15-57. - Same—Accumulations of carrion, filth, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard in the city to permit or allow any carrion, filth or other impure or unwholesome matter to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 15-45)  
Sec. 15-58. - Same—Growth or accumulation of weeds, rubbish, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any lot in the city to allow weeds, rubbish, brush or any other unsightly, objectionable or unsanitary matter to accumulate or grow on such lot. 
(Code 1964, § 15-46)  
Sec. 15-59. - Insect vectors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard, whether public or private, in the city to permit or allow insects which can vector disease to accumulate or remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 83-238, § 3, 9-6-83)  
Sec. 15-60. - Rodent control. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who shall own or occupy any house, building, establishment, lot or yard, whether public or private, to permit or allow rats, mice or other feral rodents to remain thereon or to permit or allow conditions to exist which attract or shelter such rodents. 
All public buildings and residences shall be secured against the entry of such rodents. 
(Ord. No. 83-238, § 3, 9-6-83)  
Sec. 15-61. - Notice to owner to remove or remedy conditions. 
(a)  (1)  Upon the failure of the owner, occupant, or person in control of private premises to comply with section 15-58 of this article, the director shall have the weeds or grass cut, mulched or raked, and removed from the premises. 
(2)  Before having the weeds or grass cut, mulched, raked, or removed, the director must notify the owner of the premises to bring the premises into compliance with section 15-58 within ten (10) days. The notice must be in writing and may be served by handing it to the owner in person or by United States regular mail, five-day return receipt requested, addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address as shown on the tax rolls of the city or of the county in which the premises are located. If the owner cannot be found and the letter is returned by the United States Postal Service, then the owner may be notified by: 
a.  Publication two (2) times within ten (10) consecutive days in the official newspaper adopted by the city council; 
b.  Posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the premises to which the violation relates; or 
c.  Posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the premises to which the violation relates, if the premises contain no buildings. 
(3)  The director may send a notice of violation of this article by certified mail, return receipt requested, informing the owner of the property on which the violation exists that, if the owner commits another violation of the same kind or nature that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and then assess the expense against the property. If a violation covered by a notice under this subsection occurs within the one-year period, and the city has not been informed in writing by the owner of a change in ownership of the property, then the city may, without notice, take any action permitted by subsection (a) and assess its expenses as provided in section 15-58. 
(b)  Whenever any condition described in this article, except for accumulation of weeds, is found to exist upon any lot or premises in the city, the director of public health shall notify the owner of such lot or premises to remove or remedy the condition within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served on the owner in person or mailed to him at his latest known address. In the event personal service cannot be had and the owner's address is not known, such notice shall be given by publication in a newspaper published in the city, at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days. 
(Code 1964, § 15-47; Ord. No. 83-238, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 03-040, § 1, 3-4-03)  
Sec. 15-62. - Removal or correction of condition by city—Generally. 
In the event the owner of any lot or premises fails to remove or remedy any condition described in this article within ten (10) days after notice has been given as provided in section 15-61, the city may do whatever is necessary to remove or remedy the condition, or cause the same to be done, and charge the expense incurred thereby to the owner of such lot or premises and such expense shall be assessed against the real estate upon which the work was done. The amount of said expense shall be determined by adding to the charge incurred by the city for performing, or causing to be performed, the work necessary to cause such lot or premises to come into conformance with chapter 15 of the Pasadena Code of Ordinances, plus an administrative fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00), all of which shall be due and payable by the owner of the lot or premises upon which said work was done within thirty (30) days of said billing by the city. If such expense is not paid within thirty (30) days of said billing, there shall be added thereto an amount equal to one-third ( 1/3 ) of said expense. The doing of such work and the charging and assessing of the expenses thereof against the owner shall not relieve the owner or occupant of any prosecution for violation of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 15-48; Ord. No. 75-101, § 1, 6-17-75; Ord. No. 83-238, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 94-1, § 5, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 04-55, § 1, 3-23-04)  
Sec. 15-63. - Same—Statement of expenses; lien for and interest on expenses; suit to collect expenses. 
The director of public health of the city shall file a statement of expenses incurred under section 15-62, giving the amount of such expenses and the date on which the work was done or improvements made, with the county clerk and the city shall have a privileged lien on such lot or real estate upon which the work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, in accordance with the provisions of Article 4436, Revised Civil Statutes of Texas, which lien shall be second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements. The amount of such expenses shall bear ten (10) per cent interest from the date such statement is filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. The director of public health is authorized to accept payments for such liens in installments and give releases or partial releases as necessary. 
(Code 1964, § 15-49; Ord. No. 83-238, § 1, 9-6-83; Ord. No. 84-232, § 1, 9-25-84)  
Sec. 15-64. - Insurance requirements for contractors doing weed mowing and cleanup work. 
(a)  Each contractor performing weed mowing or cleanup work for the city under this article shall comply with the following insurance requirements: 
(1)  He shall carry public liability insurance to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one person. 
(2)  He shall carry property damage insurance to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for any one accident and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one piece of property. 
(b)  The insurance required by this section shall be written by an accredited company under the supervision of the State Board of Insurance Commissioners. Evidence of compliance with these requirements shall be met when the policy or a copy thereof or a certificate of insurance has been filed with and approved by the city. The policy shall include an endorsement thereon that the city will be notified at least ten (10) days in advance in the event of cancellation or expiration of the policy. 
(Ord. No. 86-115, § 1, 6-17-86)  
Secs. 15-65—15-69. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - FOOD AND BEVERAGE VENDING MACHINE SANITATION 
 
Sec. 15-70. - Purpose. 
This article shall be liberally construed and applied to promote its underlying purpose of protecting the public health. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-71. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Bulk food means a food which when dispensed to the customer is not packaged, wrapped or otherwise enclosed. 
Commissary means a catering establishment, restaurant or any other place in which food, containers or supplies are kept, handled, prepared, packaged or stored for use in vending machines. The term shall not apply to an area or conveyance at a vending machine location used for the temporary storage of packaged food or beverages. 
Condiment means any food such as salt, pepper, mustard and ketchup that is used to enhance the flavor of other food. 
Controlled location vending machine (limited service vending machine) means a vending machine which: 
(1)  Dispenses only nonpotentially hazardous food; 
(2)  Is of such design that it can be filled and maintained in a sanitary manner by untrained persons at the location; and 
(3)  Is intended for and used at locations in which protection is assured against environmental contamination. 
Corrosion-resistant materials means those materials that maintain their original surface characteristics under prolonged influence of the food to be contacted, the normal use of cleaning compounds and bactericidal solutions, and other conditions of the use environment. 
Easily cleanable means that surfaces are readily accessible and made of such material and finish and so fabricated that residues may be effectively removed by normal cleaning methods. 
Employee means the permit holder, individual having supervisory or management duties and any other person who handles any food to be dispensed through vending machines, or who comes into contact with food-contact surfaces of containers, equipment, utensils or packaging materials, used in connection with vending machine operations, or who otherwise services or maintains one or more such machines. 
Equipment means vending machines, ovens, tables, counters, sinks and similar items, other than utensils used in vending operations. 
Food means any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption. 
Food-contact surfaces means those surfaces with which food normally comes into contact, and those surfaces from which food may drain, drip or splash back onto surfaces normally in contact with food. 
Hermetically sealed container means a container which is designed and intended to be secure against the entry of microorganisms and to maintain the commercial sterility of its contents after processing. 
Law includes federal, state and local statutes, ordinances and regulations. 
Machine location means the room, enclosure, space or area where one or more vending machines are installed and operated. 
Operator means any person who, by contract, agreement, or ownership, takes responsibility for furnishing, installing, servicing, operating or maintaining one or more vending machines. 
Packaged means bottled, canned, cartoned or securely wrapped. 
Person includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association or other legal entity. 
Potentially hazardous food means any food that consists in whole or in part of fluid milk, milk products, eggs, meat, poultry, fish, shell fish, edible crustacea or other ingredients including synthetic ingredients, which is in a form capable of supporting rapid and progressive growth of infectious or toxigenic microorganisms. The term does not include clean, whole, uncracked, odor-free shell eggs or foods which have a pH level of 4.6 or below or a water activity (Aw) value of 0.85 or less under standard conditions. 
Readily accessible means exposed or capable of being exposed for cleaning and inspection without the use of tools. 
Regulatory authority means the director of health of the city or the director's duly authorized representative. 
Safe materials means articles manufactured from or composed of materials that may not reasonably be expected to result, directly or indirectly, in their becoming a component or otherwise affecting the characteristics of any food. If materials are food additives or color additives as defined in Section 201(s) or (t) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as used, they are "safe" only if they are used in conformity with regulations established pursuant to Section 409 or Section 706 of the Act. Other materials are "safe" only if they are not food additives or color additives as defined in Section 201(s) or (t) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and are used in conformity with regulations issued under the Act. 
Safe temperatures for potentially hazardous food means temperatures of forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit (7.2 degrees centigrade) or below or one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees centigrade) or above. 
Sanitization means effective bactericidal treatment by a process that provides enough accumulative heat or concentration of chemicals for enough time to reduce the bacterial count, including pathogens, to a safe level on utensils and equipment. 
Sealed means free of cracks or other openings that permit the entry or passage of moisture. 
Single-service articles means cups, containers, lids, closures, plates, knives, forks, spoons, stirrers, paddles, straws, napkins, wrapping materials, toothpicks and similar articles designed for one time, one person use, and then discarded. 
Utensil means any implement used in the storage, preparation, transportation or service of food. 
Vending machine means any self-service device which, upon insertion of a coin, paper currency, token, card or key, dispenses unit servings of food or water, either in bulk or in packages, without the necessity of replenishing the device between each vending operation. It shall also include self-service dispensers equipped for coin, paper currency, token, card or key operation and optional manual operation. Unless otherwise stated, vending machine includes controlled location vending machines. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-72. - Captions. 
Section and other captions are part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-73. - Repealer; effective date. 
This article shall be in full force and effect three (3) months after its adoption and publication in accordance with law. At that time, all ordinances and parts of ordinances that conflict with this article are repealed. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-74. - Separability. 
If any provision or application of any provision of this article is held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-75. - Food supplies. 
Food exposed for sale, offered for sale, sold through vending machines and offered to patrons of vending machines shall be sound and free from spillage, filth, or other contamination and shall be safe for human consumption. The food shall be obtained from sources that comply with all laws relating to food and food labeling. The use of food in hermetically sealed containers that was not prepared in a food processing establishment is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-76. - Food protection. 
At all times, including while being prepared, stored, loaded, displayed, or transported, food intended for sale through vending machines shall be protected from contamination by all agents, including dust, insects, rodents, unclean equipment and utensils, unnecessary handling, coughs, sneezes, flooding, draining, and overhead leakage or condensation. All potentially hazardous foods must have pull dates that can be seen by the purchaser. 
The temperature of potentially hazardous foods shall be forty-five (45) degrees Fahrenheit (7.2 degrees centigrade) or below one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (60 degrees centigrade) or above at all times, except as otherwise provided in subsection 15-77(g). 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 83-140, § 1, 5-31-83)  
Sec. 15-77. - Special requirements. 
(a)  Milk and fluid milk products offered for sale through vending machines shall be pasteurized, shall meet the Grade A quality standards as established by law, and shall be dispensed only in individual original containers. 
(b)  Milk and fluid milk products and fluid nondairy products (creaming agents) shall not be dispensed in vending machines as additional ingredients in hot liquid beverages or other foods. 
(c)  When condiments are provided in conjunction with food dispensed by a vending machine, they shall be: 
(1)  Packaged in individual portions in single-service containers; 
(2)  Dispensed from sanitary dispensers which are cleaned, rinsed and sanitized and filled at the commissary or at the machine location if sanitary facilities are provided; or 
(3)  Made available from condiment self-service dispensing equipment at those locations having an on-duty attendant. 
(d)  Fresh fruits which may be eaten without peeling shall be thoroughly washed in potable water at the packing plant by the processor or at the commissary before being placed in the vending machines for dispensing. The washed fruit shall be protected from contamination after the washing process. 
(e)  All food, other than fresh fruit, shall be stored or packaged in clean protective containers, and all food shall be handled and vended in a sanitary manner. 
(f)  Potentially hazardous food offered for sale through vending machines shall be dispensed to the consumer in the individual, original container or package into which it was placed at the commissary or at the manufacturer's or processor's plant. Potentially hazardous food shall not be dispensed from bulk food machines. 
(g)  Potentially hazardous food shall be maintained at safe temperatures except as follows: 
(1)  During necessary period of preparation and packaging; and 
(2)  During the actual time required to load or otherwise service the machine and for a maximum machine ambient temperature recovery period of thirty (30) minutes following completion of loading or servicing operation. 
(h)  Vending machines dispensing potentially hazardous food shall be provided with adequate refrigerating or heating units and thermostatic controls which ensure the maintenance of safe temperatures at all times. Such vending machines shall also have automatic controls which prevent the machine from vending potentially hazardous food until serviced by the operator in the event of power failure, mechanical failure or other condition which results in noncompliance with temperature requirements in the food storage compartment. 
Potentially hazardous food that has failed to conform to the time-temperature requirements of this ordinance shall be removed from the vending machine, and be denatured or otherwise rendered unusable for human consumption. 
Vending machines dispensing potentially hazardous food shall be provided with one or more thermometers which, to an accuracy of + three (3) degrees Fahrenheit, indicate the air temperature of the warmest part of the refrigerated food storage compartment, or the coldest part of the heated food storage compartment, whichever is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-78. - Employee health. 
No person, while infected with a communicable disease that can be transmitted by foods or who is a carrier of organisms that cause such a disease, or while afflicted with a boil, an infected wound, or an acute respiratory infection, shall work in any area of a commissary or vending operation except as specified in subsection 15-100(3). 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-79. - Personal cleanliness. 
(a)  Employees shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness and shall conform to good hygienic practices while engaged in handling foods or food-contact surfaces of utensils or equipment. 
(b)  Employees shall thoroughly wash their hands with soap and warm water immediately prior to engaging in any vending machine servicing operation which may bring them into contact with food or with food-contact surfaces of utensils, containers or equipment. While engaged in such servicing operations, employees shall wear clean outer garments, shall not use tobacco in any form and shall keep their fingernails clean and trimmed. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-80. - Equipment and utensils—Interior construction and maintenance. 
(a)  The nonfood-contact surfaces of the interior of vending machines shall be designed and constructed to permit easy cleaning and to facilitate maintenance operations and shall be kept clean and in good repair. Inaccessible surfaces and areas shall be minimized. 
(b)  All food-contact surfaces of vending machines shall be smooth, in good repair and free of breaks, corrosion, open seams, cracks and chipped places. The design of such surfaces shall preclude routine contact between food and "V" type threaded surfaces except that in equipment where such contact is unavoidable, such as ice makers, such threads shall be minimized. All joints and welds in food-contact surfaces shall be smooth, and all internal angles and corners of such surfaces shall be rounded to facilitate cleaning. 
(c)  If solder or other sealer is used on food-contact surfaces, it shall be composed of safe materials and be corrosion resistant. 
(d)  All food-contact surfaces of vending machines, including containers, pipes, valves and fittings, shall be constructed and repaired with safe materials, including finishing materials, shall be corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent, easily cleanable and durable under conditions of normal use and shall be cleaned, rinsed and sanitized at a frequency established by the regulatory authorities based upon the type of product being dispensed. 
(e)  All food-contact surfaces, unless designed for in-place cleaning, shall be accessible for manual cleaning, rinsing, sanitizing and inspection: 
(1)  Without being disassembled; 
(2)  By disassembly without the use of tools; or 
(3)  By easy disassembling with the use of only simple tools such as a screwdriver or an open-end wrench. 
(f)  All food-contact parts or surfaces not designed for in-place cleaning (subsection (g)) shall be cleaned, rinsed and sanitized in clean, portable containers or in utensil washing sinks at the location or at the commissary. Cleaning shall consist of washing in warm water containing a suitable detergent and brushing or wiping, as appropriate. Rinsing shall consist of immersion or wiping with clean, clear rinse water. Sanitizing shall be accomplished by: 
(1)  Immersion or rinsing in water of at least one hundred eighty (180) degrees Fahrenheit (82.2 degrees centigrade) for thirty (30) seconds; or 
(2)  Immersion for one minute in a chemical sanitizing solution containing at least fifty (50) parts per million (p.p.m.) of available chlorine, or twelve and five-tenths (12.5) parts per million of available iodine, or two hundred (200) parts per million of quaternary ammonium sanitizer. 
(g)  In machines designed so that food-contact surfaces are not readily removable, all such surfaces intended for in-place cleaning shall be designed and fabricated so that: 
(1)  Cleaning and sanitizing solutions can be circulated throughout a fixed system using an effective cleaning and sanitizing regimen; 
(2)  Cleaning and sanitizing solutions will contact all food-contact surfaces; 
(3)  The system is self draining or capable of being completely evacuated; 
(4)  The procedures utilized result in thorough cleaning of the equipment. 
(h)  The openings into all nonpressurized containers used for the storage of vendible food, including water, shall be provided with covers which prevent contamination from reaching the interior of the containers. Such covers shall be designed to provide a flange which overlaps the opening and shall be sloped to provide drainage from the cover wherever the collection of condensation, moisture or splash is possible. Concave covers or cover areas are prohibited. Any port opening through the cover shall be flanged upward at least three-sixteenths inch, and shall be provided with an overlapping cover flanged downward. Condensation, drip or dust deflecting aprons shall be provided on all piping, thermometers, equipment, rotary shafts and other functional parts extending into the food container unless a water-tight joint is provided. Such aprons shall be considered as satisfactory covers for those openings which are in continuous use. Gaskets, if used, shall be of safe materials, relatively stable and relatively nonabsorbent, and shall have a smooth surface. All gasket retaining grooves shall be easily cleanable. 
(i)  The delivery tube or chute and orifice of all bulk food vending machines shall be protected from normal manual contact, dust, insects, rodents and other contamination. The design shall divert condensation or moisture from the normal filling position of container receiving the food. The vending stage of such machines shall be provided with a tight-fitting, self-closing door or cover which is kept closed except when food is being removed. The cup filling area or platform of controlled location vending machines shall not require a door or cover if there is no opening into the cabinet interior at that point other than for dispensing tube(s) or trapped waste tubing. The dispensing compartment of prepackaged candy and similar product vending machines shall be equipped with a self-closing lid at vending locations where insect or rodent entry into the machine may occur. 
(j)  The food storage compartment and other compartments in refrigerated vending machines which are subject to condensation or cooling water retention shall be self-draining or equipped with a drain outlet which permits complete draining. In vending machines designed to store cartoned beverages, diversion devices and retention pans or drains for leakage shall be provided. All such drains, devices and retention pans shall be easily cleanable. 
(k)  Can and bottle openers which come into contact with the food or the food-contact surfaces of the containers shall be constructed of corrosion-resistant, nonabsorbent and safe materials and shall be kept clean. Cutting or piercing parts of multiuse openers which come into contact with the food or food-contact surface of containers shall be reasonably protected from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents and other contamination; and such parts shall be readily removable for cleaning. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-81. - Same—Exterior construction and maintenance. 
(a)  The vending machine shall be of sturdy construction and the exterior shall be designed, fabricated, finished and maintained to facilitate its being kept clean, and to minimize the entrance of insects and rodents. The exterior of the machine shall be kept clean. 
(b)  Door and panel access openings to the food and container storage spaces of the machine shall be tight fitting and, if necessary, gasketed to prevent the entrance of dust, moisture, insects and rodents. 
(c)  All ventilation louvers or openings into vending machines shall be effectively screened. Screening material for openings into food and container storage spaces of the machine shall be not less than sixteen (16) mesh to the inch or equivalent. Screening material for openings into condenser units which are separated from food and container storage spaces shall be not less than eight (8) mesh to the inch or equivalent. 
(d)  In all vending machines in which the condenser unit is an integral part of the machine, such unit, when located below the food and container storage space, shall be separated from such space by a dust proof barrier, and when located above, shall be sealed from such space. 
(e)  In order to prevent seepage underneath the machine and to promote cleaning, freestanding vending machines shall have one or more of these elevation or movability features: 
(1)  Be light enough to be manually moved with ease by one person; 
(2)  Be elevated on legs or extended sidewalls to afford, with or without kickplates, an unobstructed vertical space of at least six (6) inches (15.24cm) under the machine; 
(3)  Mounted on rollers or casters which permit easy movement; or 
(4)  Be sealed to the floor. 
Where used kickplates shall be easily removable or be capable of being rotated. These kickplates shall be designed and installed to make the area under the machine easily accessible for routine cleaning without unlocking the cabinet door. 
(f)  Counter type machines shall be: 
(1)  Sealed to the counter; or 
(2)  Mounted on four-inch (10.16cm) legs or the equivalent; or 
(3)  Easily moved for cleaning with service connection in place. 
(g)  All service connections through an exterior wall of the machine including water, gas, electrical, and refrigeration connections, shall be grommeted, or closed with no opening over one thirty-seconds inch (0.79mm) to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents. All service connections to machines vending potentially hazardous food shall be such as to discourage their unauthorized or unintentional disconnection. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-82. - Equipment location. 
(a)  Vending machines, ovens and other equipment shall be located in a room, area or space which can be maintained in a clean condition and which is protected from overhead leakage or condensation from water, waste or sewer piping. The immediate area in which the equipment is installed shall be well lighted and ventilated. Each vending machine shall be so located so that the space around and under the machine can be easily cleaned and maintained, and so that insect and rodent harborage is not created. 
(b)  The floor area where vending machines are located shall be reasonably smooth, of cleanable construction and capable of withstanding repeated washing and scrubbing. This space and the immediate surroundings of each vending machine shall be maintained in a clean condition. 
(c)  Adequate handwashing facilities, including hot and cold or tempered running water, soap and individual towels, shall be convenient to the machine location and shall be available for use by employees servicing or loading bulk food machines. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-83. - Special requirements—Single-service articles. 
Single-service articles shall be purchased in sanitary packages which protect the articles from contamination, shall be stored in a clean, dry place until used, and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. Such articles shall be furnished to the customer in the original individual wrapper or from a sanitary single-service dispenser. All single-service articles shall be protected from manual contact, dust, insects, rodents, and other contamination. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-84. - Same—Other equipment. 
(a)  All other equipment at the vending location must be kept clean. Food-contact surfaces, if any, must be cleaned, rinsed and sanitized at a frequency established by the regulatory authorities based on the type of product being dispensed. 
(b)  The cavities and door edges of microwave ovens must be cleaned at least once a day with nonabrasive cleaners and shall be kept free of encrusted grease deposits and other accumulated soil. All doors, seals, hinges and latch fasteners (screws and related hardware) shall be kept tight and adjusted in accordance with manufacturer's procedures. Microwave ovens shall be in compliance with applicable safety standards of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's Bureau of Radiological Health. 
(c)  Food contact surfaces of all equipment and utensils must be protected from contamination at all times including while being transported from the commissary to the vending location. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-85. - Sanitary facilities and controls, water supply. 
(a)  All water used in vending machines shall be of a safe and sanitary quality and from a source constructed and operated according to law. Water used as a food ingredient shall be piped to the vending machine under pressure, except that in controlled location vending machines, water may be obtained from a safe source and carried to the machines in containers that are clean and of good sanitary construction. 
External water fill ports or drawers of controlled location vending machines shall be designed so that covers and drawers are secured to the machine. 
All plumbing connections and fittings shall be installed and maintained according to law. 
(b)  If used, water filters or other water conditioning devices shall be of a type which may be disassembled for periodic cleaning or replacement of the active element. Replacement elements shall be handled in a sanitary manner. 
(c)  To prevent leaching of toxic materials caused by possible interaction of carbonated water, piping and contact surfaces, post-mix soft drink vending machines manufactured after January 1, 1975, which are designed with an incoming water supply air gap shall have no copper tubing or other potentially toxic water system tubing between the air gap and the downstream, carbonated water dispensing nozzle. 
(d)  To prevent leaching of toxic materials caused by possible interaction of carbonated water, piping and contact surfaces, post-mix soft drink vending machines which are directly connected to the external water supply system shall be equipped with a double (or two (2) single) spring-loaded check valves or other devices which will provide positive protection against the entrance of carbon dioxide or carbonated water into the water supply system. Backflow preventive devices shall be located to facilitate servicing and maintenance. No copper tubing or other potentially toxic tubing or contact surfaces shall be permitted in or downstream from the check valves or backflow devices. These check valves or devices should be inspected and cleaned or replaced annually. 
(e)  Where spring-loaded check valves are used to prevent the backflow of carbon dioxide into accessible upstream copper or other potentially toxic piping or tubing, a screen of not less than one hundred (100) mesh to the inch shall be installed in the water line immediately upstream from the check valves in a location which permits servicing or replacement. 
(f)  In all vending machines in which carbon dioxide is used as a propellant, all food-contact surfaces from the check valves or other protective devices, including the valves or devices, shall be of such material as to preclude the production of toxic substances which might result from interaction with carbon dioxide or carbonated water. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-86. - Waste disposal. 
(a)  All trash and other solid or liquid waste shall be removed from the machine location as frequently as may be necessary to prevent nuisance and unsightliness, and shall be disposed of according to law. 
(b)  Self-closing, leak-proof, easily cleanable, insect-proof and rodent-proof waste receptacles shall be provided in the vicinity of each machine or machines to receive used cups, cartons, wrappers, straws, closures and other items. Plastic bags and wet strength 
paper bags may be used to line the receptacles. Soiled waste receptacles shall be cleaned at a frequency to prevent insect and rodent attraction. 
Waste receptacles shall not be located within the vending machines with the exception of those machines dispensing only packaged food with crown closures, in which case, the closure receptacles may be located within the machine. Waste receptacles shall not be located under counters or otherwise enclosed in a manner that will create a nuisance or prevent space around and under the counter or enclosure from being easily cleaned and maintained. Suitable racks or cases shall be provided for multiuse containers or bottles. 
(c)  Containers shall be provided within all machines dispensing liquid food in bulk for the collection of drip, spillage, overflow or other internal wastes. Such machines shall be equipped with an automatic shut-off device at the waste pail or other devices or valves which will place the machine out of operation before the waste pail overflows. Such devices shall prevent water or liquid product from continuously running in the event of the failure of any single control, high level control or other flow control device in the liquid product or water system. 
Controlled location vending machines not connected to a water supply system, and which generate no internal liquid wastes, may be equipped with easily removable drip pans at the dispensing platform in lieu of internal waste containers and automatic shut-off devices. 
Controlled location vending machines that are connected to a water supply and have not internal waste containers shall be equipped with at least two (2) independently operated controls to prevent the continued flow of water in the event of failure of any single flow control device. 
Containers or surfaces on which such wastes may accumulate shall be readily removable for cleaning, shall be easily cleanable and shall be corrosion-resistant. If liquid wastes from drip, spillage or overflow which originate within the machine are discharged into sewerage system, the connection to the sewer shall be through an air gap. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-87. - Compliance procedures; permits. 
(a)  No person shall operate one or more vending machines, other than controlled location vending machines, without a valid permit issued by the regulatory authorities. Persons who do not comply with the requirements of this article shall not be entitled to receive or retain such a permit. The fee for a permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The permit shall expire on the thirty-first day of December next after its issuance and shall be renewed by filing application therefor, paying the fee herein required and conforming to all other requirements of this article. Permits are not transferrable. 
(b)  The operator's company name and service telephone number shall be displayed on each vending machine or conspicuously adjacent to the vending machine bank. 
(c)  All operators of vending machines shall: 
(1)  Comply with the requirements of this article; 
(2)  Maintain at the operator's headquarters or at some other designated location within the jurisdiction of the regulatory authorities a list of all vending machines operated by such operator within the jurisdiction and the complete address of each machine location and of all commissaries or other establishments from which has machines are serviced. This information shall be available to the regulatory authorities upon request and shall be kept current; 
(3)  Notify the regulatory authorities of any change in machine location at which potentially hazardous food or hot or cold cup beverage vending machines have been placed in operation; and 
(4)  Notify the regulatory authorities of any change in operations involving new types of vending machines or conversions of existing machines to dispense products other than those for which the machines were built. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83; Ord. No. 94-1, § 5, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 15-88. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Any person desiring to operate one or more vending machines, other than controlled location vending machines, shall make written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authorities. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application, the regulatory authorities shall make an inspection of the commissary, supply storage, servicing, cleaning and sanitizing facilities, and transport facilities, and representative equipment and machine locations to determine compliance with the provisions of this article. A numbered operator's permit shall be issued to the applicant by the regulatory authorities after compliance by the operator with the applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-89. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  The regulatory authorities may, without prior warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit to engage in a vending operation if the operation constitutes a substantial hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b). When a permit is suspended, vending operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the permit holder shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing with the regulatory authorities within ten (10) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the permit holder or operator shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authorities by the permit holder within ten (10) days. If no request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. Prior to the hearing, the regulatory authorities may end the suspension if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(c)  A sustained suspension may be rescinded by the regulatory authorities after confirming by inspection that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(d)  The regulatory authorities, in lieu of suspending a permit, may suspend applicability of the permit to a particular vending machine, machines, commissary or specific products. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-90. - Revocation of permits. 
Prior to revocation, the regulatory authorities shall notify in writing the permit holder or operator of the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation. A permit may be revoked for serious or repeated violations of any of the items of this article as delineated on the inspection report form or for interference with the regulatory authorities in the performance of its duties. The permits shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of a revocation notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authorities by the permit holder within such a ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-91. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the permit holder or operator or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permit holder. A copy of any notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authorities. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-92. - Hearing. 
The hearings provided for in this article shall be conducted by the regulatory authorities at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authorities shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permit holder by the regulatory authorities within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-93. - Reapplication. 
Whenever a permit has been revoked, the holder may make a written application for a new permit as provided in section 15-88. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-94. - Permit exemption. 
All controlled location vending machines and vending machines which dispense exclusively: Bottled or canned soft drinks; prepackaged ice; prepackaged candy, cookies, crackers, or similar prepackaged nonpotentially hazardous snacks; or, ballgum, nuts, and panned candies are exempt from the requirements of subsection 15-87(a) and 15-87(c), but shall meet all other applicable requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-95. - Inspections—Frequency. 
The regulatory authorities shall select vending locations for inspection by a method which assures the inspection of representative machines and locations serviced by each of the operator's routemen and supervisors. The frequency of inspection and selection of locations shall assure the widest coverage of each operator's locations over the time span deemed available by the regulatory authorities but, in any case, shall not be less than at least one inspection every six (6) months, except that vending machines as set forth in section 15-94 of this article may be inspected by the regulatory authorities when there is reason to believe that insanitary conditions exist. Commissaries shall be inspected at least once every six (6) months. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-96. - Same—Access for inspection. 
The regulatory authorities, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter at any reasonable time, upon any private or public property where vending machines or commissaries are operated, or from which such machines are otherwise serviced, for the purpose of determining compliance with the provisions of this article. The operator shall make provision for the regulatory authorities to have access, either in company with an employee or otherwise, to the interior of all food vending machines operated by him. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-97. - Notification of inspection findings. 
(a)  Whenever an inspection of food vending machines is made, a copy of the completed inspection form set out in section 15-98 shall be furnished to the operator. 
(b)  Whenever the regulatory authorities discover a violation of any provisions of this chapter, they shall notify the operator concerned either by the inspection report form set out in section 15-98 or by other written notice. Such form or notice, which is a public document, shall: 
(1)  Describe the condition found; 
(2)  Provide a specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the condition; and 
(3)  State that an opportunity for a hearing on inspection findings will be provided if a written request for such hearing is filed with the regulatory authorities within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice. The regulatory authorities may also advise the operator in writing that unless the violations are corrected within the specified period of time, any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended or revoked in accordance with the provisions of sections 15-87 through 15-97, or court action may be initiated. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-98. - Inspection report form. 
The inspection report form shall be of a design approved by the Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Public Health Service, Food and Drug Administration, or such other reporting requirements as the regulatory authorities may require to regulate the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-99. - Examination and condemnation of food. 
Food may be examined or sampled by the regulatory authorities as often as necessary for enforcement of this article. The regulatory authorities may, upon written notice to the permit holder or operator specifying with particularity the reasons therefor, place a hold order on any food which it believes is in violation of this article. The regulatory authorities shall tag, label or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No food subject to a hold order shall be used, served, sold or moved to facilities not under control of the permit holder. The regulatory authorities shall permit storage of the food under conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered and accomplished. The hold order shall state that a request for hearing may be filed within ten (10) days and that if no hearing is requested the food shall be destroyed. A hearing shall be held if so requested and, on the basis of evidence produced at that hearing, the hold order may be vacated or the permit holder or person in charge of the food may be directed by written order to denature or destroy such food or to bring it into compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-100. - Procedure when infection is suspected. 
When the regulatory authorities have reasonable cause to suspect the possibility of disease transmitted from any employee, they may secure a morbidity history of the suspected employee or make any other investigation as may be indicated and shall take appropriate action. The regulatory authorities may require any or all of the following measures: 
(1)  The immediate exclusion of the employee from the commissary or vending operation; 
(2)  The immediate closing of the commissary and vending operations concerned until, in the opinion of the regulatory authorities, no further danger of disease outbreak exists; 
(3)  Restriction of the employee's services to some area of the establishment where there would be no danger of transmitting disease; 
(4)  Adequate medical and laboratory examinations of the employee, of other employees and of his or her and their body discharges. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-101. - Commissaries outside jurisdiction of the regulatory authorities. 
Food from commissaries outside the jurisdiction of the regulatory authorities may be sold within the jurisdiction if such commissaries conform to substantially equivalent food service sanitation standards. To determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the regulatory authorities may accept reports from the responsible authorities in the jurisdictions where the commissaries are located. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-102. - Remedies—Penalties. 
Any employee or operator who is convicted of violating this ordinance shall be fined as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Sec. 15-103. - Same—Injunctions. 
The regulatory authorities may seek to enjoin violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 83-68, § 1, 3-1-83)  
Secs. 15-104—15-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SEAFOOD DEALERS 
 
Sec. 15-111. - Definition. 
As used in this article the term "department" shall mean the department of health. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-112. - Fixed place of business required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or engage in the business or wholesale distribution of, or offer for sale or distribution, within the city, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood without having a fixed and established place of business within the city for such purpose unless such a business outside of the city is duly inspected and approved by another local, state or federal health authority. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-113. - General requirements for buildings and premises. 
The building in which any business for which a permit is required by this article, is to be conducted shall be constructed in accordance with the laws and ordinances of the city. Such premises shall be properly ventilated; the walls of such premises, and the benches, tables, and other furniture therein shall be built and constructed in such manner that they can be easily be kept clean; such premises shall contain sufficient and adequate refrigeration; all plumbing shall comply with the plumbing ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. Such premises shall be equipped with sanitary toilets, as required by the laws of the state, and such toilets shall not be located in any room which shall connect directly with the rooms where seafood products are cleaned, packed, stored or prepared for or offered for sale. The premises shall be equipped with wash basins or basins with individual or paper towels available in such toilets, and dirty, unused clothing shall not be permitted to be stored or kept in any room in such premises where seafood products are cleaned, stored, packed, prepared or offered for sale, unless kept in a clean, covered container. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-114. - Inspection of premises. 
It shall be the duty of the health director or his employees to inspect the establishments located in the city regulated by this article from time to time after a permit has been issued, and as often as, in the discretion of the health director, may be necessary for the proper regulation of such establishment within the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-115. - Compliance with state or federal regulations. 
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale within the city, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood which, if taken from the waters under the jurisdiction of the state, have not been approved by the state department of health and under the regulations and permit of such department, both as to preparation and packing for shipment and shipment, if such fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood is taken from the waters under the jurisdiction of any other state, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale within the city any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood which has not been taken from the waters under the jurisdiction of such state, and under the regulations and permit of and approved by the proper authorities of such state, and of the United States public health service, both as to preparation and packing for shipment and shipment, and in so selling and offering for sale such fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood, it must be indicated either by certificate or otherwise from such state and federal authorities that such fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood was taken from the water and packed and shipped as approved and required by such regulations. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-116. - Per centage of ice and water permitted in oysters. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any quantity of oysters where the whole weight of ice or water, or both, exceeds five (5) per cent of the whole weight of the oysters sold or offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-117. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, or engage in the business of the wholesale distribution of, or offer for sale or distribution, within the city, any fish, oysters, shrimp, lobsters, crabs or other seafood without first having obtained a permit so to do from the health director. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-118. - Application for permit. 
Application for a permit required by the provisions of this article shall be made in writing to the health director, upon a blank to be furnished by the department, stating: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The number of establishments to be maintained and operated; 
(3)  The location thereof; 
(4)  The nature of the business of the applicant; 
(5)  The name of the owner of such establishment; and 
(6)  The name under which such establishment is to be operated. 
A separate application shall be made for each establishment to be maintained and operated by the applicant. The application must be accompanied by a sales tax permit issued by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-119. - Inspection of applicant's premises. 
After the filing of an application for a permit under this article, it shall be the duty of the health department to make an inspection of the premises in and upon which the applicant desires to conduct such establishment and business, to determine that such premises is in compliance with all applicable provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-120. - Fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for a permit required by this division shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each establishment to be operated by the applicant, payable in cash in advance. 
(b)  A permit holder that has lost its current, valid permit may obtain a replacement permit from the health director for a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-121. - Issuance. 
Upon compliance with the sanitary and pure food laws of the state, and upon compliance with the terms and provisions of this article, by the applicant for a permit under this article, the health director shall issue such permit; provided, that no permit shall be issued, unless the building in which such business is to be conducted is constructed in accordance with applicable provisions of the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-122. - Does not authorize peddling. 
Under the terms of a permit issued pursuant to this article, the permittee shall not be allowed to peddle from house to house or from place to place, but his sales must be made directly either by delivery upon a previously executed order or directly from his place of business. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-123. - Expiration. 
All permits issued under this article shall expire on the fifteenth day of February of each year. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-124. - Revocation. 
Should the holder of any permit provided for in this article violate any of the provisions of this article, such permit may be revoked or suspended after notice to the permit holder and reasonable opportunity to correct the same. The permit holder may appeal such action to the mayor and the mayor may reverse, modify or affirm the action of the health director. When a permit has been revoked as provided herein, the permit fee for the next permit for which the permit holder applies shall be double the fee provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-125. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be fined in a sum not greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Secs. 15-126—15-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - FARM PRODUCE 
 
Sec. 15-141. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Department. The word "department" means the department of health of the city. 
(2)  Director. The word "director" means the director of health of the city. 
(3)  Establishment. The word "establishment" shall include any building, structure or stand where farm products are sold or offered for sale within the city limits. 
(4)  Farm produce. The term "farm produce" shall mean and include vegetables, fruits, nuts, berries, watermelons and cantaloupes in their natural state, but shall not include foods or food stuffs processed or manufactured from such named items. 
(5)  Peddler. The term "peddler" shall mean and include and shall be construed to mean and include all persons, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling or offering for sale farm produce, or exhibiting the same for sale or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, or who sell or offer for sale from any vehicle, conveyance or instrumentality making delivery at the time of sale of such farm produce and who have no established place of business for the sale and distribution of such farm produce within the city. 
(6)  Temporary or transient. The words "temporary" or "transient", as used in the preceding paragraph, means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one month in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-142. - Requirements as to sales establishments. 
Each establishment from which farm produce is displayed, sold or offered for sale shall be provided with floors constructed of a substance or material that is capable of being washed, cleaned and kept in a sanitary condition. The establishment shall have a roof; provided, however, this particular provision pertaining to a roof shall not apply to trucks, wagons, any other conveyances or other vehicles. The farm produce contained in such establishment shall be kept, stored or displayed on a counter or structure which is not less than eighteen (18) inches above the floor (with the exception of watermelons). There shall be available to each of such establishments running water and rest room facilities. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-143. - Enforcement. 
The director is authorized to utilize all employees of the department in the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-144. - Exemptions from article. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to a farmer who peddles, sells or offers for sale farm produce from door to door, house to house, or building to building, provided such farm produce was grown or raised by such farmer, the burden of proof being on the person asserting that he is a farmer and that he grew or raised such farm produce. 
(b)  The term "peddler" as defined in this article shall not include or be construed to include any person engaged in interstate commerce or any person upon whom the provisions of this article would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-145. - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, either for himself or as agent or representative of another, to: 
(1)  Engage in the business of selling or offering for sale farm produce, in the city limits, as a peddler of such farm produce, without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(2)  Maintain or operate an establishment for the retail sale of farm produce without first having obtained a license therefor. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-146. - Application. 
Every person, before engaging in the business of selling farm produce from door to door, or peddling farm produce, or before opening, maintaining or operating an establishment for the sale of farm produce within the city limits, shall make application for a license for such door to door sales or for an establishment to be maintained or operated by such person, upon a blank furnished by the director on a form prescribed by such officer, which shall include, among other things, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and telephone number of applicant's residence and of the establishment; and 
(2)  The license number of all vehicles used in peddling, selling or offering for sale, or delivering such farm produce. 
The application must be accompanied by a sales tax permit issued by the State of Texas. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-147. - Fee. 
(a)  Annual. A license fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per annum shall be paid prior to obtaining a license provided for in this article and prior to engaging in any business connected with farm produce where a license is required by this article. 
(b)  Replacement. A license holder who has lost his current, valid license may obtain a replacement license from the health director for a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 94-1, § 5, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 15-148. - Issuance or denial generally; term. 
Upon receiving the application for a license under this division, the health director shall make an inspection of the vehicles to be used by the applicant or of the establishment for which a license is desired, and if such establishment or vehicles comply with the provisions and requirements of this article, as well as other ordinances of the city which pertain to the operation of such establishment or vehicles, then the health director shall approve the application upon the payment of the license fee and a license shall be issued so such applicant which shall be effective for one year from the date of issuance. In the event the health director shall determine that such establishment of the applicant or any vehicle does not comply with the provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city which pertain to the operation of such establishments of vehicles. then the director shall disapprove such application. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-149. - Appeal from denial. 
An applicant who has been refused a license under this article may, within ten (10) days, appeal to the mayor by filing with the city secretary a copy of such application, showing the action of the director, and requesting that the mayor grant a hearing and overrule the action of the health director. In the event the mayor sustains the action of the health director, then his action shall be final and no license shall issue. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-150. - Revocation. 
Should the holder of any license provided for in this article violate any of the provisions of this article, such license may be revoked or suspended after notice to the license holder and reasonable opportunity to correct the same. The license holder may appeal such action to the mayor and the mayor may reverse, modify or affirm the actio of the health director. When a license has been revoked as provided herein, the license fee for the next license for which the license holder applies shall be double the fee provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-151. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any police officer of the City of Pasadena in addition to being enforced by other applicable departments and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 15-152. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be fined in a sum not greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-90, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Secs. 15-153—15-174. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - STORAGE OF TIRES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, § 17-16, et seq.; Junked vehicles, § 20-71 et seq. 
 
Sec. 15-175. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section when used in this article: 
Elements of nature means rainfall, snow, sleet, hail or other natural precipitation. 
Permit means a valid used tire generator permit issued by the city health department. 
Permittee means a person who holds a valid used tire generator permit issued by the city health department. 
Person means an individual, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, business, organization, partnership, or any entity, public or private in nature. 
Person in charge means the individual who is the apparent supervisor at the time of inspection. 
Regulatory authority means the director of the city health department or his duly authorized representative. 
Tire means any tire, whether new or used, whether serviceable or unserviceable, made wholly or partially of rubber which was manufactured for use on any vehicle propelled by a motor (including vehicles pushed or pulled by a vehicle propelled by a motor), regardless of whether such vehicle is intended for use on a public highway, provided that such tire is not mounted upon a wheel or rim and in service upon or carried as a component spare of a vehicle. 
Used tire generator means any person who, in the course of his normal business activities, generates one hundred (100) or more used tires per calendar year, and includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in the sale and mounting of new, used or remanufactured automobile, truck, and equipment tires who receive used tires in the exchange process associated therewith and persons who own or operate fleets of trades, taxicabs, buses, implements or other vehicles and service all or a portion of their own tire needs. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-176. - Permit. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a used tire generator as defined by this article within the city unless he has a current permit, or permits as required, from the director of public health or his designee(s). 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-177. - Application. 
(a)  Applications for all original or renewal permit or permits shall be made on a city health department form provided for that purpose and shall be filed with the director of public health or his designee(s). No such permit shall be issued unless the director of public health or his authorized designee(s) determines that the used tire generator maintains his premises and operates his business in compliance with all applicable city ordinances and state and federal laws and regulations. All permits issued shall remain the property of the city and shall be displayed in public view when the used tire generator is open for business. 
(b)  Renewal applications received by the city health department after the expiration date of the permit to be renewed, shall be charged an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee. 
(c)  Renewal applications received by the city health department not in completed form or with insufficient funds to cover the required permit fees, shall be returned to the applicant. The applicant shall resubmit the application in completed form with all applicable fees. There shall be an additional fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) imposed for all incomplete or insufficient fund applications. 
(d)  Such late fees are imposed to help defray the additional administrative costs related to late or incomplete applications and shall not be considered to be a civil or criminal property. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-178. - Lost permits. 
A used tire generator permittee who has lost a valid permit may obtain a replacement permit from the city health department for a fee of ten dollars ($10.00). 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-179. - Permit fees. 
The fee for a permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). The permit shall expire on the fifteenth day of February next after its issuance and shall be renewed by filing application therefore, paying the fee herein required and conforming to all other requirements of this article. Permits are not transferable and the permit fee is not refundable. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-180. - Open storage of tires declared to be a nuisance. 
The storage of any tire within the city in such a manner that the tire or tires are exposed to the elements of nature is hereby declared to be a nuisance which is subject to abatement at the expense of the owner such as provided by law. Tires shall be stored in an enclosed structure or container that protects them from the elements of nature. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-181. - Open storage of tires is declared to be unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or to suffer or permit the storage of any tire or tires upon any premises within the city in such a manner that the tire or tires are exposed to the elements of nature. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-182. - Transport of used tires. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to transport used tires upon any public highway within the city unless such person is registered as a transporter of used and scrap tires with the Texas Department of Health. Provided, it is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the cargo transported by such person: 
(1)  contains five (5) or less used tires; or 
(2)  contains five (5) per cent or less unserviceable tires by volume and is part of a general cargo of "municipal solid waste" as that term is defined by Chapter 361, Health and Safety Code, V.T.C.A.; or 
(3)  originated outside of the city and is destined for transport outside of the city, provided that no used tires are loaded or unloaded within the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-183. - Suspension of permits. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may, without prior warning, notice or hearing, suspend any permit to engage in a used tire generator operation for the following reasons: 
(1)  fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the permit; 
(2)  fraud or misrepresentation in the operation of a permitted business; 
(3)  conducting a used tire generator operation in violation of the permit or this ordinance; or 
(4)  conducting a used tire generator operation in such a manner as to create a public nuisance. 
Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b). When a permit is suspended, operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the permittee shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing with the regulatory authority within ten (10) days of receipt of a request for a hearing. 
(b)  Whenever a permit is suspended, the permittee or person-in-charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permittee within ten (10) days. If no request for hearing is filed within ten (10) days, the suspension is sustained. Prior to the hearing, the regulatory authority may end the suspension if reasons for suspension no longer exist. 
(c)  A sustained suspension may be rescinded by the regulatory authority after confirming by inspection that the requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-184. - Revocation of permits. 
Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify in writing the permittee or person in charge of the reasons for which the permit is subject to revocation. A permit may be revoked for serious or repeated violations of any of the items of this article. The permits shall be revoked at the end of ten (10) days following service of a revocation notice unless a request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the permittee within such a ten-day period. If no request for a hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-185. - Service of notices. 
A notice provided for in this article is properly served when it is delivered to the permittee or person in charge or when it is sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the permittee. A copy of any notice shall be filed in the records of the regulatory authorities. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-186. - Hearing. 
The hearing provided for in this article shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded evidence of such hearings, the regulatory authority shall make a final finding and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the permittee by the regulatory authority within ten (10) days. 
(Ord. No. 91-215, § 1, 11-5-91)  
Sec. 15-187. - Penalty clause. 
Violation of any applicable provision of this article shall be punishable by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and each day that any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Provided, however, that if an offense committed under this article also constitutes an offense of state law, it shall be punishable as provided in the applicable state law.  
ARTICLE IX. - SMOKING 
 
Sec. 15-188. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, whenever used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Air ventilation system means an HVAC system designed by a licensed professional engineer to meet the requirements of the city mechanical code and shall utilize an amount of outside "mixing" air in accordance with industry codes and standards. Such systems shall have a negative pressure on the area designated for smoking to prevent air from a smoking area to be drawn across or into the nonsmoking area. 
Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and derives at least sixty (60) percent of gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption, including, but not limited to, any tavern, nightclub, cocktail lounge, or cabaret. 
Bingo hall means an establishment or facility licensed by the State of Texas for the purpose of conducting bingo games. 
Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including any retail establishment where goods or services are sold and any professional corporation or other entity where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered. 
Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his services for a non-profit entity or provides such services on a contract basis. 
Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one (1) or more individuals. 
Enclosed , when used in reference to an area or a building or portion thereof, means closed in on all sides from floor to ceiling by solid walls, with or without windows and exclusive of doorways. 
Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, any hospital, rehabilitation hospital or other clinic, including any weight control clinic, nursing home, home for the aging or chronically ill, laboratory, or the office of any surgeon, chiropractor, physical therapist, physician, dentist, or specialist within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within a health care facility. 
Meeting facility means a building designed, operated and used primarily for private functions. 
Physical barrier means a barrier that will form an effective membrane continuous from outside wall to outside wall, from a smoke barrier to a smoke barrier, from floor to floor, or roof above, or a combination thereof, including continuity through all concealed spaces, such as above suspended ceilings, interstitial structural and mechanical spaces. Transfer grilles, louvers and similar openings shall not be used in these partitions. Self-closing, tight-fitting doors are permitted in such barriers. 
Place of employment means an enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer where employees work or to which employees have access during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. A private residence is not a "place of employment" unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Private club means a fraternal, social or religious organization that promotes its services to its owners, members and guests and has been granted an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
Private function means a gathering of individuals for the purpose of deliberation, education, instruction, entertainment, amusement, or dining, where specific invitation is a prerequisite to entry and where the event is not intended to be open to the public. 
Public place means an enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Aquariums, galleries, libraries, and museums; 
(2)  Areas available to and customarily used by the general public in businesses; 
(3)  Bars; 
(4)  Bingo facilities; 
(5)  Child care and adult day care facilities; 
(6)  Convention facilities; 
(7)  Educational facilities, both public and private; 
(8)  Elevators; 
(9)  Gaming facilities; 
(10)  Governmental facilities, including buildings and vehicles; 
(11)  Health care facilities; 
(12)  Hotels and motels; 
(13)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities; 
(14)  Polling places; 
(15)  Pool and billiard halls; 
(16)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
(17)  Restaurants; 
(18)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas; 
(19)  Retail establishments; 
(20)  Service lines; 
(21)  Shopping malls; 
(22)  Sports arenas; and 
(23)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
A private residence is not a "public place" unless used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
Restaurant means food service establishment, including but not limited to, any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, and private and public school cafeteria, that gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as any kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
Retail tobacco store means any retail establishment utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and smoking accessories in which the sale of other products, including food and beverages, does not exceed forty (40) percent of gross revenues. 
Service line means an indoor line in which one (1) or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money. 
Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect customer entrances to two (2) or more retail or other businesses and is used for customer pedestrian traffic. 
Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or other lighted tobacco product in any manner or in any form. 
Sports arena means any sports pavilion, stadium, gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller and ice rink, bowling alley, pool hall or other similar place where members of the general public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events. 
Substantial means fifty (50) percent or more. 
Tobacco bar means a bar in which the on-site sales or rentals of tobacco products and smoking accessories for consumption or use on the premises exceeds twenty (20) percent of gross revenues and into which entry is restricted to individuals eighteen (18) years of age and above. 
(Ord. No. 11-020, § 1, 2-15-11)  
Sec. 15-189. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, except as provided in section 15-194 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-190. - Prohibition of smoking in places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas within places of employment, except as provided in section 15-194 of this Code. 
(b)  An employer shall communicate this prohibition to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-191. - Prohibition of smoking in seating areas at outdoor events. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in the seating areas and covered concourses of all outdoor sports arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters, as well as in bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-192. - Prohibition of smoking in covered public transportation facilities. 
Smoking shall be prohibited in any covered public transportation facilities, including ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-193. - Reasonable distance. 
Smoking is prohibited within twenty-five (25) feet outside entrances, exits, or wheelchair ramps serving any entrance or exit, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited, so as to ensure that tobacco smoke does not enter those areas. This section shall not apply to restaurant and bar outdoor seating areas. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-194. - Where smoking not regulated. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of sections 15-189 and 15-190 of this Code: 
(1)  Private residences, except when used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(2)  Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated as smoking rooms; provided, however, that not more than thirty-five (35) per cent of rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated. All smoking rooms on the same floor must be contiguous, and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. The status of rooms as smoking or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to add additional nonsmoking rooms. 
(3)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted, provided that smoke from these places does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(4)  Retail tobacco stores, provided that smoke from these establishments does not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(5)  Tobacco bars in operation on or before September 1, 2006; provided that the establishment operates an air ventilation and purification system using best available technology, offers comprehensive health insurance to its employees, including a substantial employer contribution, for the purpose of mitigating the effects of secondhand smoke on employees and obtains a permit from the department. The director is authorized to issue a permit for such establishments that are consistent with rules and regulations developed by the director regarding air ventilation and purification systems and comprehensive health insurance for the purpose of mitigating the effects of secondhand smoke on employees. The director is authorized to require a permit fee, not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), that reflects the actual cost of processing and issuing said permit. 
(6)  Designated enclosed meeting areas in convention centers, hotels, motels, and other meeting facilities, only during times the meeting areas are in actual use for private functions; provided that the owners of such facilities must designate in writing to the department the meeting areas in which smoking will be permitted. The designated meeting areas must be separately enclosed from the rest of the facility, and smoke from these areas must not infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article. 
(7)  Private functions held for the sole benefit of and in facilities owned or operated by a non-profit organization that is tax-exempt under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code; provided that no qualifying non-profit organization may hold more than five (5) such private functions in a calendar year pursuant to this exception. Non-profit organizations wishing to invoke this exception must notify the department in writing of each such private function at least thirty (30) days prior to the private function. 
(8)  Stage areas of enclosed theaters, if smoking is an integral part of a theatrical performance. 
(9)  Bars, where the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises derives at least sixty (60) per cent of gross revenues from the sale of alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption, including, but not limited to, any tavern, nightclub, cocktail lounge, or cabaret; and 
a.  Entry is limited to anyone who is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
b.  The establishment is sealed such that smoke from the establishment cannot infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; 
c.  Provided that the establishment operates an air ventilation using best available technology and that the air ventilation system shall provide a total air exchange every ten (10) minutes and shall exhaust that air to the exterior of the building; 
d.  A sign must be clearly and conspicuously posted at each entrance in English stating "SMOKING PERMITTED" in letters that shall have a height of not less than one (1) inch; and 
e.  Offers comprehensive health insurance, including a substantial employer contribution, for the purpose of mitigating the effects of secondhand smoke on employees. 
(10)  Private clubs, provided that the establishment is sealed such that smoke from the establishment cannot infiltrate into areas where smoking is prohibited under the provisions of this article; and 
a.  Whereas a sign shall be clearly and conspicuously posted at each entrance in English stating "SMOKING PERMITTED" in letters that shall have a height of not less than one (1) inch, and; 
b.  Provided that the establishment operates an air ventilation using best available technology and that the air ventilation system shall provide a total air exchange every ten (10) minutes and shall exhaust that air to the exterior of the building; 
c.  Offers comprehensive health insurance to its employees, including a substantial employer contribution, for the purpose of mitigating the effects of secondhand smoke on employees. 
(11)  Bingo halls, which provide the following: 
a.  Designated smoking areas equipped with a functional separate ventilation system that: 
i.  Provides negative pressure on the area designated for smoking to prevent air from a smoking area to be drawn across or into the nonsmoking area; and 
ii.  Operates an air ventilation system using best available technology; and 
iii.  Provides a total air exchange every ten (10) minutes; and 
iv.  Exhausts to the exterior of the building; and 
b.  Smoking areas separated from nonsmoking areas by means of a physical barrier; and 
c.  Smoking areas located such that patrons do not have to enter into a smoking area to access a designated nonsmoking area; and 
d.  Signage posted in at least one-inch letters "Smoking Permitted and no-smoking areas available"; and 
e.  Comprehensive health insurance to its employees, including a substantial employer contribution, for the purpose of mitigating the effects of secondhand smoke; and 
f.  Reasonable accommodations for an employee required to work in a smoking area who requests assignment to a smoke-free area. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 07-368, § 2, 1-2-08; Ord. No. 11-020, § 2, 2-15-11)  
Sec. 15-195. - Declaration of establishment as nonsmoking. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection (a) of section 15-196 of this Code is posted. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-196. - Posting of signs. 
(a)  The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or place of employment shall clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs in English (and, if desired, any other language such person may choose) or the international 'No Smoking' symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) in every public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(b)  The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or place of employment shall conspicuously post at every public entrance thereto a sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited therein. Such signs shall conform to the requirements set out in paragraph (a) of this section. 
(c)  The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control shall remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06; Ord. No. 07-368, § 3, 1-2-08)  
Sec. 15-197. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Any authority having jurisdiction to enforce city ordinances shall have authority to enforce the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the health department by contacting the department directly or via the city's call center. 
(c)  The health officer and the fire marshal or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this article. 
(d)  The health officer or his designee, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter any public place and place of employment at any reasonable time, for the purpose of making inspections and examining applicable records of the establishment to determine compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-198. - Rules and regulations. 
The public health manager is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-199. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he is smoking in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every person in control of an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article to request any person known to be smoking in such area to extinguish the burning tobacco product. Any knowing or intentional failure to maintain compliance with such duty shall constitute an offense. 
(c)  Whenever in this article an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or misdemeanor, or whenever in this article the doing of any thing or act is required or the failure to do any thing or act is prohibited, the violation of the provision shall be and constitute a misdemeanor punishable, upon conviction, by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each violation shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision is cumulative of and shall never be a bar to any other civil or administrative remedy provided or allowed in this article or by law. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Sec. 15-200. - Other applicable laws. 
This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 06-301, § 2, 12-5-06)  
Chapter 16 - HEATING, AIR CONDITIONING, MECHANICAL REFRIGERATION AND BOILER CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), adopted January 17, 2017, amended chapter 16 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 16, pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; housing, Ch. 16½; plumbing, Ch. 29. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Purpose. 
This Code is an ordinance providing minimum requirements and standards for the practical safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising from the installation of heating, air conditioning, refrigeration, air treatment, and boiler systems. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to the installation, replacement, relocation, or maintenance of heating, air conditioning, refrigeration, air treatment, or boiler equipment within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-3. - Adoption of codes and state laws. 
The City of Pasadena Mayor and City Council, with the recommendation of the City of Pasadena Heating, Air Conditioning, Refrigeration, and Boiler Board (hereafter referred to as Mechanical Board), does hereby adopt the most current edition of the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code, the most current edition (as adopted and mandated by the State of Texas) of the International Energy Conservation Code, and the current Laws and Regulations adopted by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation for air conditioning, heating, refrigeration, and boilers. Also adopted is Chapter 16 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances, hereafter known as the Mechanical Codes. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-4—16-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MECHANICAL BOARD 
 
Sec. 16-26. - Mechanical board created. 
There is hereby created a mechanical board consisting of seven (7) members of who shall be resident's or own a business in the City of Pasadena, and appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-27. - Members of mechanical board. 
(a)  Position one (1) shall be filled by the chief air conditioning and boiler inspector of the City of Pasadena or his duly authorized representative. 
(b)  Position two (2) shall be filled by a representative of the building trades in Pasadena. 
(c)  Positions three (3), four (4), five (5), and six (6) shall be filled by duly licensed heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration contractors. Such contractors shall have been registered and actively engaged in heating, air conditioning, or refrigeration contracting in the City of Pasadena for at least one (1) year immediately prior to confirmation for membership on the mechanical board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-28. - Appointments, terms, and removal. 
Board members for the mechanical board shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council, and serve a term of two (2) calendar years, or until his or her successor has been appointed, and confirmed to take office. Any appointed member of the board may be removed from office in accordance with article III, section 7 of the City of Pasadena Home Rule Charter. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-29. - Quorum. 
Four (4) members of the mechanical board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board, and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-30. - Officers, procedures, order of business. 
The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary, the chairman, vice-chairman, and the secretary shall be nominated by the members of the mechanical board each year in its first meeting after January 2nd. Each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the then qualified and serving members of the mechanical board. Employees of the City of Pasadena shall not serve as officers of the mechanical board. The terms of all elective officers shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's board membership. The meeting procedure and order of business shall be as prescribed by the mechanical board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-31. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The mechanical board shall be responsible for making interpretations of the mechanical codes including the approval of equipment, material installation techniques, and granting special permission for the material and installations not covered herein. 
(b)  The mechanical board shall submit to the mayor, city council, and the building official, written suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the City of Pasadena Mechanical Code. 
(c)  The mechanical board will review appeals requested on behalf of contractors, homeowners, and citizens of the City of Pasadena, and advise the permit department and/or the City of Pasadena Mayor and city council as to specific rulings and/or opinions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-32. - Reports. 
The mechanical board shall prepare a written report to the mayor and/or building official indicating herein the official action of the board. Said report is to be submitted during January of each year or as may be requested in regards to specific appeals before the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-33. - Investigations. 
The chief mechanical inspector, or his representative, shall make such investigations regarding mechanical work as deemed necessary or as requested by the mayor, or building official, and prepare a written report, with correction requirements, to requestor and owner or occupant of property in question. 
Inspector shall have "right of entry" during reasonable hours for investigating the previous mentioned inspection or complaint as may be properly reported to the City of Pasadena. By adoption, this allows the City of Pasadena to recover an hourly amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) an hour for staff fees associated to any individual or company found at fault or responsible by determination of the mechanical board. This is separate and independent of fines that may result from the investigation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-34. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation, or organization dissatisfied with an interpretation of a mechanical inspector shall have the right to appeal such decision. The appeal shall be in writing for review to the mechanical board within two (2) working days after such decision. If no appeal is made within the time allowed the inspector's decision will be final. There upon, the mechanical board within fifteen (15) working days shall hear and determine said appeal based on the current mechanical code(s) being used at the time of the original decision. The mechanical board shall have the right to affirm, modify, or reverse the action of the mechanical inspector, provided, that until such time as the inspector's decision is reversed or modified, such decision shall be in effect. The decision of the mechanical board shall be subject to review by the city council as provided for below. If no appeal is made within the time allowed below the board's decision will be final. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation, or organization that questions a decision of the mechanical board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city secretary within ten (10) days after the decision of the mechanical board. After receipt of such appeal, the city council shall set the date for a hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and the chairman of the mechanical board. The mechanical board, as well as the appellant, shall have the right to be heard. The city council shall affirm, modify, or reverse the action and/or decision of the mechanical board. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is requested within the time and manner herein provided, the ruling of the mechanical board shall be final. The action of the mechanical board shall in all things be effective until reversed or modified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-35—16-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 16-41. - Definitions. 
No terms in this mechanical code are gender specific. 
Administrative "hold" prevents a contractor or owner from acquisition of mechanical or other permits. 
Air conditioning contractor: Any individual, partnership, firm, or corporation engaging in the business of installing, altering, replacing, or maintaining an air conditioning, heating, ventilating, refrigeration, boiler, or air treatment system or unit. Contractor shall be licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation or have someone licensed by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation on staff, and registered with the City of Pasadena. 
Air treatment: Any system which is capable of absorbing or neutralizing smoke, odors, dust, and other pathogens through ultra violet lights, filters, chemical, or electrically charged systems. 
Alteration: A change in air conditioning, heating, boiler, ventilation, air treatment, or refrigeration system that involves an extension, addition, relocation, or modification of the mechanical equipment or system. 
Amendments: More stringent code modifications made to ensure that life-safety and environmental concerns/improvements are satisfied for the citizens and this community. 
Authority having jurisdiction: The City of Pasadena Texas is hereby recognized as the authority having jurisdiction in every context and application of the adopted codes, regulations and amendments. 
Chief mechanical inspector: A person employed by the City of Pasadena Permit Department working under the authority and assignment for the duties of chief mechanical inspector as assigned by the City of Pasadena Building Official preferably certified by a nationally recognized certification agency in the mechanical inspections field. The chief mechanical inspector will enforce all regulations described in this and other adopted codes as pertaining to air conditioning, heating, ventilation, boilers, refrigeration and air treatment equipment. The chief mechanical inspector shall be accountable to the building official. 
French drain: A lined hole (18"×18"×18") dug in the ground, filled with gravel or rocks for the air condition condensate to drain into. 
Full time employee: An individual employed by an individual, partnership, or corporation on a full time basis of thirty-six (36) hours or more per week and reported on their federal and state tax records as an employee. These records shall be made available to the chief mechanical inspector, or his representative, during normal business hours. 
IECC inspector or designer: An individual certified, under a current nationally recognized model energy code, to design or perform energy inspections for IECC compliance. 
Inspector: Shall mean the inspector(s) as may be assigned by the City of Pasadena Building Official or his representative to enforce laws, regulations, codes and policies set forth by the City of Pasadena. 
Mechanical equipment: Air conditioners, heaters, heat pumps, air handlers, fans, boilers, air treatment, refrigeration, exhaust/ventilation and any other type of equipment used in these fields or similar industries. 
Mechanical work: Any work pertaining to mechanical equipment. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-42—16-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MECHANICAL PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 16-51. - Fees. 
All permit department fees, specific policies and procedures must comply with the provisions of the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 2006-322 or if the fee was unmodified, it defaults to any previous established fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-52—16-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFIC POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 16-61. - Scheduled overtime or emergency inspections. 
All shall comply with the specific provisions in the City of Pasadena Ordinance Number 2006-322. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-62. - Gas connection approval. 
No connection from an energy or fuel source shall be made to any heating, air conditioning, or boiler equipment unless specifically approved by the chief mechanical inspector or his representative. An inspection shall be scheduled within forty-eight (48) hours of completion of installation or receive penalties. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-63. - Mechanical work by homeowner. 
Any homeowner may perform mechanical work, for which a permit is required, in and on his legal homestead, provided a permit is obtained first. The mechanical work shall not include equipment requiring EPA certification, gas heating furnaces, or work in other crafts requiring permits. All work must be in accordance with all applicable provisions of this ordinance and must pass inspection. The homeowner shall not employ, pay or compensate, in any manner, a mechanical contractor, or any other person to perform any part of the mechanical work. All mechanical work shall be performed by the homeowner, or immediate family, or permit will be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-64. - Electrical and plumbing work by mechanical contractors. 
No electrical or plumbing work is to be done by mechanical contractors or their employees. Work requiring permits must be performed by their respective contractor and scheduled for inspection at completion of job. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-65—16-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 16-71. - Enforcement. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to do any mechanical work in the City of Pasadena, unless a person has a valid mechanical license, issued by the State of Texas, and registered with the City of Pasadena, or works for a company, corporation, or an individual that has a valid mechanical license and is registered with the City of Pasadena Permit Department, and has a permit, if required, for the work. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a mechanical license holder to permit his license to be used in any manner contrary to any provisions adopted by this Code, or to obtain a permit required by this Code in their name, or to allow the use of their name or company name directly or indirectly by another person not legally employed by the license holder or the company he represents, for the purpose of obtaining a mechanical permit. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to use a mechanical contractor's license without his knowledge or permission to secure a mechanical permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to design, for IECC compliance, a Rescheck or Commcheck, or perform energy inspections without first being certified under a current nationally recognized energy code. 
(e)  A licensed contractor must be available to meet with the chief mechanical inspector or his representative within twenty-four (24) hours after being notified of this request. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-72—16-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL PASADENA AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 16-81. - Unlawful advertising by contractors. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, or company to display a sign, advertise, including business cards, invoices, proposals, or other written material, when soliciting work in the City of Pasadena, indicating that such person or company is in the business of air conditioning or mechanical work unless authorized under the provisions of this Code or the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation and registered with the Permit Department of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-82. - Ladders. 
The following apply to all new installations for projects permitted after the date of adoption: 
(a)  In all attic installed heating and/or air conditioning equipment shall have pull down attic stairways, that comply with OSHA Type 1 ratings for a minimum of three hundred fifty (350) pounds with an affixed listed approved label, and with a clear minimum opening of twenty-two (22) inches. 
(b)  Twenty-four-inch wide walkway from attic access to service platform. If a/c ducts must cross walkway, support a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above walkway or build bridge over ducts. 
(c)  There shall be thirty-inch clear service platform on service side of heater, evaporator coil, emergency drain pan, and air treatment equipment, and any drains or refrigerant lines crossing platform shall be protected. 
(d)  Vertical difference in ceiling heights in attic walkway, over twenty-four (24) inches, shall have steps. 
(e)  Commercial roof top mechanical equipment installed on new buildings, or existing buildings, over fifteen (15) feet tall, shall have an approved ladder installed to service equipment. Safeguards must be in place to not allow access within eight (8) feet of grade by those not performing work or maintenance to the structure or equipment. 
(f)  No ladder shall be required on existing buildings if mechanical equipment has been installed on roof prior to present job. Ladders may be mounted on outside or inside of building, as per OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-83. - Conditioned areas. 
All residential and commercial buildings used for any occupied use or business shall have conditioned air that meets winter and summer design conditions of sixty-eight (68) degrees in winter and seventy-six (76) degrees in summer. Maintained at a level of three (3) feet from the floor and two (2) feet from any corner or door opening. Storage, open bay service area, and unconditioned warehouses do not need to comply. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-84. - Return air. 
Return air shall be obtained from an approved interior location of the same building. Return air shall be taken from each level of a multi-story house. If an air conditioner or heater serves only one (1) specific area, return air shall be returned from that area to the unit serving it. 
A return air duct or chase shall have at least: 
Tonnage 	Duct Size 	Duct Size Square Inches 
1 	10" 	78.5 
1½ 	12" 	113.4 
2 	14" 	153.86 
2½ 	16" 	200.96 
3 	18" 	254.34 
3½ 	18" 	254.34 
4 	20" 	314.0 
5 	2-16" 	380 
 
Return air grills shall not be smaller than ten (10) square inches of net free area for every thousand BTU's of air conditioning. 
Return air shall not be obtained from the following locations: 
(a)  Where it will pick-up objectionable odors, fumes, or flammable vapors. 
(b)  A hazardous location. 
(c)  An unsanitary location. 
(d)  An area having a volume less than fifty (50) per cent of the entire volume served by the supply air system, unless there is a permanent communicating opening to areas having a volume equal to the required fifty (50) per cent. Appropriately sized transfer grills or door undercuts may be used to provide the required openings, as long as calculations are provided to the authority having jurisdiction. 
(e)  A mechanical room with gas fired equipment. 
(f)  A room or space containing fuel burning equipment. 
Exceptions: 
(1)  Fire places, decorative appliances. 
(2)  A listed vented wall furnace. 
(3)  The return air inlet shall not be within ten (10) feet of any appliance fire box, draft diverter, or gas burning appliance in the same room or space. 
(g)  A closet, bathroom, toilet room, or kitchen. 
(h)  Within four (4) feet of an air supply register. 
(i)  A corridor, exit passageway, or exit enclosure required by the building code to be of fire, or smoke resistive construction, unless sprinkled. 
(j)  A dwelling unit, guest room, or patient room other than the room in which the air originates. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-85. - Gas connections. 
A mechanical contractor shall be limited to the installation of the gas flex line serving the gas appliance. Gas flex lines are limited to a maximum of three (3) feet in length. A listed gas shut-off valve shall be installed on the service side of the furnace within three (3) feet of the furnace gas valve. A solid gas pipe nipple shall be added to the gas valve on the appliance for connection of the flex gas line outside the furnace cabinet, the nipple shall not extend more than four (4) inches outside the cabinet, including any ninety (90) elbow installed. 
Any addition, replacement, or relocation of the gas pipe must be done by a licensed plumbing contractor with a permit for that particular job. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-86. - Non-vented equipment. 
Non-vented fuel-burning room heaters and decorative appliances shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-87. - Adding or replacing equipment in attics. 
All heating or cooling equipment installed in attics shall be installed a maximum of twenty (20) feet from approved attic access, and shall have a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches of attic space with sufficient openings communicating to the outside for required combustion air. A light shall be installed a maximum of six (6) feet in front of the service side of the unit being installed, and controlled by a switch at the attic access opening. All equipment shall have a separate means of disconnect, adjacent to and within sight of the equipment, for service or replacement. All 110v outlet shall be installed next to service side of equipment. All gas furnace flue pipe shall be installed as per Uniform Mechanical Code, with a maximum increase of one (1) size. All new flue pipe shall have matching new cap, collar, and flashing. Deteriorating roof jacks or flashings shall be replaced. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-88. - Condensate drains. 
Condensate drains shall not be less than three-quarters (¾) inch in diameter or reduced from original equipment size. Condensate drains may be of copper or PVC, or other material approved by the mechanical board. No black poly-vinyl tubing shall be used. All drain connections shall face the service side of the equipment that it is connected to, or have a twenty-four-inch walk way leading to the drain connections for service. Drains shall be connected to approved locations, such as, P-traps under lavatories, drains on bath tubs, or other locations designated by the plumbing code. Drains shall not be connected to sinks, hand wash stations, or food prep areas. Residential retrofit equipment drains shall run to French-drains, eighteen (18) by eighteen (18) by eighteen (18) inches filled with gravel or a five (5) gallon bucket with the bottom removed, placed into the ground with one (1) inch of the top of the bucket exposed, filled with rock; if not able to connect to approved location. Drains shall be supported every four (4) feet with a minimum of one-eighth-inch drop per foot, and insulated with one-half-inch insulation, through-out the entire horizontal run(s), and protected across walkways and service platforms. All main condensate drains shall be insulated, with a minimum of one-half-inch wall thickness insulation, in concealed walls and attics. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-89. - Evaporator coils: Requirements for installation. 
(a)  All evaporator cooling coils, or air conditioning units with cooling coils placed above a finished ceiling, closet, or any location that may cause damage, shall have a secondary drain run to a readily observable location. All secondary drain pans shall require a float switch. Package units shall require a float switch in the main drain pan. All float switches shall be listed by an approved testing laboratory. All new installations shall have emergency drains. 
(b)  Horizontal evaporator coils and plenums shall be supported on both sides with one (1) inch metal straps. Where straps are attached to over-head rafters or other wooden supports; nails or screws used shall be one (1) inch in length. No perforated straps shall be used. 
(c)  A minimum eight by eight (8×8) inch listed inspection door shall be installed in the transition for horizontal evaporator coils. 
(d)  When replacing evaporator coils, condensate drains will be brought up to current code standards. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-90. - Smoke detectors. 
All commercial air conditioning and heating units shall have a smoke detector installed in supply side, regardless of CFM's, unless pre-shipped from factory with smoke detector in return air side. If structure has a supervised fire alarm system, the smoke detector shall be connected to it. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-91. - Environmental air ducts; requirements for installation or replacement. 
(a)  Flex duct or duct board shall be a minimum of R-8. All duct insulation shall meet R-8 minimum requirement, unless required by the energy code to be more restrictive. 
(b)  All register boxes and bath fans shall be supported on a minimum of two (2) sides, and sealed. 
(c)  Residential bathrooms with open window area of at least three (3) square feet shall not require bath exhaust fans. If exhaust fans are required they shall be vented to outside. 
(d)  Domestic ranges shall have a hood with exhaust vented to outside and made of smooth sheet metal, connected by listed fittings, and with a back draft damper. 
(e)  Clothes dryer exhaust ducts shall be smooth sheet metal with no screws. Four-inch duct shall not run over twenty-five (25) feet in total length with two (2) elbows, additional elbows will deduct five (5) feet from total length for each elbow. A run may be extended to forty (40) feet by increasing the duct to five (5) inches with a listed increaser. The elbows will apply the same as for the four-inch exhaust duct. All dryer exhaust ducts, not vented thru the wall, shall have lint traps installed below the flex connector at the wall. Lint traps shall be made with a four-inch metal "T" and a four-inch metal ninety (90), with an end cap on the lint trap end. When vents for dryers or domestic ranges are vented thru a roof jack, a sheet metal escutcheon shall be installed to seal off the vent at the roof jack. No tape will be allowed to seal off vents in roof jack. 
Gas clothes dryers in enclosed rooms shall have a minimum of one (1) square inch per thousand BTU's of make-up air. An exhaust fan, vented to the outside of the house or building, is required unless the room has an operable window. 
(f)  Fresh air duct shall be smooth sheet metal duct extended to outside of building with one-fourth-inch bird screen at outside termination, and filtered. 
(g)  Combustion air may be taken from an attic area, if attic is communicable with outside air, otherwise it must be taken from outside of building. Combustion air duct shall be smooth sheet metal, and of sufficient dimensions to allow one (1) square inch per three thousand (3,000) BTU's, or in enclosed room providing fifty (50) cubic feet per thousand (1,000) BTU's of all gas fired equipment in the room. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-92. - Commercial kitchen hoods; requirements for installation or repairs. 
(a)  Commercial exhaust hoods Type 1 and Type 2 shall be of stainless steel material and thickness as noted in the current Uniform Mechanical Code. 
(b)  Listed zero (0) clearance insulating material may be used in lieu of a shaft or enclosure. Installation instructions must be on job site for inspection. No mineral wool batting shall be used. 
(c)  Make-up air shall be provided for all commercial exhaust hoods. Plans shall be submitted for approval before permit will be issued for class 1 commercial kitchen exhaust hoods. All details will be shown on plans, including size of hood, size of ducts, and CFM's and static pressure, of all fans. Exhaust ducts, and hoods, within eighteen (18) inches of combustible material or above ceilings, shall have zero (0) clearance duct wrap. 
(d)  Type 2 commercial hoods shall be installed over all commercial dishwashing equipment, and heat generating equipment. Hoods shall be constructed of stainless steel materials and shall be six (6) inches larger per each side than the dishwashing equipment, or heat generating equipment. 
(e)  All air intakes shall be a minimum distance of ten (10) feet horizontal or three (3) feet vertical from any vents or exhausts. 
(f)  Nail salons shall have six (6) air changes per hour with a separate exhaust and supply fan. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-93. - Fresh air requirements. 
CFM of fresh air per person: 
Dining room, offices, etc. 	10 
Auditoriums, theaters, churches 	5 
Cafeterias 	10 
Night clubs, taverns 	15 
All other occupancies 	5 
Hospitals 	15 
Operating rooms 	100% Outside Air 
 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 16-94—16-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - APPLICATION FOR MECHANICAL PERMIT 
 
Sec. 16-101. - Application. 
To obtain a mechanical permit, the licensed mechanical contractor, or their duly authorized representative, shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose, by the Permit Department of the City of Pasadena. Each application shall: 
(a)  Identify and describe the scope of work to be covered by the permit, and list the sizes of each piece of equipment to be permitted. 
(b)  Describe the location, where the proposed work is to take place, by street address. 
(c)  Show the use or function of the building and/or project. 
(d)  Be accompanied by plans, heat load calculations, and specifications. 
(e)  Be signed by the licensed mechanical contractor, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 
(f)  By requesting the issuance of a permit; the mechanical contractor is stating that they have read, and are familiar with this chapter, and will supervise, direct, and control all mechanical work performed under it. 
(g)  It shall be the responsibility of the mechanical contractor to final all permits, any permit not finaled will be submitted to the department of licensing and regulation for further action. 
(h)  Boiler installation or replacement shall be permitted by a mechanical contractor only. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-102. - Plans and specifications for commercial permits. 
(a)  With each commercial application that includes mechanical plans, the applicant must submit two (2) sets of plans, heat load calculations, and specifications. The chief mechanical inspector may require that such plans and specification bear the seal of a registered professional mechanical engineer licensed by the State of Texas. 
(b)  Plan submittal will require equipment and duct lay-out, size of equipment and air ducts; also CFM's of equipment, fans, supply ducts, exhaust ducts, and make-up air ducts. 
(c)  Plans and specifications for all commercial buildings, and commercial kitchen exhaust systems shall be submitted before permits are secured, except for minor alterations when specifically exempted by the chief mechanical inspector or his representative. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-103. - Approval of plans and specifications. 
(a)  The submitted applications, plans, heat loads, and specifications shall be reviewed by the chief mechanical inspector or his representative. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the City of Pasadena for compliance with laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction. If the chief mechanical inspector concurs with the other departments that the work described in the plans and specifications conform to the requirements for the City of Pasadena, he shall authorize a permit to be issued. 
(b)  When the chief mechanical inspector authorizes a permit, he shall stamp on both sets of plans and specifications "approved", and affix his signature thereto. 
(c)  All approved plans and specifications shall be on job site before any inspection will be made. 
(d)  No permit shall be transferred or assigned to any person by the applicant. 
(e)  Heat load calculations. Calculation of heating and cooling loads shall be determined in accordance with the procedures described in the ASHREA Fundamentals Handbook or by an approved equivalent computation procedure excepted by authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-104. - Validity. 
To issue or grant a permit with approval of plans, heat loads, and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for/or approval of any violation of the provisions of this chapter. No permit shall give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter, except to authorize the work or use as lawful. 
To issue a permit based on plans, heat loads, and specifications shall not prevent the chief mechanical inspector from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in the plans, heat loads, and specifications, or from preventing building operations from being carried out when in violation of any provision of this chapter or other ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-105. - Display of permits. 
The permit on all mechanical work shall be displayed on the job site, in a readily observable location, prior to commencement of any mechanical work. The permit shall remain posted until final inspection of the mechanical work. The permit document shall be protected from the elements. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-106. - Expiration of permit. 
Each permit issued by the City of Pasadena Permit Department shall expire and become null and void if the project authorized has not started within sixty (60) days from the date of issue of such permit, or if the project is suspended or abandoned at any time, after the work has started. Before work can be resumed, a new permit shall be obtained. The fee shall be one-half (½) the amount of the original fee, if obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days of the original issue date, provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications. If changes have been made, a new permit shall be required. The permit shall be allowed to run concurrent with the building permit. 
All, stand alone, mechanical permits shall expire in one hundred eighty (180) days from issue date if inspections have not been completed. An inspection shall extend a mechanical permit and additional one hundred eighty (180) days from date of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 16-107. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Mechanical contractors required to be registered as a business or entity under this Code shall keep in full force and effect, at all times, a policy or policies of insurance for the minimum limits of coverage as required by the State of Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, and naming such contractor, with their license number, as an insured under the provisions of such policy or policies. The mechanical contractor shall make available to the air condition inspector or owner of project, on demand, a copy of the insurance. 
(b)  The insurance required by this code shall be written by an accredited company under the supervision of the Texas Department of Insurance Evidence of compliance with such insurance requirements shall be considered as having been met when a certificate of insurance (accord form) has been filed by the insurance agency, and is approved by the building official, or his representative, and lists the City of Pasadena as the certificate holder. 
(c)  Each policy of insurance required by this Code shall include an endorsement thereon that the City of Pasadena Permit Department shall be notified at least thirty (30) days in advance in the event the policy is cancelled or expires before the expiration date, and the name of the license holder and license number as it appears on the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation issued license. 
(d)  No mechanical contractor's license shall be valid in the City of Pasadena, unless the applicant has complied with this section. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Chapter 16½ - HOUSING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 96-234, adopted Dec. 19, 1996, amended Ch. 16½ in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 16½, §§ 16½-1—16½-19, derived from Ord. No. 92-187, adopted Sept. 1, 1992; Ord. No. 94-59, adopted April 5, 1994; and Ord. No. 96-136, adopted Sept. 3, 1996. 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 21; planning, Ch. 28; plumbing, Ch. 29; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; swimming pools, Ch. 33; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 37; basic subdivision ordinance, App. A; Townhouse subdivisions, App. B. 
 
Sec. 16½-1. - Adoption of a housing code. 
The 2006 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc. is hereby adopted as the housing code of the City of Pasadena, State of Texas. This is for the protection of the public, health, safety, and welfare in all existing structures and properties regardless of occupancy or use. As herein provided; and each and all of the relations, provisions and conditions of the 2006 edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes if any, prescribed herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96; Ord. No. 02-98, § 1, 4-2-02; Ord. No. 07-170, 5-15-07)  
Sec. 16½-2. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 07-170, § 1, adopted May 15, 2007, repealed § 16½-2, which pertained to additions, deletions and changes to International Property Maintenance Code 2000 and derived from Ord. No. 96-234, 12-9-96; Ord. No. 02-98, § 1, 4-2-02.  
Sec. 16½-3. - Apartment inspector. 
The apartment inspector shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-4. - Application of deed restrictions and other chapters. 
(a)  Nothing in this code shall permit establishment or conversion of a multifamily dwelling in any residential addition except where permitted by the deed restrictions; nor the continuation of such nonconforming use in any addition except as provided therein. 
(b)  The City of Pasadena has adopted several codes governing the installation, maintenance and repair of housing items including: 
(1)  Ch. 9, Building Code. 
(2)  Ch. 12, Electrical Code. 
(3)  Ch. 13, Fire Prevention. 
(4)  Ch. 16, Heating, Air Conditioning and Mechanical Refrigeration Code. 
(5)  Ch. 21, Mobile Home Code. 
(6)  Ch. 28, Planning. 
(7)  Ch. 29, Plumbing. 
(8)  Ch. 32, Streets and Sidewalks. 
(9)  Ch. 33, Swimming Pools. 
(10)  Ch. 37, Water, Sewer and Sewer disposal. 
(11)  Appendix A, Basic Subdivision. 
(c)  All repairs, maintenance and replacement will also be governed by the above codes as they now exist or may hereinafter be adopted or any other applicable provision of the ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-5. - Definitions. 
Duplex means any building or portion thereof, which is rented, leased, or let to be occupied for compensation as two (2) dwelling units, or which is occupied as a place of residence by two (2) families, living independently of each other. 
Manager means the person responsible for leasing and collecting the rents for any multiunit complex and in charge of the complex. 
Master-metered complex means any multiunit complex as defined herein in which one or more utility services are provided to the residents for which they do not pay the utility company directly. 
Multifamily complex means any building or portion thereof which is rented, leased, or let to be occupied for compensation as four (4) or more dwelling units, or which is occupied as a place of residence by four (4) or more families, living independently of each other, and doing their own cooking, in said building, and shall include flats and apartments. Multifamily complexes shall also include four (4) or more detached dwelling units sharing common grounds, which are rented, leased, or let to be occupied for compensation as a home or place of residence by four (4) or more families living independently of each other, excluding mobile home parks. This also includes units in hotels and motels that are rented by the week and/or month. (The data is acquired from state publication "Hotel Occupancy Tax Accounts," published quarterly by the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts.) 
Multiunit complex means two (2) or more dwellings in one or more buildings that are: 
(1)  Under common ownership; 
(2)  Managed by the same owner, agent, or management company; and 
(3)  Located on the same lot or tract or adjacent lots or tracts of land. 
Occupant means any person living or sleeping in a building; or having possession of a space within a building. 
Triplex means any building or portion thereof, which is rented, leased, or let to be occupied for compensation as three (3) dwelling units, or which is occupied as a place or residence by three (3) families, living independently of each other. 
Utility interruption means the termination of utility service to a master-metered complex by a utility company for nonpayment of billed service. 
Vehicle means every kind of operable or inoperable automobile, truck, motorcycle, recreational vehicle or trailer. 
Workmanlike means executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line, matched, fitted, without leaks, properly connected, undamaged and without marring adjacent work. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-6. - License required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to lease space in a multiunit complex without a current and valid occupancy license having been issued for said duplex, triplex, or multifamily complex. A separate license will be required for each separate location. 
(b)  In the absence of a valid occupancy license no unit may be leased. 
(c)  A trade name for a multiunit complex may not be used unless it has been filed in the County Assumed Name Records of Harris County, Texas. 
(d)  The owner shall file with the building official a written application, on the form provided for that purpose, signed by the owner. Should an applicant own dwellings at more than one (1) location, a separate application shall be filed for each location. A multiunit complex license is not assignable or transferable. 
(e)  The following information shall be required in the application: 
(1)  Name, address, telephone number of multiunit owner, complex manager and mortgagee (if any). 
(2)  The trade name of the complex; names and addresses of all registered agents of the owner. 
(3)  The number of dwelling units categorized by number of efficiencies, one (1) bedroom, two (2) bedrooms, three (3) bedrooms, and four (4) bedrooms. 
(4)  Attach a copy of each type of floor plan showing the dimensions of the bedrooms or the square feet thereof. 
(5)  The owner's acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of this article and an agreement to abide by it as a condition of receiving and maintaining an occupancy license. 
(6)  If the owner resides outside Harris County he shall designate thereon the resident manager who shall be the agent for the purpose of notice, and other communications required under this chapter. 
(7)  Present evidence that the multifamily complex has been sprayed and treated for insects, rodents, and vermin, within the preceding six (6) months by a person licensed under the Texas Structural Pest Control Act. 
(f)  All licenses shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
(g)  Upon change of ownership of a multiunit complex the license shall expire and a new license shall be obtained within thirty (30) days of the change. The owners shall also notify the City of Pasadena within thirty (30) days of any change of multiunit complex manager or resident landlord. 
(h)  Upon request, official rental records shall be made available to the inspector, including but not limited to, lease agreements and other records which indicate the number of occupants per apartment unit. Also made available upon request a log of all repairs and replacement costing more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) made to the complex. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-7. - Annual occupancy license fee. 
(a)  The annual occupancy licensing fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit including the annual inspection fee for a duplex or triplex. The annual occupancy fee for multiunit complex with four (4) or more units two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) base fee per multifamily complex. There will be an annual inspection fee of two dollars and seventy-five cents ($2.75) per unit, with a minimum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per multifamily complex. 
(b)  The annual occupancy license fee and unit inspection fees shall be due and payable to the City of Pasadena Permit Division on or before the expiration date of the license. 
(c)  A replacement license may be issued for lost, destroyed, or mutilated licenses upon application of the form provided by the administrator for a fee of five dollars ($5.00). A replacement license shall have the word "replacement" stamped across the face and shall bear the same number as the [license] replaced. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96; Ord. No. 99-186, § 1, 10-5-99)  
Sec. 16½-8. - Master-metered complexes. 
(a)  The owner or manager of a master-metered multiunit complex shall post and maintain a notice containing the name, address and telephone number of the person with the authority and responsibility for making payment to the utility companies for utility bills. 
(b)  The notice shall be posted and displayed in the leasing office or conspicuous places to which occupants have access. 
(c)  The owner or property manager shall correct the notice within the ten (10) days of any change in information given in the notice. 
(d)  It is a violation of this chapter to fail to pay a utility bill when the nonpayment results in the interruption to any dwelling unit of service essential to the habitability of the unit, and health of the occupants. Essential utility services are gas, electric, water, and waste water services. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-9. - Owner responsibilities—Minimum standards. 
(a)  The owner shall present evidence that the multiunit complex has been sprayed and treated for insects, rodents, and vermin, within the preceding six (6) months by a person licensed under the Texas Structural Pest Control Act. 
(b)  An owner shall: 
(1)  Comply with all applicable statutes, ordinances, laws, regulations and guidelines of the City of Pasadena, the State of Texas, and the United States of America. 
(2)  Provide an adequate number of solid waste receptacles or containers on the premises, and provide adequate removal services. 
(3)  Keep the doors and windows of a vacant structure or dwelling unit properly secured, in order to prevent unauthorized entry. 
(4)  Specifically comply with the provisions of chapter 92, Subchapter D, of the Texas Property Code. 
(5)  No junk, junked or wrecked vehicle or parts thereof, shall be stored or parked on the premises. In accordance with Article 6701g-2, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, the owner or complex manager shall abate and remove from the premises or cause to be removed any vehicle which is either a public nuisance as defined in section 20-73, City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances, or an unauthorized vehicle under Article 6701g-2, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes as those codes and statutes are now construed or may hereinafter be amended. 
(6)  The owner must also certify that all dwelling units are equipped with a smoke detector that complied with the applicable state law at the time of leasing the unit. 
(c)  An owner of a multifamily dwelling is responsible to see that the property of the owner complies with all provisions of this code, the ordinances of the City of Pasadena, the statutes and regulations of the State of Texas and of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-10. - Additional structural standards. 
(a)  Provide cross ventilation of not less than one and one half (1½) square feet for each twenty-five (25) lineal feet of wall in each basement, cellar, and crawl space. 
(b)  Provide and maintain moisture resistant material for flooring and sub-flooring for each kitchen, bath/shower room, and toilet room. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-11. - Same—Utility standards. 
(a)  Provide and maintain in operating condition connections to discharge sewage from a structure or land into a public sewer system when available. 
(b)  Provide and maintain a supply of hot water of a constant minimum temperature of one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), within each dwelling unit. 
(c)  Connect each heating and cooking device that burns solid fuel to a chimney or flue. 
(d)  Provide and maintain electrical circuits and outlets sufficient to safely carry a load imposed by normal use of appliances and fixtures and comply with the electrical code of the City of Pasadena, as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(e)  Maintain all electrical, plumbing, heating and other facilities supplied by the owner in good working condition at all times. 
(f)  If a fixed air conditioning system is furnished, it must be designed to cool to a twenty-degree differential between inside and outside temperatures, or at least seventy-eight (78) degrees Fahrenheit. If mechanical air conditioning is not supplied, there shall be insect screens attached to all windows and doors as provided in PM 304.15 of the BOCA PM Code 1996. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-12. - Notice of utility interruption. 
The city shall encourage the utility companies to make a reasonable effort in providing notice of pending utility interruption to residents of a master-metered complex. In ideal circumstances, notification shall occur ten (10) days before a pending utility interruption. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-13. - Inspections. 
(a)  For the purpose of ascertaining whether violations exist, the administrator or duly authorized designee is authorized to inspect at reasonable times: 
(1)  The exterior of the structure; 
(2)  The interior and exterior of vacant duplex, triplex, and multifamily units; 
(3)  The interior of occupied duplex, triplex, and multifamily units if permission is granted by the occupant. 
(b)  The inspector also has the right to inspect all portions of the premises and structures located on the premises that are not dwelling units. These include all storage areas, community buildings, swimming pools, athletic facilities, equipment rooms, and other facilities that are not constructed as dwelling units. 
(c)  Whenever necessary to make an inspection, to enforce any provision of this code, whether the building official or his/her authorized designee has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building in or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by this chapter, provided that if such buildings be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and request entry, and if such buildings be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building. If such entry is refused, or if the owner or other person having charge or control of the premises cannot be found, then the inspector or building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to gain entry, as through an inspection warrant. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-14. - Overcrowding. 
(a)  In addition to those standards set forth in the BOCA PM Code, 1996, for purposes of relieving any strain on the plumbing, occupancy shall be further limited to two (2) persons in an efficiency apartment, three (3) persons in a one-bedroom apartment, five (5) persons in a two-bedroom apartment and seven (7) persons in a three-bedroom apartment. 
(b)  However the code enforcement officer may permit occupancy of a higher number if: 
(1)  It is necessary to comply with the standards of the Federal Fair Housing Laws. 
(2)  An adult is seeking temporary sanctuary from family violence as defined in section 7101 of the Family Code for a period not to exceed one (1) month. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-15. - Violations; notices; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Remove or destroy a placard placed by the administrator; 
(2)  Occupy a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the administrator has placed a placard; 
(3)  Authorize, as owner or manager, a person to occupy a vacant structure or dwelling unit on which the administrator has placed a placard; 
(4)  Knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, or to fail to correct any violation after notification by administrator; or 
(5)  Not obtaining the necessary permits for repairs and replacements as may be required by the ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-16. - Disconnection of utilities and placarding. 
(a)  The administrator may authorize the disconnection of utility service or to any unit deemed unfit for human habitation. The administrator may place or cause to be placed a placard on a structure or dwelling unit that is deemed to be in an unsafe or unsanitary or dangerous condition. 
(b)  In the event a dwelling unit is deemed unsafe, the administrator shall give the owner or manager a statement of the particulars which make the dwelling unit a dangerous dwelling unit, and an order requiring the same to be put in such condition as to comply within a specified time with the terms of this chapter. 
(c)  In addition, the administrator may place a placard notice on all dwellings which are determined to be dangerous dwelling units which shall read as follows: 
Date________ 
Case #_______ 
WARNING—THIS STRUCTURE HAS BEEN FOUND TO BE A DANGEROUS DWELLING UNIT OR UNSAFE EQUIPMENT OR UNFIT FOR HABITATION BY THE BUILDING OFFICIAL OR HIS DESIGNATED REPRESENTATIVE. THE DWELLING UNIT IS TO BE VACATED IMMEDIATELY. THIS NOTICE IS TO REMAIN ON THIS BUILDING UNTIL IT IS REPAIRED OR DEMOLISHED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE NOTICE WHICH HAS BEEN GIVEN THE OWNER, OCCUPANT, LESSEE, MORTGAGEE, OR AGENT OF THIS DWELLING UNIT AND ALL OTHER PERSONS HAVING AN INTEREST IN SAID DWELLING UNIT AS SHOWN BY THE DEED RECORDS IN OFFICE OF THE HARRIS COUNTY CLERK OF HOUSTON, TEXAS. IT IS UNLAWFUL TO REMOVE THIS PLACARD UNTIL SUCH NOTICE HAS BEEN FULLY COMPLIED WITH (PENALTY = $500). 
(d)  That statement and placard notice shall also be given to the occupant, lessee, mortgagee, and all other persons having an interest in such dwelling unit as shown by the city's tax roll or the deed records of the county clerk, stating that: 
(1)  The owner or landlord shall vacate or cause the dwelling unit to be vacated immediately, and not rented until all violations are corrected; or 
(2)  The owner or landlord shall repair or demolish the dwelling unit in accordance with the terms of Chapter 9, Article VII. 
(e)  If the owner of the property resides outside of Texas, the city may give notice to the multi-unit complex manager. In the event the city provides notice to the complex manager, such notice shall be deemed to be given to the owner. The owner shall be responsible for corrections of the violations identified in the notice provided to either the owner or the manager on the owner's behalf. 
(f)  If a deficiency is not corrected, for which a warning and a citation have been issued and there has been a hearing on the deficiency, with a finding that it should be repaired, the administrator may revoke the occupancy license as to the dwelling unit not in compliance. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-17. - Penalty for violations and reinspection fees. 
(a)  Every person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that a violation exists shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(b)  In the event any of the violations require a reinspection, then a reinspection fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid prior to reinspection. Any violation existing after a third inspection and/or a previous citation was issued is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted, and each offense is punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-18. - Right of appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the action of the building official in the enforcement of this chapter, except by citation, may appeal to the building and standards commission of the city by filing a request in writing within five (5) working days of such actions. All appeals to the building and standards commission under this chapter shall be as proscribed in Chapter 9, Article II "Buildings and General Building Regulations." 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-19. - Limitations of liability. 
The city shall not be liable under this chapter for any damage to persons or property, by reason of the inspection or reinspection of buildings, structures or equipment authorized herein or failure to inspect or reinspect such buildings, structures, or equipment authorized herein, or failure to inspect or reinspect such buildings, structures or equipment or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any building, structure, or equipment authorized herein. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-20. - Notices. 
All notices required to be given to the city shall be to the building official at the permit office in city hall and a copy to the apartment administrator if a multiunit complex is involved. Failure to give notice or to obtain a current occupancy license can result in the tenant being required to vacate on demand of the code official. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Sec. 16½-21. - Landlord/tenant. 
The terms of this article shall not be construed to alter the terms of any lease or other agreement between landlord and tenant or others relating to property that is the subject of the chapter; provided that no provision of any lease or other agreement shall be construed to excuse the compliance with this article by any person. It is the intent of this article to identify the parties the city will hold responsible for compliance with and violations of this article rather than to determine the rights and liabilities of persons under agreements to which the city is not a party. 
(Ord. No. 96-234, 12-19-96)  
Chapter 17 - CONTAINER STORAGE YARDS, AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AND SALVAGE YARDS, PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS, SCRAP METAL PROCESSORS, SECONDHAND RESELLERS AND RELATED BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 11-116, § 2, adopted July 19, 2011, amended Chapter 17 title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such title pertained to container storage yards, junk and secondhand goods, wares and merchandise. 
All provisions of Ordinance No. 11-116 shall take effect immediately upon the date of its passage by the city council except, with respect to existing businesses only, those provisions regarding licensing and fees, which shall take effect on October 15, 2011, and except those provisions regarding a real-time electronic web-based database, which shall take effect 30 days after passage of this ordinance. 
 
ARTICLE I. - CONTAINER AND CHASSIS YARD STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 17-1. - Purpose. 
The following development standards shall apply to container and chassis yards. The standards of this division are intended to ensure container and chassis yards operate in a manner that protects the public health, safety and general welfare, minimizes development impacts and does not produce adverse effects on nearby properties or the community at large. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Chassis shall refer to skeletal equipment, flatbed or other vehicle furnished by ocean carrier for transport of its containers. 
Chassis storage is the service of providing open storage space for vessel-owned or controlled chassis in idle status. 
Container means a portable compartment or item of equipment used for the repeated carriage of cargo in bulk or package form. Containers shall meet the standards, regulations, specifications and guidelines of the following organizations: International Maritime Organizations (IMO), U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT), Transport Canada (TC), Association of American Railroads (AAR), International Standards Organization (ISO), and the Convention for Safe Containers (CSC). The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) defines a container to have the following characteristics: (a) of a permanent character and accordingly strong enough for repeated use, (b) specially designed to facilitate the carriage of goods by one or more modes of transport with or without intermediate reloading, (c) fitted with devices permitting its ready handling, particularly its transfer from one mode of transport to another, and (d) so designed as to be easy to fill and empty. The term shipping, storage or intermodal container includes all types involved in the maritime, railroad, and trucking industries and may be ten (10) feet, twenty (20) feet, thirty (30) feet, forty (40) feet, forty-five (45) feet, forty-eight (48) feet or fifty-three (53) feet in length, 8'0" or 8'6" in width, and 8'6" or 9'6" in height typically, but may be of any length, width or height, including but not limited to general purpose (dry cargo), freight, tank, flatrack or platform, vehicle rack, portable liquid rack, open top, canvas top, refrigerated (reefer), ventilated, insulated or thermal, half-height, high cube, roll-off, bulk, intermediate bulk (IBC), pallet, super sack, tote and similar named containers. The term applies to new, used, certificated, documented, licensed, repaired or surplus containers constructed of any material. Features common to containers include collapsible, covers, EMI/RFI shielding, handles, hazardous materials storage, locking or restricted access, stackable and wheels. 
Container yard means the specific location or materials handling/storage facility where containers are assembled, held or stored and where containers loaded with goods are received or delivered. A container yard may accommodate, in whole or in part, the storage, holding, handling, assembly, staging, cleaning and repair of containers. 
Chassis yard is an area used for chassis storage, staging or assembly. 
Natural area means a site having valuable or vulnerable natural resources, ecological processes or rare, threatened or endangered species of vegetation or wildlife. 
Nature reserve is a protected area of importance for wildlife, flora, fauna or features of geological or other special interest, which is reserved and managed for conservation and to provide special opportunities for study or research. Nature reserves may be designated by government institutions or by private landowners, such as charities and research institutions, regardless of nationality. This includes the Armand Bayou Nature Center and other natural areas dedicated to remain open space areas. 
Open space area means a land or water area for human use and enjoyment that is relatively free of man-made structures. 
Parks refer to land or water parks owned by the city, county, state or political subdivision. 
School refers to an educational institution or facility where instruction is given. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-3. - Container and chassis yard standards. 
The following standards and requirements shall apply to all container or chassis storage yards or any combination thereof. 
(a)  The minimum acreage required for the development of a container and/or chassis yard shall be twenty-five (25) acres. 
(b)  Container and/or chassis yards shall be a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from the closest property line of a residential or commercial land use, schools, parks and nature reserves. 
(c)  Container and/or chassis yards shall be no closer than 300 feet from the banks of any watercourse, FEMA one (1) per cent floodplain, or edge of the wetlands in a riparian corridor. 
(d)  The front setback for structures is fifty (50) feet. 
(e)  The rear setback for structures is fifty (50) feet. 
(f)  The side setback for structures is thirty (30) feet. 
(g)  The minimum setback for container and/or chassis yards shall be twenty (20) feet from the front lot line. All front fencing shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the front lot line and a buffer area shall be planted. 
(h)  No buildings, parking areas, loading docks, outside storage, or refuse containers will be allowed in such setback areas. These areas are to be landscaped with trees, shrubs and ground cover, with a planting plan required to be submitted and approved by the planning department. 
(i)  Side and rear yard setbacks may be reduced to zero if adjacent to railroad right-of-way or rail service spurs. 
(j)  A minimum seven-foot high perimeter fence or wall shall completely enclose and secure the container and/or chassis yard. 
(k)  No object, including but not limited to landscaping, fence, building, vehicle or sign shall be located in the sight triangle, as defined in section 31-3(21) of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas and in such a manner as to obstruct traffic visibility at a level between three (3) feet and six (6) feet as measured above adjacent road grade. 
(l)  The maximum stacking height for containers and chassis is thirty-six (36) feet. 
(m)  Containers shall not be stacked higher than four (4) containers in height. 
(n)  Containers will be stacked in a "pyramid" appearance along the front of the site. Corner lots shall be treated as having two front property lines. The initial row shall not exceed two (2) containers in height, with each successive interior row gaining one (1) container in height to a maximum of four (1) containers in height. For the sides beyond the front area, the "pyramid" appearance shall not be required. 
(o)  Container and/or chassis yards shall have improved, paved surfaces with internal drainage collection, including but not limited to wastewater, stormwater or any other substance or liquid, and minimum twenty-foot wide drive aisles, with all overhead obstructions being a minimum height of 14'6". On-site buried storm sewer piping may be required and site shall be sloped to drain away from all property lines toward center of site. 
(p)  Commercial truck and trailer parking and access shall have the following minimum requirements: 
1.  Commercial truck and trailer parking and access shall have a minimum improved surface constructed of six (6) inches of 3,000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at eighteen (18) inches O.C. on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent standard proctor density. 
2.  Driveways and approaches shall be constructed to a minimum design of eight (8) inches of 3,000 PSI concrete reinforced with No. 4 rebar at eighteen (18) inches O.C. on an eight-inch compacted limestone or crushed concrete base on a subbase compacted to ninety-five (95) per cent standard proctor density. Driveway width and radii shall be such that a tractor-trailer combination can enter and exit the facility without running over curbs. Turns into or departing the facility must be made from and to a single lane. 
3.  The standard eighteen (18) inches square saw cut into the street will be required with a monolithic twelve (12) inch deep by twenty-four (24) inch beam extending under the existing street by a minimum of six (6) inches with a minimum of four (4) horizontal No. 4 rebar and No. 3 rebar stirrups spaced at a minimum distance eighteen (18) inches O.C. 
4.  Certain streets, roads or highways may require Driveway/Approach permits with Harris County, TxDOT and/or the Harris County Toll Road Authority. 
5.  On-site stormwater detention may be required as determined by the City of Pasadena Public Works Department and/or Harris County Flood Control District. 
(q)  Maintenance, cleaning and repair facilities shall meet all current federal, state, and local codes and regulations. All containers to be stored in empty condition must be cleaned of any residue which may pose any kind of physical or health risk. 
(r)  The city shall require recovery systems, fixed fire protection, gas detection, a safety management system to be in place, including risk assessments, segregation planning for dangerous goods, emergency response planning, competency based employee training, contractor orientation and on-site safety briefing. 
(s)  No person, firm or corporation may operate a container yard without first obtaining a license to do so from the City of Pasadena, Texas. The license shall be renewed on an annual basis and the city shall conduct an annual site inspection prior to license renewal. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-4. - Landscaping/screening for container and chassis yards. 
The following landscape and screening requirements shall apply to container and/or chassis yard facilities or any combination thereof. The landscape buffer requirements are intended to (1) reduce incompatibility of uses by requiring a screening buffer to minimize harmful impact of wind, erosion, flooding, noise, dust, odor, glare or artificial light intrusion, and other impacts; (2) allow the surrounding lands to act as a natural drainage system and ameliorate stormwater drainage problems, reduce harmful effects to underground water reservoirs, permit the return of precipitation to the ground water strata; and (3) enhance the appearance of industrial uses, parking lots and storage yards and enhance the property value in the area. 
(a)  The property owner or tenant shall provide a twenty-foot wide natural screen along the length of the front property line. This will be accomplished in one (1) of three (3) ways. 
(1)  Leave in place existing trees, vegetation, underbrush, etc. to provide a thorough, continuous and effective opaque visual screening of the shipping container development. 
(2)  Construct earthen berms with a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that after three (3) years will be at least twenty (20) feet in height and creates a continuous visual screen. 
(3)  Develop a screening plan that would be approved by the city that includes a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover that after three years will be at least twenty (20) feet in height and creates a continuous visual screen. 
(b)  The property owner or tenant will provide screening along the frontage of the site and along the side yards for a distance of fifty (50) feet. 
(c)  All required screening shall be adjusted away from overhead power lines to allow for full maturity of the trees without unnecessary trimming or topping of the trees. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-5. - Special use performance standards. 
(a)  Traffic control. A traffic impact analysis (TIA) shall be submitted, as outlined in section 9-195 and in conformance with the traffic and transportation department's TIA requirements. Improvements to the existing road facility or container yard by the developer will be required such that the TIA shall show no impact to occur as a result of the container and chassis yard development. No impact is defined as any degradation of the "level of service" as defined and calculated by the Highway Capacity Manual. Examples of required improvements include but are not limited to construction of dedicated left and right turn lanes, construction of acceleration and/or deceleration lanes, and traffic signal installation or modernization. The traffic generated shall be channeled and controlled in a manner that will mitigate any congestion on public streets, increased safety hazard or cause additional traffic through residential areas. Vehicular access points shall be limited, shall create a minimum of conflict with traffic movements, and shall be subject to the approval of the departments of traffic and transportation, public works and engineering and planning. Vehicular ingress lanes shall be large enough to accommodate peak use on the same lot without requiring the stopping or waiting of vehicles on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Required licenses obtained. All necessary government permits and licenses shall be secured with evidence of such placed on record with the city. Any person, firm or corporation seeking to exercise, carry on or engage in the business or operation of a container yard or chassis yard or any combination thereof shall file a written application with the City of Pasadena Permit Department. The fee for a city license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). Such fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the initial license and upon renewal of license each year thereafter. The license shall be valid for one year following issuance, unless sooner revoked or suspended. Such license shall be renewed by filing an application for renewal at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the current license. Prior to the renewal of license, the city shall conduct an annual inspection to determine whether or not the licensee is meeting the requirements of this article and any other applicable ordinance of this city or law of the state. Upon decision of the licensee to expand the operation of said business onto property not originally covered in the application for license, an application for license shall be filed covering the proposed expansion. The city retains the right to revoke the license should the licensee violate the provisions of this division. 
(c)  Availability and adequacy of public service. Public services including but not limited to sewer, water, gas, police and fire protection must be available as evidenced by letters of availability from the department of public works and engineering at an adequate level and capable to service the proposed land use. The planning and zoning commission and the city council may impose any necessary conditions and restrictions to insure than an overloading of the city system does not occur and that inordinate demand on public services does not jeopardize or limit existing and protected services demands. 
(d)  Loading berths. Loading berths located on the front or at the side of buildings on a corner lot shall be required to meet the following conditions: 
(1)  Loading berths shall not conflict with pedestrian movement. 
(2)  Loading berths shall not obstruct the view of the public right-of-way from off-street parking access. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-6. - Operational performance standards. 
Container or chassis storage or any combination thereof shall each meet the following minimum performance standards. No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall operate or permit to be operated a container and/or chassis yard in violation of any of the following performance standards contained in this section. All applications for building permits and subsequent annual renewal applications shall include a certification from a licensed engineer that verifies compliance with these performance standards. Where applicable, land uses shall meet and be in compliance with the appropriate federal, state and local regulations. 
(a)  Lighting and glare. Any lighting used shall be arranged so as to deflect light away from any adjoining residential use or from public streets. Direct or sky-reflected glare, where from floodlights or from high temperature processes such as combustion or welding, shall not be directed onto any adjoining property. The source of lights shall be hooded or controlled in some manner so as not to light adjacent property. Bare incandescent light bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. Any light or combination of lights which cast light on a public street shall not exceed one foot-candle (meter reading) as measured from the centerline of such street. Any light or combination of lights which casts light on residential property shall not exceed 0.4 foot-candles (meter reading) as measured from such property. 
(b)  Radiation and electrical emissions. No activities shall be permitted that emit dangerous radioactivity beyond enclosed areas. There shall be no electrical disturbance adversely affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
(c)  Smoke. The emission of smoke by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(d)  Dust or other particulate matter. The emission of dust, fly ash or other particulate matter by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(e)  Odors. The emission of odor by any use shall be in compliance with and regulated by the appropriate federal, state or local agency. 
(f)  Fire and explosive hazards. Hazardous materials/explosives shall meet all current federal, state, and local codes and regulations. 
(g)  Vibration. All uses shall be operated so that ground vibration is not perceptible outside the lot lines of the site on which the use is located. 
(h)  Noise. All noise shall be muffled so as not to be objectionable due to intermittence, beat frequency or shrillness and as measured at any property line, shall not exceed the requirements and standards set forth in section 20-1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(i)  On site containment of materials and waste. No material or waste shall be deposited on a property in such a form or manner that it may be transferred off the property by natural causes or forces such as wind or rain. 
(j)  Hours of operation. Hours of operation for container and chassis yards are limited. Facilities shall only operate during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. and no overnight facilities shall be allowed on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-7. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon verified written complaint filed by any person with the director of the permit department setting out facts alleging that any licensee under this division has violated the provisions of this division, or any other applicable ordinance of the city, state or federal law, the director of the permit department or the designated representative shall investigate the allegations. 
(b)  Based on this investigation, the director of the permit department shall determine whether just cause exists for a hearing on revocation. 
(c)  If just cause exists for a hearing on revocation of a license herein, the director of the permit department shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a revocation hearing will be conducted at a specified time and place within reference to such complaint. A copy of the verified complaint shall be included, notifying the licensee of the allegations against him. 
(d)  At the hearing conducted by the director of the permit department, all parties may present evidence and may be represented by licensed attorneys. All parties may question opposing witnesses. 
(e)  Based on a preponderance of the evidence, the director of the permit department shall determine whether the license should be revoked. A written copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than thirty (30) days. 
(f)  In the event that the licensee's license is revoked, such licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council by notifying the city secretary in writing within fourteen (14) days after the revocation. A hearing before the city council shall be set as soon as practical. Failure to appeal within fourteen (14) days shall render the director of the permit department's decision final. 
(g)  At the hearing conducted by the city council, all parties shall have the right to be represented by a licensed attorney and shall have the right to cross-examine opposing witnesses. After hearing the evidence presented by both sides, the city council shall, based on a preponderance of the evidence, render its decision, and notify applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than thirty (30) days. Failure of the city council to act within thirty (30) days shall constitute a rejection of the application. This shall conclude the licensee's administrative remedies and the city council's action or inaction shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Sec. 17-8. - Penalty for violation. 
That it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this chapter shall be fined in a sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 07-30, § 2, 2-20-07)  
Secs. 17-9—17-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AUTOMOBILE WRECKING AND SALVAGE YARDS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 11-116, § 4, adopted July 19, 2011, amended Article II title to read as herein set out. Formerly, such title pertained to junkyards and automobile wrecking yards. 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 7; storage of tires, § 15-175 et seq.; motor vehicle dealers, Ch. 22; payment of taxes prerequisite to issuance of licenses and permits, § 26-1 et seq. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 17-16. - Definitions. 
Unless specifically indicated to the contrary, the following definitions shall apply in the construction and enforcement of this article: 
Automobile wrecking and salvage yards means places, including lots or tracts of land of any size of configuration, whereon any person shall engage in the buying, selling, accumulating, storing or handling of any automotive vehicles, whether wheeled or tracked, and utilized at any time in industry or private ownership for the purpose of disassembling, dismantling, cutting-up, stripping or otherwise wrecking such vehicles from their state as automotive vehicles for sale or resale, either at wholesale or retail, as used automotive components, parts or accessories. 
Cutting means any use of any type of torch or any other device emitting a flame or spark. 
Probable fair market charge for restoration is that approximate United States of America dollar price of which a willing bailor would pay a willing bailee, and which such bailee would likely accept, in a leisurely market, for the restoration by such bailee of an article of tangible personal property, unusable for its originally designed and manufactured purpose, to such condition as to render it again usable for such originally designed and manufactured purpose. 
Probable fair market replacement value is that approximate United States of America dollar price for which a willing buyer would pay a willing seller, and which seller would likely accept, in a leisurely market, for an article of tangible personal property then owned by such seller to replace a comparable and like used article owned by such buyer. 
Used, as applied to articles of tangible personal property, means that which has been delivered into the custody or possession of the ultimate consumer or user thereof. "Used" means secondhand. 
Worn-out or discarded, in reference to any material or object, means a state of being whereas the same are no longer usable for the purpose originally intended and of such condition as not to be economically feasible considering the fair market replacement value and the fair market charge for restoration to restore same to their former state of service. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-17. - Reserved.  
Sec. 17-18. - Premises and stock to be open for examination. 
All persons having the care, custody or control of any automobile wrecking and salvage yard shall, during regular days and hours of business, allow the director of the health department, the building official and the fire marshal, or their duly authorized assistants, to examine the premises and all articles of tangible personal property upon the premises, for the purposes of ascertaining compliance with all requirements of this article and of all other applicable ordinances. In the same manner and for the same purposes, at any and all times, city police officers shall be allowed to likewise examine such property and premises. All searches, examinations and inspections shall comply with due process of law, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-19. - Complaints for violations of article. 
The fire marshal, the building official and the director of the health department, and their duly authorized assistants, are hereby severally and especially empowered and directed to file complaints in the municipal court for all violations of this article. All city police officers are hereby severally and especially empowered and directed to file complaints in the municipal court for all violations of this article, whenever another police officer or the fire marshal, the building official or the director of the health department, or their duly authorized assistants, have not already filed complaint for the same offense. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-20. - Neat appearance required. 
(a)  Any person, firm or corporation granted a license as provided for in this article shall keep the premises used in the operation and maintenance of the business in a neat and orderly condition. It shall be unlawful for vehicles to be dismantled or worked on outside the fence required by this article. It shall also be unlawful for wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled or inoperative vehicles to be outside the fence required by this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for wrecked automobiles or parts thereof, or material of any character to be stacked above the height of the fence. Automobile wrecking and salvage yards shall be screened so that wrecked automobiles, or parts thereof, or material of any character shall not be visible to the motoring public traveling in a standard-size automobile from the main traveled way of any public street within the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-189, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 91-152, § 1, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 92-157, § 1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-21. - Hours of operation. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator engaged in the operation of a automobile wrecking and salvage yard to carry on the activity of crushing of any vehicle or parts thereof between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-22. - Prohibited conditions designated—Stagnant water. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator engaged in the operation of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to permit or allow the accumulation of stagnant water on the premises of the automobile wrecking and salvage yard, or to permit stagnant water to remain thereon. It shall likewise be unlawful for any owner or operator of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to permit or allow holes or places where water may accumulate and become stagnant or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-23. - Same—Tires and other objects. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to maintain or stack tires or other objects capable of maintaining or holding water in such a fashion as to allow water to accumulate and become stagnant or to permit the same to remain thereon. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-24. - Same—Burning operations. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to engage in the operation of burning any vehicle, parts thereof or any other matter. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-25. - Cutting operations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator engaged in the operation of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to carry on any cutting operations as defined in this article unless such operation is performed in a designated cutting area. 
(b)  A designated cutting area shall be a cleared area within the fenced area of the automobile wrecking and salvage yard no less than twenty-five (25) feet by twenty-five (25) feet. Said cleared area shall contain no other type vehicle or parts thereof other than the vehicle being cut. The cutting area shall be accessible at all times to emergency vehicles. 
(c)  All seats, headliners, carpets and any other combustible materials shall be completely removed from any vehicle or parts thereof before placing in a designated cutting area or commencing any cutting operation thereon. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-26. - Penalties and remedies. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues and shall be punishable as such. 
(b)  The penalties provided for in this section are in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may have under this article, other city ordinances and state and federal law. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 91-152, § 2, 8-27-92)  
Secs. 17-27—17-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 17-30. - Required. 
No person shall exercise, carry on or engage in the business or operation of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard unless he has applied for and obtained a license in accord with this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-31. - Filing and contents of application. 
Any person, firm or corporation desiring to exercise, carry on or engage in the business or operation of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard shall file a written application for a license with the director of the health department. The application shall state the name and address of the owner, the name and address of the operator, if different from that of the owner, the name and address of the registered agent for service, and the address of the home office if the applicant or owner is a corporation, and the name and address of the applicant. The application shall be accompanied by a survey and legal description of the property encompassed within the application, and shall also include evidence that the applicant has notified the owners of land located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed site at least ten (10) days prior to filing the application of the intent to file an application and of their right to request a hearing before the director of the health department prior to the license being issued. The hearing shall be to allow citizens to bring to the attention of the director of the health department any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations they feel would cause the application to be disapproved. The application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the deed restrictions for the property encompassed within the application or a signed statement from the director of the planning department of the city that no such restrictions exist. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 92-157, § 1, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5—7, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-32. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this division shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). Such fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the initial license to an applicant and upon renewal of such license each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 94-1, § 6, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 17-33. - Investigation and approval or rejection of application generally. 
Upon receipt of an application for a license under this division, the director of the health department shall forward a copy to the fire marshal. The director of health department, or his duly appointed agent, and the fire marshal, or his duly appointed agent, shall conduct an investigation and determine if the property is free of any liens by the city, if all taxes on the property have been paid and if the application has met the requirements of this article and any other ordinance of the city or law of the state which may be applicable to the operation covered by the application within fourteen (14) days of the date of the application. Upon completion of the investigation, the fire marshal shall forward to the director of the health department a statement as to the results of his findings. The director of the health department, after consideration of all applicable laws, ordinances and requirements, shall advise the applicant of the approval or rejection of the application. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-34. - Notice of an appeal from rejection of application. 
Upon the rejection of an application for a license under this division, the director of the health department shall give notice thereof to the applicant by mailing same to the address stated in the application, by certified mail, return receipt requested. Any applicant receiving such notice shall have fifteen (15) days from the date of receipt, refusal or inability to deliver as indicated on the return certificate thereon to appeal the rejection of the application, said hearing to be held within fifteen (15) days of the date of the notice of appeal. The city council shall direct the city secretary to advise, in writing, the applicant of the time, date and place of the hearing. At the time of the hearing, all interested parties shall be given an opportunity to present their views. After hearing the evidence presented on both sides, and consideration of all applicable laws, ordinances and requirements, the city council shall, based on a preponderance of the evidence, render its decision by majority vote. A copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties as soon after the hearing as practical, but in no event more than thirty (30) days following the date of the hearing. Failure of city council to act within thirty (30) days shall constitute a rejection of the application. Action or inaction of city council is final. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-35. - Issuance. 
Upon the approval of an application for a license under this division, the director of the health department shall issue the license to the applicant, upon payment of the fee prescribed by this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-36. - Term; renewal. 
A license issued under this division shall be valid until the first day of October next following its issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Such license shall be renewed by filing an application for renewal at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the current license. Upon receipt of the renewal application, the director of the health department, or his duly appointed agent, shall conduct an investigation into the operation of the automobile wrecking and salvage yard and junkyard to determine whether or not the licensee is meeting the requirements of this article and any other applicable ordinance of this city or law of the state. If renewed, the license shall be issued upon payment of the prescribed fee on or before the first day of October. If, based on the investigation of the business of the licensee, the application is rejected, the licensee shall have the right of appeal as set forth in section 17-34. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-37. - Expansion. 
Upon the decision of the licensee of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to expand the operation of said business onto property not originally covered in the application for license, an application for license shall be filed covering the proposed expansion in the manner prescribed in section 17-31. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-38. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon verified written complaint filed by any person with the director of the health department setting out facts alleging that any licensee under this article has violated the provisions of this article, or any other applicable ordinance of the city, state or federal law, the director of the health department or his designated representative shall investigate the allegations. 
(b)  Based on this investigation, the director of the health department shall determine whether just cause exists for a hearing on revocation. 
(c)  If just cause exists for a hearing on revocation of a license herein, the director of the health department shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, that a revocation hearing will be conducted at a specified time and place within reference to such complaint. A copy of the verified complaint shall be included, notifying the licensee of the allegations against him. 
(d)  At the hearing conducted by the director of the health department, all parties may present evidence and may be represented by licensed attorneys. All parties may question opposing witnesses. 
(e)  Based on a preponderance of the evidence, the director of the health department shall determine whether the license should be revoked. A written copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than thirty (30) days. 
(f)  In the event that the licensee's license is revoked, such licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council by notifying the city secretary in writing within fourteen (14) days after the revocation. A hearing before the city council shall be set as soon as practical. Failure to appeal within fourteen (14) days shall render the director of the health department's decision final. 
(g)  At the hearing conducted by the city council, all parties shall have the right to be represented by a licensed attorney and shall have the right to cross-examine opposing witnesses. After hearing the evidence presented by both sides, the city council shall, based on a preponderance of the evidence, render its decision, and notify applicant by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practical, but in no event more than thirty (30) days. Failure of the city council to act within thirty (30) days shall constitute a rejection of the application. This shall conclude the licensee's administrative remedies and the city council's action or inaction shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-39. - Licensing of automobile wrecking and salvage yards. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator engaged in the operation of an automobile wrecking and salvage yard to operate same without a license as provided by this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Secs. 17-40—17-42. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - FENCE OR WALL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9. 
 
Sec. 17-43. - Required. 
Every automobile wrecking and salvage yard shall be enclosed by a continuous fence or wall on all sides thereof, which fence or wall shall conform to the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82; Ord. No. 11-116, §§ 5, 6, 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-44. - General construction and material requirements. 
(a)  The fence or wall required by this division shall be of such construction as is generally acceptable and used in the fence building trade, except as otherwise provided in this division. 
(b)  The fence or wall required by this division shall be of such construction as to not permit visibility of the interior therein. 
(c)  The fence or wall referred to herein shall be constructed in such a fashion as to be generally acceptable by those skilled in the fence building trade and may be constructed of the following materials: 
(1)  Metal sheets with a baked enamel finish. 
(2)  Masonry, concrete blocks or brick, on foundations equivalent to outside wall specifications, less live load, required by the city building code. 
(3)  Chain link fence with plastic or metal strips running through all links thereof, fully opaque to outside view, such strips to project neither above nor below the top or bottom of the fence proper. 
(4)  Any combination of paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) above. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-45. - Utilization of walls and doors of enclosed buildings. 
One or more sides of the opaque enclosure required by section 17-44 may consist, in whole or in part, of any wall or door, or walls and doors, of any completely enclosed building or buildings on the premises, so long as any such wall is not less than eight (8) feet in height, measured from the bottom edge thereof, and is of such construction as is prescribed in this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-46. - Conformity to setback lines. 
A fence or wall required by this division shall be so placed on the premises as to conform to all setback lines, as prescribed by Chapter 9 of this Code, insofar as the same do not conflict with this division. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-47. - Minimum height. 
A fence or wall required by this division shall be not less than eight (8) feet in height. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-48. - Maximum clearance between ground and bottom edge. 
The clearance between the ground and the bottom edge of any fence, wall, gate or door required by this division shall not exceed three (3) inches. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-49. - Maximum size of openings. 
A fence or wall required by this division shall have not more than thirty (30) consecutive, linear feet of opening in any side thereof. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-50. - Gates and doors generally. 
(a)  Any opening in a fence or wall required by this division shall be fitted with a gate or gates, door or doors, equipped with at least one key lock, or a combination padlock, or sliding bar operable only from inside the enclosure, located so as to lock the same completely when not in use. 
(b)  There shall be no more than one gate or door in any given side of an enclosure, when such side consists of the wall of an enclosed building, as permitted in section 17-45. All gates hung in any such enclosed building shall, when fully closed, entirely fill the openings in which such gates are hung. 
(c)  All gates and doors hung on the wall or fence required by this division, except those hung in the wall of an enclosed building which do not open onto a public street, shall not be less than eight (8) feet in height, measured from the bottom edge thereof, and shall be of the same construction as all, or part, if a construction combination is used, of the side of such enclosure containing the gate or door. Such gate or doors in concrete block, brick, masonry or metal walls may be of wood board construction with a minimum of two (2) coats of outdoor paint adequate to protect the wood from weather damage. One opening in a side of the fence or wall which faces a public street shall contain a gate not less than six (6) feet in height through which the interior of the premises is clearly visible. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-51. - When gates and doors may be open. 
Any gate or door installed in an opening in a fence or wall required by this division, which opening is less than thirty (30) consecutive linear feet wide, may remain open, so long as the premises are attended, between sunrise and sunset of each day, provided, not more than one such gate or door in any given side of the enclosure shall remain thus open. All other gates and doors in such a fence or wall shall remain closed at all times except when in actual use. 
(Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82)  
Sec. 17-52. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-116, § 8, adopted July 19, 2011, repealed § 17-52, which pertained to automobile wrecking and junkyards in business at the time of passage of amendments to this chapter and derived from Ord. No. 82-89, § 1, 5-4-82.  
Secs. 17-53—17-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-116, § 9, adopted July 19, 2011, repealed §§ 17-65—17-72, which pertained to secondhand dealers and derived from Ord. No. 1696, §§ 1—9, 12, 8-24-65; Ord. No. 00-138, § 1, 9-5-00. The users' attention is directed to Art. VI of this chapter for similar provisions. 
 
Secs. 17-65—17-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - GARAGE SALES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Nonamendatory Ordinance No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, adopted June 10, 1986, has been included at the editor's discretion as Article IV of Chapter 17, §§ 17-81—17-86. 
 
Sec. 17-81. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Garage sale means any sale entitled "garage sale" or "yard sale" or any similar casual, occasional sale of used tangible personal property by persons who owned and used the property prior to sale and who paid sales tax on the property when purchased new which is advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of such sale. 
Goods means any commodity, ware, merchandise, or any other property capable of being the object of sale. 
Homeowners' association means a group of people organized within a specific subdivision of the city for the purpose of considering and acting upon a broad range of quality of life issues such as public safety, health, and welfare, and aesthetics and land use as governed by by-laws and applicable city codes and which has been officially recognized by the City of Pasadena pursuant to Ordinance No. 99-107. 
Neighborhood organization means a group of people organized within a specific subarea of the city for the purpose of considering and acting upon a broad range of quality of life issues such as public safety, health and welfare, and aesthetics and land use as governed by by-laws and applicable city codes and which has been officially recognized by the City of Pasadena pursuant to Ordinance No. 99-107. 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Sec. 17-82. - Permit. 
(a)  General. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, except those holding a garage sale sponsored by a neighborhood organization or homeowners' association which has obtained a permit under this chapter, to conduct a garage sale in the city without first filing with the city permit division the information hereinafter specified and obtaining a permit from the City of Pasadena to do so. The fee for such a permit shall be ten dollars ($10.00). Such permit shall be issued to any one (1) person at a specific address only once within a six-month period and no such permit shall be issued for more than five (5) consecutive calendar days. Each permit shall be prominently and conspicuously displayed on the premises upon which the garage sale is conducted so as to be readily seen from the street during the entire period of the permitted sale. 
(b)  Inclement weather. A garage sale for which a permit has been issued that cannot be held due to inclement weather may be rescheduled one (1) time only without additional cost to the permittee upon written request to the department issued the garage sales permit. Such request must be made within ten (10) days of the date the garage sale had originally been scheduled and may not be rescheduled for a date more than ninety (90) days after the original date. 
(c)  Sponsored by homeowners' association or neighborhood organization. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to conduct a garage sale sponsored by a homeowners' association or neighborhood organization unless a permit has been previously obtained covering that garage sale by the homeowners' association or neighborhood organization sponsoring that person's garage sale. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a homeowners' association or neighborhood organization to sponsor a garage sale without first obtaining a permit to do so. No more than two (2) such garage sales shall be permitted each year for each homeowners' association or neighborhood organization. 
(e)  Each homeowners' association or neighborhood organization shall be permitted to sponsor garage sales on no more than two (2) occasions per year. No such sponsored garage sales shall be conducted for more than five (5) days on each of the two (2) permitted occasions. The fee for each permit shall be thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Sec. 17-83. - Same—Application. 
(a)  Information to be filed with the city permit division by an applicant, including a homeowners' association or a neighborhood organization sponsoring a garage sale shall include the following: 
(1)  Names of the persons, firms, groups, corporations, associations, or organizations conducting said sales; 
(2)  Names of the owners of the property on which such sales are to be conducted, and consent of owner if the applicant is other than the owner; and 
(3)  Specific addresses at which sales are to be conducted; 
(4)  Number of days and dates of the sales; and 
(5)  Dates of any past sales at the specific addresses; 
(6)  Relationship or connection the applicant may have had with any person, firm, group, organization, association, or corporation conducting such sales and the date or dates of such sales; and 
(7)  Whether or not the applicant has been issued any other vendors, resale or peddlers license by any local, state, or federal agency. 
(b)  A statement shall be given by the person signing the garage sale permit application that the information contained therein is full, true, and correct and known to the applicant to be so. 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Sec. 17-84. - Same—Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article requiring a garage sale permit shall not apply to or affect the following: 
(1)  Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(2)  Persons acting in accordance with the powers and duties of public officials; and 
(3)  Any person selling or advertising for sale a good or goods of personal property which are specifically named and described in an advertisement and which separate goods do not exceed twenty (20) in total number. 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Sec. 17-85. - Enforcement. 
Provisions and terms of this article shall be enforced by the police department or the building official of the city or designee of the building official of the city. 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
Sec. 17-86. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 86-113, §§ 1—5, 6-10-86; Ord. No. 00-138, § 2, 9-5-00)  
ARTICLE V. - DONATION COLLECTION CONTAINERS 
 
Sec. 17-87. - Collection containers maintained by a donation collection center. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Donation collection container. Any metal, plastic or wooden box, bin, container, trailer, accessory structure, or similar facility located outside of an enclosed building or in a parking lot or public place, provided by a person, organization, or collection center for the primary purpose of receiving or storing donated items including household goods and clothing. 
Donation collection entity. Any organization that collects or resells donated items. 
Director. The city's director of health. 
Operator. Any person or organization who owns, operates, or is otherwise in control of a donation collection container located in the city. 
Recyclable paper or plastic. Any paper or plastic that is able to be used again after processing. 
(b)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful and a violation for: 
(1)  Any person or organization to place, operate or maintain a donation collection container in the city on or after January 1, 2010. 
(2)  Any person or organization to allow the placement of a donation collection container on property owned or leased by him/them on or after January 1, 2010. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  It is an exception to the application of this section that a container is used exclusively for the collection of recyclable paper or plastic. 
(2)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution that a donation collection container is located outside of an enclosed building on or adjacent to a premises or tract where the donation collection entity maintains a retail or storefront facility operating with regular business hours. The donation collection container must be manned during those hours with specific personnel posted at the container and designated to accept donations delivered during business hours. No materials shall be allowed to accumulate outside of the confines of such donation collection container. 
(d)  Removal of container. If a donation collection container is within the city limits on or after January 1, 2010, in violation of this section, the city may remove the container immediately. 
(e)  Costs. If a donation collection container is removed by the city, the operator will be charged the actual costs of such removal plus an administrative charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) per donation collection container. 
(f)  Penalties. This section shall be operative within the city limits of the city and in addition to any charges assessed for removal of containers, and any person who violates any provisions of this section, upon conviction in the Municipal Court of Pasadena, shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty provision found in section 1-7 of this Code for each offense, and each and every day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. Violations are treated as strict liability offenses. There is no need to prove intent to violate this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-252, § 2, 12-1-09)  
Secs. 17-88—17-115. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - PRECIOUS METALS DEALERS, SCRAP METAL PROCESSORS, SECONDHAND RESELLERS AND RELATED BUSINESSES  
DIVISION 1. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 17-116. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Antique dealer means any person who engages exclusively in the business of buying, selling, trading, or otherwise dealing in used items which, because of age or design or quality or intrinsic beauty, or rarity or demand or otherwise have a value enhanced over the original value of such goods. 
Business means an activity carried on for profit, but shall not include occasional purchases or trades by a hobbyist. 
Chief of police means the Chief of Police for the City of Pasadena and such persons as he may designate to perform his duties under this article. 
Director means the director of the health department or his designee. 
Minor means any person under eighteen (18) years of age. 
Resale media and clothing dealer means any person who deals exclusively in: 
(a)  Used books, magazines and other printed documents; 
(b)  Used phonographic records, magnetic audio tapes, audio discs or other recordings of sound which do not include recordings of visual images; and/or 
(c)  Used items of clothing, except those made in whole or in part from fur, but not in any other items, goods, products, wares, clothes or articles which are subject to regulation under this article. 
Secondhand reseller means any person who buys, sells, exchanges or deals in personal property that has been previously used, broken or disfigured; provided, that a merchant who deals in new furniture, dishes or other regular household furnishings and accepts such articles for credit on the purchase price of new or used articles sold contemporaneously therewith that are of similar character to the goods so exchanged shall not be considered a secondhand reseller for the purposes of this article. 
Show means any display and offering of used items for sale or trade by more than one dealer at a single location. 
Used means any items, goods, products, wares, chattels, or articles of any sort, which have previously been owned by someone other than the manufacturer, or by a dealer whose business it is to sell such items, goods, products, wares, chattels, or articles when new to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-117. - Inapplicability of article. 
(a)  This article shall not apply to pawnbrokers licensed by the State of Texas; automotive dealers licensed under chapter 22 of this Code or automobile wrecking and salvage yards licensed under this chapter 17. 
(b)  This article, except for section 17-171, shall not apply to a non-profit organization which is a qualified non-profit organization, and exempt from taxation, under the provisions of Section 501(c)(3) of Title 26 (Internal Revenue Code) of the United States Code; antique dealers as defined in this article or resale media and clothing dealers as defined in this article. 
(c)  This article, except for section 17-171, shall not apply to secondhand resellers that are not precious metals dealers as defined in this article or metal recyclers/secondhand metal dealers as defined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-118. - Penalty for violation of any portion of this article. 
Any person who owns or operates any business governed by this article but does not have a valid license therefore or any person who shall violate any portion of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. Each day such owner/operator/person permits the sale of any goods from such unlicensed business or violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-119. - State law/city retention periods. 
Any retention periods required by this chapter are not meant to replace any required retention periods provided for by state law; in the event there is a conflict between retention periods provided for in this chapter and retention periods required by state law, the longer retention requirements shall control and apply. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-120. - Requirement for certificate of occupancy. 
Any business covered by this article that operates out of facilities required by city ordinance to have a certificate of occupancy must obtain said certificate of occupancy prior to a license being issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Secs. 17-121—17-125. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PRECIOUS METALS 
 
Sec. 17-126. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Licensee means any person licensed as a precious metals dealer pursuant to this article. 
Precious metals means gold, silver or platinum, other than tableware. 
Precious metals dealer means any person who engages in the business of buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in used precious metals. 
Tableware means any flatware, dishes, serving pieces or other items designed or intended to be used in connection with the serving or eating of food when such items are made of any precious metal or wholly or partially plated with a precious metal. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-127. - License required; display. 
No person shall operate as a precious metals dealer unless he is licensed pursuant to the licensing provisions of this article or is acting in the employment of one licensed under this article. A separate license shall be required for each permanent location of any such business. A license issued under this subsection shall be marked to indicate that the business is authorized to deal only in the items listed in this subsection and shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-128. - Application for and issuance or refusal of license. 
(a)  Any person desiring a license required by this article shall make application therefore in writing to the director on an application form provided for that purpose. On the application, the applicant shall provide the following information: 
(1)  The full name and mailing address of where the business is to be located, and the residence address of each owner, manager and operator of the business. 
(2)  Such application form shall be accompanied by an affidavit, sworn to by the applicant, stating whether he or any business partner, or, in the case of a corporation, any corporate officer, has had a license revoked under this article or any preceding city ordinance governing the business described herein. 
(3)  Whether any owner or operator is an individual, partnership, corporation, or other legal entity. 
(4)  If any owner or operator is a corporation, all officers of the corporation; and if there are fewer than five (5) shareholders, the names of all shareholders. 
(5)  If any owner or operator is a partnership, the type of partnership and names and addresses of all general partners. 
(6)  If any owner or operator is an unincorporated association, the names and addresses of all officers of such association. 
(7)  The location where the business will be conducted, along with a copy of the certificate of occupancy for the location. 
(8)  The time period or periods during which the business will be conducted. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such application, the director shall investigate the items sworn to by affidavit. If neither the applicant, his business partners, nor any corporate officers have had a license revoked as described above, the director shall issue a license to the applicant upon payment of the license fee. 
(c)  If the director rejects the application, he shall give written notice by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested to the applicant at the address stated in the application. The written notice shall specifically set forth the reasons for the rejection. A rejection shall be subject to appeal in the same manner provided in section 17-135 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-129. - License fees. 
(a)  The license fee issued pursuant to this article with a permanent place of business within the city shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per year. The license shall expire on the fifteenth day of October next after its issuance and shall be renewed by filing application therefore paying the fee herein required and conforming to all other requirements of this article. Permits are not transferable and permit fee is not refundable. 
Each licensee with a permanent business location in the city may use the license for that business when attending shows at other locations in the city. 
(b)  Any dealer described herein who desires to sell items at shows in the city, but who does not maintain a permanent place of business in the city, must apply for and secure a license for each location. License fees for shows shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-130. - Records required to be kept. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to all businesses carried on at a single location. Every precious metals dealer shall keep at his place of business a record in a real-time electronic web-based database, in a form and method approved by the chief of police, in which he shall enter daily, in English, a full description of each transaction in which personal property is purchased or otherwise received at his place of business. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The date and time of receipt of any item; 
(2)  The full name and current address of the person or place of business from whom each item was received; 
(3)  Verified evidence that the person transferring, selling or otherwise giving the items is at least 18 years of age by presentation of valid identification, including a photograph of the face of person transferring, selling or otherwise giving the item, in the form of: 
a.  A current driver's license from Texas or another state within the United States; 
b.  An identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety or another state within the United States; or 
c.  A United States military identification card. 
(4)  The individual transaction number assigned by the licensee to each item received; 
(5)  A description of the items received as part of the transaction including, where customary in the business, the size, weight, material, length, capacity, and any other designations or descriptions customarily employed in the sale and purchase of such items; 
(6)  A digital photograph and/or digital video as described in subsection (d); 
(7)  Documentation of ownership and any other information required for receipt of such items as provided in state or federal laws or regulations and any provision of this Code; 
(8)  The name or employee number of the employee who facilitates or conducts the transaction. 
(9)  Whether the person either: 
a.  Presented a written document evidencing that the person is the legal owner or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material; or 
b.  Signed a written statement that the person is the legal owner of or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material offered for sale. 
(b)  The real-time electronic web-based database described in subsection (b) of this section shall be maintained by the police department. The precious metal dealer shall forward the required record and descriptions set forth in subsection (b) of this section in an electronic format to the designated police department web site before the close of business on each day on which the precious metal dealer is open for business. Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a precious metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(c)  The precious metal dealer, his agents or employees shall obtain a consecutively numbered receipt from the seller or transferor of the property. Such receipt shall be dated on the actual date of the transaction and shall list the items sold or otherwise transferred. A printed version of the record input and transmitted to the real-time electronic web-based database as described in this section shall satisfy this requirement. An accurate copy or record of receipts obtained shall be retained for a period of not less than three years. 
(d)  A precious metal dealer, his agents or employees shall take a digital photograph or digital video of sufficient quality to enable the identification of each of the following: 
(1)  The person from whom each item was received; 
(2)  The valid identification of the person from whom each item was received; 
(3)  Each item received; and 
(4)  The person and the item(s) as the item(s) are being transferred. 
The photograph(s) or video(s) may be of such persons and/or items individually or as a group. Each photograph shall be maintained by the precious metal dealer for not less than two years. Each video shall be maintained by the precious metal dealer for not less than one year. Each photograph and video shall be made available to the director in accordance with rules promulgated by the director for administration of this article and peace officers in accordance with rules promulgated by the chief of police for administration of this article. 
(e)  A precious metal dealer shall, upon request, submit and exhibit the various business records, including photographs and thumbprints, that are required to be maintained under this section for inspection or copying by any peace officer or authorized inspector of the director. Failure to maintain or to so permit the examination or copying of such records when requested shall be a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a precious metals dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11; Ord. No. 12-014, 2(Exh. A), 1-31-12)  
Sec. 17-131. - Stock to be open for examination. 
The stock or inventory of any dealer that is openly displayed and available to the public shall at any time during ordinary business hours be accessible for examination by any peace officer or authorized inspector of the health department. Failure to permit an examination when requested shall be a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-132. - Articles to be retained. 
No precious metals dealer shall sell, dismantle, deface or in any manner alter or dispose of any item purchased or otherwise received by him at his licensed place of business for eleven (11) days after receipt. During such eleven-day period, all items of property shall be stored or displayed at the dealer's business location, in the exact form received, and in a manner so as to be identifiable from the description entered in the record book. Such property shall not be kept so as to prevent or impede its examination hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-133. - Purchasing or receiving goods of minors. 
No precious metals dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive in the course of his business, any item, ownership of which is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession of or under control of a minor. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-134. - Change in business address. 
Should any person licensed under this article move his permanent place of business from the place designated in such license to a new address, he shall immediately give written notice to the director and have the change noted on his license. A fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) payable to the director is hereby levied for such a change. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-135. - Revocation of license. 
(a)  Upon written verified complaint filed by any person with the director setting out facts alleging that any licensee under this article has, since the license was granted, violated the provisions of this chapter, or any state or federal statute involving the criminal offense of theft, or the provisions of § 37.09 or 37.10 of the Texas Penal Code or that the licensee falsified his original application for a license, the director shall cause the allegations to be investigated. 
(b)  If just cause exists for a hearing on revocation of a license herein, the director shall notify the licensee in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, and by regular mail that a revocation hearing will be conducted at a specified time and place with reference to such complaint. A copy of the verified complaint shall be included, notifying the licensee of the allegations against him. 
(c)  At the hearing conducted by the director or his designee, all parties may present evidence, be represented by an attorney, and question opposing witnesses. 
(d)  Based on a preponderance of the evidence, the director or his designee shall determine, whether the license should be revoked. A written copy of the decision shall be sent to all parties by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practicable but in no event more than thirty (30) days thereafter. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. In the event a license is revoked, the city shall not be liable to the licensee for any refund of any part of the license fee. 
(e)  In the event that the licensee's license is revoked, such licensee may appeal the revocation to the city council by notifying the city secretary in writing within fourteen (14) days after the revocation. A hearing before the city council shall be set as soon as practicable. Failure to appeal within fourteen (14) days shall render the decision of the director. 
(f)  The city council shall, based on a preponderance of the evidence, render its decision. A copy of the decision shall be sent by the director to all parties by certified mail, return receipt requested, as soon after the conclusion of the hearing as practicable but in no event more than thirty (30) days. The city council action shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-136. - Reports of property suspected stolen. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the licensee, his agents or employees to report immediately to the police department any offer to sell to the licensee, his agents or employees property which such licensee, his agents or employees have actual knowledge is stolen or by reasonable diligence should know is stolen, together with the identity, when known, and description of the person or persons making such offer. Such licensee, his agents, or employees, shall also report any property acquired by the licensee which the licensee, his agents or employees, subsequently determine or reasonably suspect to be stolen property and the licensee, his agents or employees, shall furnish such other information as might be helpful to the police in investigating the matter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agents or employees to purchase an item of property on which are written or affixed the words "Property of the City of Pasadena" or other words demonstrating ownership by the city except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the person offering such property for sale is an employee of the city authorized by the city controller to make such a sale, and provides the licensee, his agents or employees with a written authorization from the city controller for the sale of such property; or 
(2)  Where the person offering such property for sale presents at the time of such offer a valid receipt from the city controller evidencing the purchase of such property by the person offering such property. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Secs. 17-137—17-150. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - METAL RECYCLERS/SECONDHAND METAL DEALERS AND SECONDHAND RESELLERS 
 
Sec. 17-151. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building construction material(s) means copper pipe, tubing, or wiring, aluminum wire, aluminum siding, plumbing supplies, electrical supplies, window glass, window frames, doors, door frames, downspouts, gutters, lumber, air conditioning units and other similar materials. 
Catalytic converter means a device used to reduce the toxicity of emissions from an internal combustion engine. 
Clear thumbprint impression means an intentional recording of the friction ridge detail on the volar pads of the thumb. 
Fixed location means any building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued. 
Licensee means a person who holds a license to conduct business as a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer or a secondhand reseller. 
Metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer means any person who: 
(1)  Engages in the business of purchasing aluminum cans; or 
(2)  Engages in the business of utilizing machinery or equipment for the processing of or manufacturing of iron, steel or nonferrous metallic scrap and whose principal product is scrap iron, scrap steel or nonferrous metallic scrap for remelting purposes; or 
(3)  Operates or maintains a scrap metal yard or other place in which used or previously purchased metal items or scrap metal is collected or kept for shipment, sale, or transfer. 
Real-time electronic web-based database means an electronic filing system in which data is organized by fields and records and that is capable of transmitting a file or responding to input immediately via the internet. 
Scrap metal means a direct product or byproduct of any form of a manufactured, shaped, or processed iron, steel, aluminum, brass, copper, lead, tin, zinc, or other nonferrous metallic material. 
Used means any items, goods, products, wares, chattels, or articles of any sort which have previously been owned by someone other than the manufacturer, or a dealer whose business it is to sell such items, goods, products, wares, chattels, or articles when new to the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-152. - Administrative rules. 
The director and the chief of police shall promulgate rules and regulations to administer the provisions of this ordinance. Such rules and regulations shall not conflict with any applicable provisions of this Code. All rules and regulations so promulgated shall be kept on file for public inspection at the office of the city secretary, the office of the chief of police and the office of the director. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be provided to any person upon payment of the fees prescribed by law. Failure to comply with any of the promulgated rules or regulations established under this subsection shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of the owner or operator of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer. The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty, and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-153. - License required; posting of license. 
No person shall operate as a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer or own any such business unless such operation or business is conducted from a fixed location. No person shall operate as a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer or own any such business without a license as herein provided. Any person who engages in more than one business described herein at the same location must obtain a license for each business activity conducted at that location. A separate license shall be required for each permanent location of any such business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-154. - Bond. 
(a)  The director shall require that an applicant for a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer license file a bond with the application. The bond must be: 
(1)  Satisfactory to the director; 
(2)  In the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each license; 
(3)  Issued by a surety qualified to do business in this state; and 
(4)  Valid at the time of the application and remain in effect during the entire term of the license. 
(b)  The aggregate liability of the surety may not exceed the amount of the bond. 
(c)  The bond must be in favor of the city for the use of the city and the use of a person who has a cause of action under this article against the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer. 
(d)  The bond must be conditioned on: 
(1)  The metal recycler's/secondhand metal dealer's compliance with this article and rules adopted under this article; and 
(2)  The payment of all amounts that become due to the city or to another person under this article. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-155. - Application for and issuance or refusal of license. 
(a)  The director shall require that an applicant for a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer license file a written application therefore. For any business not existing prior to the enactment of this ordinance, the application shall be accompanied by a survey and legal description of the property encompassed within the application, and shall also include evidence that the applicant has notified the owners of land located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the proposed site at least ten (10) days prior to filing the application of the intent to file an application and of their right to request a hearing before the director of the health department prior to the license being issued. The hearing shall be to allow citizens to bring to the attention of the director of the health department any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations they feel would cause the application to be disapproved. The application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the deed restrictions for the property encompassed within the application or a signed statement from the director of the planning department of the city that no such restrictions exist. On the application, the application shall set forth: 
(1)  The full name and residential address of the applicant. 
(2)  A statement indicating whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States or an alien legally residing in the United States. 
(3)  The applicant(s) social security number or business(es) federal tax identification number. 
(4)  The full name and address of each partner if the applicant is a partnership. 
(5)  The full name and address of each officer and director if the applicant is a corporation. 
(6)  The fixed location where the business is to be conducted and proof of his ownership of the private property or a written statement including the name, address and telephone number of the property owner or authorized agent, granting permission for operation of the business at the proposed location where his business will be in operation. If the property owner is a partnership or corporation, the statement shall include the name, address, and telephone number of one of the partners or one of the principals prior to issuance of any license. 
(7)  A copy of the certificate of occupancy for the business location. 
(8)  The regular days and hours of operation. 
(9)  The applicant's date of birth, place of birth, and each address where he has resided in the five years immediately preceding his application. 
(10)  A statement indicating whether the individual applicant, any partner in a partnership, or any officer or director of a corporation, has been arrested, charged, or convicted for any criminal offense in this state or any other state or country. If he has been arrested or jailed for any such offense, he shall set out the offense for which he was arrested, jailed, or imprisoned, the date of the arrest or confinement, and the place, court and case number of the case. 
(11)  A statement indicating whether either he or any business partner, or, in the case of a corporation, any corporate officer or director, has had a license under this chapter or any preceding city ordinance governing the businesses described herein revoked. 
(12)  The signature of the applicant. 
(13)  A sworn and notarized statement that all matters stated in the application are true and correct. 
(14)  Evidence that he is at least eighteen (18) years of age by presentation of valid identification, including a photograph showing the face of the applicant, in the form of: 
a.  A current driver's license from Texas or another state within the United States; 
b.  An identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety or another state within the United States; or 
c.  A United States Military Identification Card. 
(15)  Such other information as the director finds relevant. 
(b)  The director shall review and approve the application and issue a license unless he finds: 
(1)  The information provided in the application is incomplete, materially false or incorrect or the applicant has failed in any material way to comply with this article and applicable rules and regulations; and 
(2)  The applicant has had a license revoked during the preceding one year period. 
(c)  In the event that the director rejects or refuses to issue an application, it shall be subject to appeal in the same manner provided in section 17-135 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-156. - License fees; use of license at shows. 
(a)  The license fee for a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer with any permanent place of business within the city shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) yearly, payable prior to the issuance of the license. Such license, unless revoked as provided herein, shall expire on the fifteenth day of October next after its issuance and shall be renewed by filing application therefore paying the fee herein required and conforming to all other requirements of this article. Permits are not transferable and the permit fee is not refundable. 
(b)  Each licensee with a permanent business location in the city may use the license for that business when attending shows at other locations in the city. 
(c)  Any dealer described herein who desires to sell items at shows in the city, but who does not maintain a permanent place of business in the city, must apply for and secure a license for each location. License fees for shows shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. The said license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license or renewal thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-157. - Records required to be kept by metal recyclers/secondhand metal dealers. 
(a)  The provisions of this section apply to all businesses carried on at a single location. With the exception of the sale or transfer of aluminum cans, a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall keep at his place of business a record in a real-time electronic web-based database, in a form and method approved by the chief of police, in which he shall enter daily, in English, a full description of each transaction in which personal property is purchased or otherwise received at his place of business. Such description shall include: 
(1)  The date and time of receipt of any item. 
(2)  The full name and current address of the person or place of business from whom each item was received. 
(3)  A clear thumbprint impression of the person from whom each item is received, which shall be excluded from the requirement for electronic transmission set forth in subsection (b) of this section but shall be maintained by the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer for not less than two (2) years and made available to the director in accordance with rules promulgated by the director for administration of this article and peace officers in accordance with rules promulgated by the chief of police for administration of this article. 
(4)  Verified evidence that the person transferring, selling or otherwise giving the items is at least eighteen (18) years of age by presentation of valid identification, including a photograph of the face of person transferring, selling or otherwise giving the item, in the form of: 
a.  A current driver's license from Texas or another state within the United States; 
b.  An identification card issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety or another state within the United States; or 
c.  A United States Military Identification Card. 
(5)  A description of the vehicle in or on which each item received was carried to, delivered or transported to the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer's place of business, including state and license plate number and vehicle identification number, if applicable. 
(6)  The individual transaction number assigned by the licensee to each item received. 
(7)  A description of the items received as part of the transaction including, where customary in the business, the size, weight, material, length, capacity, and any other designations or descriptions customarily employed in the sale and purchase of such items. 
(8)  A digital photograph of sufficient quality to enable the identification of each item received. 
(9)  If the item received is a junked, abandoned or wrecked automotive vehicle, documentation of ownership and any other information required for receipt of such vehicles as provided in state or federal laws or regulations and any provision of this Code. 
(10)  The name or employee number of the employee who facilitates or conducts the transaction. 
(11)  Whether the person either: 
a.  Presented a written document evidencing that the person is the legal owner or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material; or 
b.  Signed a written statement that the person is the legal owner of or is lawfully entitled to sell the regulated material offered for sale. 
(b)  The real-time electronic web-based database described in subsection (a) of this section shall be maintained by the police department. The metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall forward the required record and descriptions set forth in subsection (a) of this section in an electronic format to the designated police department web site before the close of business on each day on which the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer is open for business. Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(c)  The metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees shall obtain a consecutively numbered receipt from the seller or transferor of the property. Such receipt shall be dated on the actual date of the transaction and shall list the items sold or otherwise transferred. A printed version of the record input and transmitted to the real-time electronic web-based database as described in this section shall satisfy this requirement. An accurate copy or record of receipts obtained shall be retained for a period of not less than three (3) years. 
(d)  A metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees shall take a digital photograph of sufficient quality to enable the identification of each of the following: 
(1)  The person from whom each item was received; 
(2)  The valid identification of the person from whom each item was received; 
(3)  The vehicle(s) in or on which each item received was carried to, delivered or transported to the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer's place of business, and the license plate; 
(4)  Each item received; and 
(5)  The person and the item(s) as the item(s) are being transferred. 
The quality of the photographs must be such that the person/information contained therein are recognizable. The photographs shall be maintained by the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer for not less than two years and made available to the director in accordance with rules promulgated by the director for administration of this article and peace officers in accordance with rules promulgated by the chief of police for administration of this article. 
(e)  A metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall, upon request, submit and exhibit the various business records, including photographs and thumbprints, that are required to be maintained under this section for inspection or copying by any peace officer or authorized inspector of the director. Failure to maintain or to so permit the examination or copying of such records when requested shall be a misdemeanor. 
(f)  Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-158. - Stock to be open for examination. 
The stock or inventory of any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer that is openly displayed and available to the public shall at any time during ordinary business hours be accessible for examination by any peace officer or authorized inspector of the director's office. Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-159. - Articles placed on hold; tag; exceptions. 
(a)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of this section, no metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall sell, dismantle, deface or in any manner alter or dispose of any item purchased or otherwise received by him at his licensed place of business for seventy-two (72) hours after receipt, excluding weekends and holidays, provided that he is not required to keep aluminum cans for more than twenty-four (24) hours. During such seventy-two-hour period, all items of property shall be stored or displayed at the dealer's business location, in the exact form received, and in a manner so as to be identifiable from the description entered in the database. Such property shall not be kept in such a manner so as to prevent or impede its examination. 
(b)  A peace officer who has reasonable suspicion to believe that an item of regulated material in the possession of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer is stolen may place the item on hold in the manner provided by Section 1956.037 of the Occupations Code. 
(c)  Exceptions. A metal recycling entity is not required to comply with the provisions of this section if the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer verifies that the person or entity seeking to sell or otherwise transfer the metal items has one of the following licenses or permits to establish that he is a manufacturing, industrial, commercial, retail, or other seller that sells regulated material in the ordinary course of its business: 
(1)  A valid city-issued metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer license, which the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall record by photocopying the license or recording the license number in connection with the sale and maintain for a period of not less than two (2) years; or 
(2)  A valid city-issued construction, demolition, electrical, plumbing or heating, ventilation, air conditioning (HVAC) permit, which the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall record by photocopying the permit or recording the project number located on the permit in connection with the sale and maintain for a period of not less than two (2) years; or 
(3)  A valid state-issued professional license or a sales tax identification number issued by the Texas Comptroller which the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall record by photocopying the license and tax identification number, or recording the license number and tax identification number in connection with the sale and maintain for a period of not less than two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-160. - Purchasing or receiving goods of minors. 
No metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall purchase or otherwise receive in the course of his business, any item, ownership of which is claimed by any minor, or which may be in the possession of or under control of a minor. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-161. - Change in business name or address. 
Should any licensee change the name of his business or move his place of business from the place designated in such license to a new address, he shall immediately make application to the director for a new license and pay the full license fee. If the new site and surety bond, if applicable, are approved by the director, a new license reflecting the new business name or address shall be issued. The original license must be surrendered to the director at the time the amended license is issued to the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-162. - Revocation of license on verified complaint. 
(a)  Upon written verified complaint filed by any person with the director setting out facts alleging that any licensee under this article has, since the license was granted, violated the provisions of this chapter or any health regulation of the city or the state, or any state or federal statute involving the criminal offense of theft, or the provisions of section 37.09 or 37.10 of the Texas Penal Code or that the licensee falsified his original application for a license, the director shall investigate the allegations. 
(b)  Such complaints shall be investigated, heard, determined, and shall be subject to appeal as provided in section 17-135 as applicable to precious metals dealers. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-163. - Acceptance of property suspected stolen; peace officer requested holds; violation. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to report immediately to the police department, by filing a formal complaint, any offer to sell to the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees, property that such metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees have actual knowledge is stolen or by reasonable diligence should know is stolen, together with the identity, when known, and description of the person or persons making such offer. Such metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents, or employees, shall also report any property acquired by the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer that the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees, subsequently determine or reasonably suspect to be stolen property, and the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees, shall furnish such other information as might be helpful to the police in investigating the matter. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of section 17-159 of this article, it shall be the duty of every metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to hold all suspected stolen property in a secure place for sixty (60) days upon request by a peace officer. The metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees, may not process or remove the property from the dealer(s) or entity(ies) premises before the sixtieth day after receipt of the request from a peace officer to hold the property unless: 
(1)  The item is released into a peace officer(s) care, custody and control at an earlier time; 
(2)  A peace officer releases the hold on the property upon an earlier date; 
(3)  A peace officer makes a written request to extend the holding period for up to twenty-four (24) months from the date the request is received; or 
(4)  A court orders release of the property. 
(c)  Failure to comply with any provision of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-164. - Acceptance of building construction material(s). 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any metal recycling entity to receive, sell, dismantle, deface or in any manner alter or dispose of any building construction material(s) received by him at his licensed place of business unless he complies with the provisions of sections 17-157 through 17-161 and 17-163 of this Code. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer to receive, sell, dismantle, deface or in any manner alter or dispose of any building construction material(s) received by him at his licensed place of business unless prior to receiving, selling, dismantling, defacing or in any manner altering or disposing of any building construction material, the metal recycling entity/secondhand metal dealer: 
(1)  Records, along with the description of the property, the serial number, or other identifying characteristics of each part or piece of building construction material(s); and 
(2)  Obtains a written, signed statement from the seller attesting to lawful ownership of the property, a receipt from the lawful owner, or a written, signed statement from the lawful owner of the property providing that the seller has authorization to sell or otherwise transfer that property. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-165. - Government or utility property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive an item of property, including but not limited to street signs, traffic signals, manhole covers, road and bridge guard rails, street light poles and fixtures, on which are written or affixed the words "Property of the City of Pasadena" or other words or markings demonstrating ownership by the city except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the person offering such property for sale is an employee of the city authorized by the director to make such a sale and provides the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees, with a written authorization from the city controller for the sale of such property; or 
(2)  Where the person offering such property for sale presents at the time of such offer a valid receipt from the city controller evidencing the purchase of such property by the person offering such property. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive an item of property that is marked with any form of the name or initials of a governmental agency, including but not limited to the State of Texas and the United States of America and their agencies and political subdivisions or that the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees know or should reasonably be expected to know belongs to a governmental agency, including but not limited to street signs, traffic signals, manhole covers, road and bridge guard rails, street light poles and fixtures, except: 
(1)  Where the person offering such property for sale is an employee of the governmental agency authorized by that agency to make such a sale and provides the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees with a written authorization from the agency for the sale of such property; or 
(2)  Where the person offering such property for sale presents at the time of such offer a valid receipt from the governmental agency evidencing the purchase of such property by the person offering such property. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive an item of property that is marked with any form of the name or initials of an electrical, telephone, cable, or other public utility company or that the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees know or should reasonably be expected to know belongs to a public utility unless the person offering such property for sale presents at the time of such offer a valid receipt from the public utility company evidencing the purchase of such property by the person offering such property. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-166. - Acceptance of property in original packaging. 
It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive an item of property in its original packaging unless the person offering such item presents a receipt or proof of purchase for that property. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-167. - Acceptance of property inscribed with company name. 
It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, or his agents or employees, to purchase or receive an item of property that is marked with any form of the name or initials of a private company or that the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer knows or should reasonably be expected to know belongs to a private company unless the person offering such property for sale presents at the time of such offer a written, signed statement from the seller attesting to lawful ownership of the property, a receipt from the lawful owner, or a written, signed statement from the lawful owner of the property providing that the seller has authorization to sell or otherwise transfer that property. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-168. - Acceptance of property delivered by other than vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive an item of property, other than aluminum cans, that is transported to the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer's place of business by any method other than a vehicle that is required to be registered, and that is lawfully registered, under the laws of the State of Texas or other state within the United States. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-169. - Acceptance of air conditioning unit parts. 
It shall be unlawful for any metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive any central air conditioning unit parts from any person offering such property for sale unless the person presents a valid city-issued HVAC permit, state-issued professional license, or a permit issued by the city to a homeowner for the installation, alteration, or repair of an air-conditioning system at a particular address. This provision shall not apply to window air conditioning units. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-170. - Acceptance of a catalytic converter. 
It shall be unlawful for any metal recycling entity, secondhand metal dealer, his agents or employees to purchase or receive any catalytic converter in whole or part from any person offering such property for sale. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-171. - Operation of yards used by metal recyclers/secondhand metal dealers and secondhand resellers; hours for purchasing materials. 
(a)  Compliance. All lots or tracts of land used for the purpose of carrying on the business or trade of metal recyclers/secondhand metal dealers and secondhand resellers who store inventory outside of a structure shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
(b)  Removal of flammable liquids from vehicles. All gasoline, gasohol and diesel fuel shall be completely drained and removed from any junked, wrecked or abandoned automotive vehicle before the vehicle is placed in any yard owned or operated by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer in the city. All flammable liquids drained from any vehicle shall be stored in a safe manner and in strict accordance with the City Fire Code. 
(c)  Fencing, wall requirements. Every equipment and inventory storage and processing yard owned or operated by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer within the city shall be completely surrounded and enclosed by a solid fence or wall as follows: 
(1)  All sides of such yard shall be bounded by a solid fence or wall at least eight (8) feet in height. 
(2)  The term "solid" as used herein shall mean constructed and maintained so that the outer surface thereof is continuous and without interstices, gaps, spaces or holes. This shall not be construed to prohibit any spaces or gaps left by a properly constructed and maintained chain link fence with strips or slats as hereinafter provided. 
(d)  Construction, maintenance of fence or wall. Every fence or wall herein required shall be constructed and maintained in good repair as follows: 
(1)  All fences shall be constructed of wood, masonry, corrugated sheet metal, chain link, or any combination thereof; provided, however, that any one side shall be bounded by a fence or wall constructed of only one of the above materials. 
(2)  Chain link fences shall be constructed of galvanized chain link fencing with wood or metal slats or strips run through all links of the chain link fence. 
(3)  All fences or walls shall extend downward to within three inches of the ground and shall test plumb and square at all times. 
(4)  All fences or walls shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Building Code. 
(e)  Use of wall, door of building as part of fence or wall. Any part of a fence or wall required by subsection (c) hereof may consist, in whole or in part, of a solid wall and door, or walls and doors of any completely enclosed building on said premises, if such wall or door meets all construction requirements hereinabove set forth. 
(f)  Gates at openings in enclosure. Openings in the prescribed enclosure which are necessary to permit reasonable access to such yards shall be equipped with a gate or gates, constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements for a fence or wall hereinabove set forth. Such gates shall be closed and securely locked at all times except during normal business hours. 
(g)  Use of premises outside enclosure. It shall be unlawful for an owner, operator, his agents or employees, to display, store or work on any junked or wrecked automotive vehicle, or the parts, accessories or junk therefrom or any other new or used metal materials outside of the herein required fence or wall. 
(h)  Arrangement of materials. All automotive vehicles, parts and other materials located in or on the premises of any yard owned or operated by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer in the city shall be so arranged to allow reasonable access to, and inspection of, the premises by authorized fire, health and police officials. No materials shall be stored at a height above the fence. 
(i)  Control of vegetation. It shall be unlawful for the owners or operators of any yard used by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer to allow grass, weeds, brush or other unsightly matter to grow. 
(j)  Compliance with regulations and ordinances. All yards used by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer/secondhand reseller must at all times be in full compliance with all city ordinances regarding health and safety, including specifically, without limitation, all requirements of the City Fire Code. 
(k)  Improved surface. All lots or tracts of land used as a yard by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer/secondhand reseller must have an all-weather surface of concrete, asphalt, black-top, stone, macadam, limestone, iron ore, gravel, shell, slag or other hard fill surface and appropriate drainage. 
(l)  Vector and rodent control. Any materials stored in a yard owned and operated by a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer/secondhand reseller must be stored in a manner which will allow adequate vector and rodent control measures. An owner or operator shall provide for vector and rodent control at least once within a ninety-day period or more frequently as needed. 
(m)  Violations and penalties. Failure to comply with any provisions of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of or the refusal to issue or renew any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this Code. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(n)  A metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer may only purchase regulated material from the general public on Monday through Saturday between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-172. - Rejection; refusal to renew; revocation; hearing; penalty. 
(a)  Grounds for rejection, refusal to renew or revocation. The director may reject an original application, or an application for a renewal of any existing license, if, as a result of inspections by the police department, the health department, or other city department, it appears that the applicants' place of business is not in compliance with or violates any provision of this article. Failure to comply with any provisions of this Code shall be grounds for the rejection of an original application, renewal or revocation of any license required of a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer under this article. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished as provided by section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Notice. If the director rejects an application, refuses to renew or revokes any license issued under this article to a metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer for failure to comply with any provision of this article, the director shall give written notice by certified mail and regular mail to the applicant at the address stated in the application of the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer. The written notice shall specifically set forth the reasons for the rejection, refusal or revocation. 
(c)  Appeal. The metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the mailing of the notice of rejection, refusal or revocation of his license to appeal the rejection, refusal or revocation of the license to the director. Upon receipt of such notice, the director shall notify the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer of the date and time of the hearing, to be held at the earliest time practicable. The appeal shall be in the same manner provided in section 17-135 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Sec. 17-173. - Abatement of operations for unlawful operation of a metal recycling, secondhand metal, or secondhand business. 
(a)  Declaration; notice. The continued ownership and operation of or engaging in a business that participates in buying, selling, trading or otherwise dealing in new or used metal in violation of this article is declared to be a public nuisance where (1) the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer is convicted three (3) or more times for violations under this article in a twenty-four-month period, (2) the director finds and determines that the owner or operator habitually violates the provisions of this article and that issuance of citations and subsequent convictions for violations of this article are no longer adequate remedies to address unlawful operations, and (3) that pursuit of a civil action will promote preservation and protection of property of the city or its inhabitants. Whenever the existence of a public nuisance under this section shall come to the knowledge of the director, the director shall cause a written notice, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, to be sent to the owner identifying the business in violation of this article and directing that the unlawful activity cease within a reasonable time to be determined by the director. 
(b)  Notice. 
(1)  The notice under this section must be given: 
a.  Personally to the owner in writing; 
b.  By letter addressed to the registered agent of the partnership or corporation for service of process, or to the individual owner at the owner's latest address according to the records of the director. 
c.  If personal service cannot be obtained: 
(i)  By publication at least once; 
(ii)  By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or 
(iii)  By posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates. 
(2)  If the director mails a notice to a property owner in accordance with subsection (a) of this section, and the United States Postal Service returns the notice as "refused" or "unclaimed," the validity of the notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered. 
(3)  A notice provided under this section shall state that the owner is entitled to request a hearing to be held in the manner described in section (c) of this section. 
(c)  Abatement hearing. The owner subject to abatement under this section may request a hearing by notifying the director within ten (10) days following the date the city mails the required notice under subsection (b) of this section. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 17-135 of this Code for the purpose of determining whether the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer has operated his business in violation of this article and the criteria set out in subsection (a) of this section are satisfied. At the hearing, the owner and the director may present any evidence relevant to the proceedings. If the hearing official determines that the metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer has operated his business in violation of this article or any other provision of this Code affecting metal recycler/secondhand metal dealer, and that the criteria set out in subsection (a) of this section for the designation of public nuisance have been satisfied, the hearing official shall issue an order so stating and direct that the owner cease the unlawful operations. 
(d)  Abatement by city; expenses and liens. If the owner fails to timely cease unlawful operations within ten (10) business days of the hearing official's order, or final city council decision, whichever is applicable, then the city attorney shall be authorized to exercise all other remedies available to the city relating to the subject matter hereof as set out in subsection (e) of this section. 
(e)  Remedies cumulative, civil enforcement, other action not limited. The procedures set forth in this section are cumulative of all other remedies available to the city relating to the subject matter hereof. Exercise of this remedy shall not be a bar against, nor a prerequisite for, taking any other available actions. Specifically, the city attorney may institute any legal action to enforce this article or enjoin or otherwise cause the abatement of any condition described in this article, as well as for the recovery of all expenses incurred in connection therewith, including without limitation administrative and legal expenses, attorneys fees and costs, and for civil penalties as provided by law. The city attorney is hereby authorized to file a civil suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent the violation of any of the provisions of this article. This remedy shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedies. 
(Ord. No. 11-116, § 3(Exh. A), 7-19-11)  
Secs. 17-174—17-180. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PAWNBROKERS 
 
Sec. 17-181. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Goods means tangible personal property. 
Pawnbroker means a person who is licensed by the state pursuant to V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.001 et seq., and pursues the business of lending money upon interest and receiving upon deposit any personal property as security for the payment of such loan and interest or purchasing goods on condition that the goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period. 
Pawn transaction means the pledging with a pawnbroker of a single item of goods as security for a loan of money. 
Pledged goods means goods deposited with or otherwise delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker with a pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.001 et seq.  
Sec. 17-182. - Compliance with state law. 
Any pawnbroker or any person doing business as such who shall receive any article in pledge or sell any article pledged to him shall comply with V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.001 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16) 
State Law reference— Pawnbrokers generally, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.001 et seq.  
Sec. 17-183. - Compliance with article. 
Every person managing, owning, maintaining or operating as a pawnbroker in the city shall comply with this article. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16)  
Sec. 17-184. - Effect of noncompliance. 
Any person shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-7 if the person shall: 
(1)  Violate any of the sections of this article; 
(2)  Fail or refuse to keep the books and records in connection with his business as provided for in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.152; 
(3)  Make false entries concerning the transactions named; or 
(4)  Fail or refuse to permit an inspection and examination of such books of the property pledged with or sold to him by any police officer as provided. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16)  
Sec. 17-185. - Records. 
Every pawnbroker shall keep books in connection with his business wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged or sold to him as required in V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.177. In all cases all property shall be as accurately and fully described as the nature of the article permits. There shall be entered in such record a general description of the person by whom the article is deposited or sold, the time when the deposit or sale was done, and the explanation given by the person as to the source of the article. These entries shall be made as soon after any transaction is had as possible, in no event allowing more than one hour to elapse after such transaction before the entry is made concerning the item. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16) 
State Law reference— Record of pawned articles, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.177.  
Sec. 17-186. - Inspection of records and articles. 
The records and the articles themselves so pledged or sold to a pawnshop shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection and examination by the police officers or any other law enforcement officer in the city without judicial writ or other process. All pawnbrokers shall have their goods arranged in stock so as to enable them to be inspected by the law enforcement officials. It shall be unlawful for any such dealer to refuse to admit such officers to such place of business to inspect such property. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16) 
State Law reference— Inspection by peace officers, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.204.  
Sec. 17-187. - List of purchases furnished to police. 
All pawnbrokers shall file all daily incoming merchandise records electronically, on the website www.leadsonline.com, within five working days of receipt of the merchandise to which the records pertain or electronically file such records in another database that the city chief of police may authorize in writing dated and signed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. Any pawnbroker failing or refusing to file daily incoming merchandise records in the manner prescribed herein shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16)  
Sec. 17-188. - Responsibility for employees or agents. 
Any owner, manager or operator of a pawnshop whose employees or agents fail to observe any of the sections of this article shall be responsible for any action done in the course of the pawnbroker's business by any employee or agent, whether or not such pawnbroker, owner, manager or operator had knowledge of such action. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16)  
Sec. 17-189. - Receipt of property or transaction of business with minor or person believed under influence of alcohol or drugs. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager, or employee of a pawnshop to buy or receive property or transact business with a minor or person believed to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16) 
State Law reference— Similar provision, V.T.C.A., Finance Code § 371.176.  
Sec. 17-190. - Duty to report stolen goods; purchase of city property 
(a)  It shall be the duty of a pawnbroker to report immediately to the police department any offer to sell to the pawnbroker, or his agents or employees, property which such pawnbroker or his agents or employees have actual knowledge is stolen or by reasonable diligence should know is stolen, together with the identity, when known, and description of the person making such offer. Such pawnbroker and his agents or employees shall also report any property acquired by the pawnbroker which the pawnbroker or his agents or employees subsequently determine or reasonably suspect to be stolen property, and the pawnbroker and his agents or employees shall furnish such other information as might be helpful to the police in investigating the matter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or his agents or employees to purchase an item of property on which are written or affixed the words "property of the City of Pasadena" or other words demonstrating ownership by the city, except in the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the person offering such property for sale is an employee of the city authorized to make such a sale and provides the pawnbroker or his agents or employees with a written authorization from the city for the sale of such property; or 
(2)  Where the person offering such property for sale presents, at the time of such offer, a valid receipt from the city evidencing the purchase of such property by the person offering such property. 
(Ord. No. 16-050, § 1(Exh. A), 4-19-16)  
Chapter 18 - LIBRARY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, adopted December 30, 2003, repealed and replaced former Ch. 18, §§ 18-1—18-53, to read as set forth herein. Formerly, Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 1753, §§ 1—3, 4-1(a)—(d), 4-2(a)—(d), and 5—9, adopted January 11, 1966, and Ord. No. 80-144, §§ 1—4, adopted July 29, 1980. 
Cross reference— Failure to return library materials, § 20-17. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Board. The term "board" or "library board" shall mean the city public library board. 
Department. The term "department" or "library department" shall mean the city public library department. 
Library director. The term "library director" shall mean the city public library director. 
Library. The term "library" shall mean the city public library. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-2. - Library department. 
There has been created and established in and for the city, the city public library department, which shall continue in existence into the future in accordance with this chapter, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-3. - Free use; deposits, registration charges, etc. 
All residents of the city and such other persons as may be specially permitted, pursuant and subject to the rules and regulations of the library, may have use of the books, documents and services of the library, its branches, stations, reading rooms, and system facilities, free of charge. Overdue charges may be assessed and collected for the unauthorized detention of library property, forfeiture, in whole or in part, of deposits, according to the terms of the deposit agreement of the library with the borrower, charges for the replacement of library property lost or destroyed on loan, and special fees for services involving the commitment by the library of unusual time, quantities of supplies, or property of unique or special value that qualify as special fees as prescribed by the rules and regulations of the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-4. - Budget and expenditures procedure. 
(a)  The board may adopt, at its annual meeting convened for the purpose of approving the budget requested by the library director, a detailed budget of requested, estimated expenditures for the city's fiscal year. A forecast of library income during such fiscal year shall be included in such budget. The library director shall be fully consulted in the preparation of such budget. 
(b)  After adoption of the library budget by the board, the budget shall be transmitted to the mayor at a time to be directed by the mayor. The city council may appropriate for the use of the board and the operation and maintenance of the library department such sums as it deems proper, consistent with the City Charter and the laws of the state. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the library director to report regularly to the board the financial status of the adopted budget. All expenditures in the library department shall be based on vouchers, requisitions, or such other accounting records as may be required by the city, as submitted by the library director. All city purchasing ordinances shall be observed. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-5. - Fees. 
Overdue book fines 	$ .25/day; maximum fine per item $10.00 
Overdue audio/visual fines (includes DVDs, videos, kits, CDs and cassettes) 	$ .25/day; maximum fine per item $10.00 
Processing fee for lost or damaged items 	$7.00 
Use of collection agency 	$10.00 
 
Fees to reserve library meeting rooms for private use: 
(no fees charged to city departments to reserve meeting rooms) 
Central Library meeting room rentals 	$75.00/for up to four hours use 
Central Library meeting room rentals (maximum ten hours one day) 	$150.00/entireday 
Fairmont Branch Library meeting room rentals 	$50.00/for up to four hours use 
Fairmont Branch Library meeting room rentals (maximum ten hours one day) 	S100.00/entireday 
Meeting room deposit 	$25.00 
Meeting room deposit for any group using central library kitchen 	$100.00 
 
Teleconference equipment users will be charged in addition to room rental fee according to the following fee structure: 
Class A—Other Texas libraries, no deposit; $25.00/hour 
Class B—Nonprofit organizations, $25.00 deposit; $50.00/hour 
Class C—Businesses and individuals, $25.00 deposit; $100.00/hour 
Class D—City departments, no deposit; $12.50/hour 
Central Library Business Center fees: 
Service 	Price 
Fax - incoming 	50 cents/page 
Fax - outgoing 	$1.00/page 
Scanning 	$2.00/page 
Printing - B&W 	10 cents/page 
Printing - color 	50 cents/page 
Copying - 8.5? × 11? 	10 cents/page 
Copying - 11? × 17? 	20 cents/page 
Laminating 	$2.00/foot 
 
Central Library Business Center Fees to Reserve Computer Lab for Private Use: 
(no fees charged to city departments to reserve lab) 
Service 	Price 	Details 
Private lab access 	$75.00/hour 	Private access to lab without staff assistance or specialized software 
Private library class 	$75.00/hour 	Scheduling a private class from the standard library curriculum 
Specialized class access 	$85.00/hour 	Private access to the lab with access to specialized software provided by customer, but with limited staff assistance 
Custom classes 	Prices vary 	Private classes with specialized software and taught by a staff member. Contact the Systems and Marketing Manager for quote. 
Security deposit 	$30.00 	Refundable barring damage to hardware or software 
Printing fee 	$3.00/person 	Participants can print up to 15 pages of B&W or color printing 
 
(Ord. No. 04-187, § 1, 8-31-04; Ord. No. 09-176, § 1, 9-1-09) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 04-187, § 1, adopted August 31, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as § 18-7. In order to maintain numerical order, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 18-5.  
Sec. 18-6. - Nonprofit rental and sponsorship policy. 
(a)  Any entity requesting consideration as a nonprofit organization shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Shall be an established nonprofit organization or corporation approved by and registered with the State of Texas; 
(2)  Shall reside in and maintain its principal place of business and operation within the City of Pasadena city limits; 
(3)  Shall provide a needed service to the community and/or donate monies for scholarships to city programs and local schools; and 
(4)  Shall be required to follow all other policies and procedures related to the leasing of library facilities. 
(b)  Organizations that qualify as nonprofit, by meeting all of the above stated requirements, may apply for the following concession when renting with the understanding that customers paying standard rates may be given priority for the use of library facilities: the payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) library meeting room fee; however, if the event is social in nature the regular charges apply. 
(c)  A function sponsored by the City of Pasadena may have all fees waived. 
(1)  Organizations seeking a sponsorship agreement for an event shall provide a letter of request clearly stating the event's purpose and any benefits the city and/or community may expect to receive as a result of the sponsorship. 
(2)  The mayor and/or his designee may make finding and if approved enter into written sponsorship agreements which fulfill a public purpose as determined by the city council; such purpose may include the health, safety and welfare if the citizens of the Pasadena, economic development and education which directly benefit the city and/or community. 
(Ord. No. 09-176, § 2, 9-1-09)  
Secs. 18-7—18-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LIBRARY BOARD 
 
Sec. 18-19. - Library board. 
There has been created and established in and for the city, the city public library board, which shall continue in existence into the future in accordance with this chapter, as may be amended from time to time, and any other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-20. - Composition; appointment of members. 
The board shall consist of nine (9) voting members to be nominated and appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by the city council. Additionally, the superintendent of the Pasadena Independent School District, or an assistant superintendent of such district, as may be from time to time designated by the superintendent, shall be an ex officio member of the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-21. - Qualifications of members. 
Each voting member of the board shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-22. - Terms of members. 
Board members serve staggered two-year terms that expire January 3, except that the initial appointees under this section shall draw lots to determine: 
(1)  The five (5) members to serve terms that expire on January 3 of the following year; and 
(2)  The four (4) members to serve terms that expire on January 3 of the second year. 
The mayor shall nominate and appoint and the city council shall confirm and approve all nine (9) of such members without reference to the length of their respective terms of office. The board member offices becoming vacant shall be filled by the mayor and the city council as provided in this article for a regular term of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-23. - Member's oath of office. 
Every board member shall take and subscribe the oath of office required by the state. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-24. - Vacancy caused by member failing to attend meetings. 
In the event of four (4) consecutive absences by a board member from the regular meetings of the board, without leave of absence for good cause for one (1) or more of such absences granted by the board, the chairperson of the board shall promptly certify such fact in writing to the mayor. If, upon investigation, the mayor, or his appointed representative, finds the certification to be correct, he shall promptly file a written declaration of vacancy in such member's office with the city secretary and the chairperson of the board. The mayor shall then nominate and appoint a successor to fill such vacancy. After confirmation and approval by the city council, the successor shall serve out the unexpired term of the subject board member office and shall enter upon the duties of that office at the regular board meeting next following his confirmation and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-25. - Vacancy caused by death or resignation of member. 
In the event of the death or resignation of any board member prior to expiration of his term of office, certification of such fact, written declaration of vacancy and nomination, appointment, confirmation and approval of a successor shall be made as in the case of vacancy by consecutive absences, as provided for in section 18-24, and the successor's term and entry upon duties shall be the same as in the case of a consecutive absences vacancy. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-26. - Members to serve without compensation; reimbursement for travel expenses. 
The board members shall serve without compensation for their services as such, but in the event it is found necessary by the board, of the better performance of any of their several duties, for any members of the board to go upon any out-of-city trips for the inspection of library facilities, the attendance of library governing boards conferences, or for the acquisition of materials or equipment for the city library system, their actual costs of travel and lodging may be paid by the city subject to prior approval by the mayor, and subject to all applicable laws and policies of the city. Full and detailed expense vouchers, in such cases, shall be filed with the city controller prior to payment. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-27. - Election and terms of officers. 
The board shall elect a chairperson, a vice-chairperson, and a secretary from among its members, each to serve a term of one (1) year and not more than two (2) consecutive terms in one (1) office; provided, no such officer, or any other board officer constituted and elected by the board, shall serve for a total period of more than two (2) years in a single board officership. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-28. - Library director to be executive officer and attend meetings. 
The library director shall act as the executive officer of the board and attend all of its meetings, unless excused by the majority vote of the board, or for good cause. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-29. - Quorum. 
Five (5) voting members of the board present at a board meeting shall constitute a quorum and shall be a majority in voting. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-30. - General powers. 
The board shall have such powers as are enumerated in this chapter and such other powers as are reasonably necessary for the government of the city library system, subject to all laws and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-31. - Bylaws. 
There have been bylaws adopted for the board to follow for its own procedure, which shall continue in existence into the future as may be amended by the board from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-32. - Promulgation of rules and regulations for operation of library system. 
The board may prescribe the establishment of rules and regulations for the government and operation of all city libraries, branches, stations, reading rooms and other facilities under its control, subject to all laws and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-33. - Recommendations as to expenditures. 
The board may, at any time, recommend to the mayor, and subject to the mayor's approval, the uses of any funds especially appropriated, any unbudgeted funds from available taxes, any funds appropriated for maintenance, or any library-purpose bond funds, for expenditure to acquire, hold, transfer, trade, rent or lease real, personal or mixed property, including books and supplies, in the name of and for the city, so long as such uses are for the administration, development and enlargement of the city library system and its interest. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-34. - Authority to receive gifts and bequests. 
The board or library director may recommend to the mayor to accept in the name of and for the city; donations, gifts or bequests, either of land, money, securities, books, manuscripts, collections of historical papers or materials, local history relics or memorabilia, to be devoted to library uses or purposes, upon such terms as may be deemed proper, not inconsistent with law and the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-35. - Copies of minutes of meetings to be delivered to councilmen. 
True copies of minutes of every regular or special meeting of the board shall be delivered to the city hall office of each city council member no later than forty-five (45) days after such regular or special meeting. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Secs. 18-36—18-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LIBRARY DIRECTOR 
 
Sec. 18-47. - Office created. 
There is hereby created and established in and for the city of pasadena, the office of city public library director, which shall continue in existence into the future in accordance with this chapter, as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-48. - Appointment. 
The mayor shall nominate and appoint the library director, subject to confirmation and approval by the city council. The library board may give recommendation to the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-49. - Qualifications. 
The library director shall, at the time of his or her appointment by the mayor, and confirmation and approval by the city council, possess a masters degree in library science from an accredited college or university. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-50. - Oath and bond. 
The library director shall qualify upon taking and subscribing the oath of office and filing the same with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-51. - General powers and duties. 
The library director shall be the director of the library department and have responsibility for the supervision of all such personnel, subject to all laws and policies of the city. The library director shall be responsible for the custody and care of all archives, records and papers of the library, subject to all laws and policies of the city. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-52. - Duty to maintain property acquisition record, catalog and inventory. 
The library director shall maintain a continuous acquisition record and a catalogue of all books, document, papers, manuscripts and other loan and reference materials of the library and an accurate inventory of all real and personal property of the library. Such records shall be open for inspection by the board, the mayor and the city council or their representatives at all reasonable times. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Sec. 18-53. - Annual report. 
Each year the library director shall prepare an annual report, reviewing the library department's activities of the previous year and setting forth recommendations for programs and operations in the coming year. The library director shall furnish a copy of such report to the mayor and each member of the board. The report shall be submitted with the proposed budget to the board. 
(Ord. No. 03-257, § 1, 12-30-03)  
Chapter 19 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 19-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Massage. The word "massage" shall mean and include any process consisting in kneading, rubbing or otherwise manipulating the skin of the body of a human being, either with the hand, or by means of electrical instruments or apparatus, or other special apparatus, but shall not include massage by duly licensed physicians, nor massage of the face practiced by duly licensed beauty parlors or barbershops. 
Massage establishment. A "massage establishment" is hereby defined to mean any building, room, place or establishment, other than a regularly licensed hospital, where manipulated massage or manipulated exercises are practiced upon the human body for compensation by any person not a duly licensed physician, whether without or with the use of mechanical, therapeutic or bathing devices, and shall include Turkish bathhouses. This term shall not include, however, beauty parlors or barbershops duly licensed by the state. 
(Code 1964, § 16-1)  
Sec. 19-2. - Maintenance of premises and equipment. 
It shall be the duty of every person conducting or operating a massage establishment to keep the same at all times in a clean and sanitary condition. All instruments and mechanical, therapeutic and bathing devices or parts thereof that come into contact with the human body shall be sterilized by a modern and approved method of sterilization, before initial use, and any such instruments and devices or parts thereof, after having been used upon one patron, shall be sterilized before being used upon another. Towels and linens furnished for use of one patron shall not be furnished for use of another until thoroughly laundered. 
(Code 1964, § 16-2)  
Sec. 19-3. - Operation in connection with living or sleeping quarters prohibited. 
No massage establishment shall be operated or conducted in connection, either directly or indirectly, with any place used for living or sleeping quarters. 
(Code 1964, § 16-3)  
Sec. 19-4. - Hours of operation. 
No massage establishment shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. on any day. 
(Code 1964, § 16-4)  
Sec. 19-5. - Management to keep list of employees. 
The manager or person in charge of a massage establishment shall keep a list of the names and addresses of all employees therein, both on duty and off duty, and such list shall be shown to all proper authorities of the police and the director of public health upon request. 
(Code 1964, § 16-5)  
Sec. 19-6. - Employment of certain persons prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating a massage establishment to employ, in any capacity therein, a known prostitute or any person who has been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude in any state, municipal or federal court, or any woman who has been convicted in any such court of vagrancy or prostitution. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person suffering from a communicable disease to work or be employed in any massage establishment. 
(Code 1964, § 16-6)  
Sec. 19-7. - Health certificate for employees. 
All employees of a massage establishment shall be required to secure a valid health certificate from a physician. 
(Code 1964, § 16-7)  
Sec. 19-8. - Cleanliness of employees. 
All masseurs and operators at a massage establishment shall wash their hands thoroughly before administering massage manipulations to any patron. 
(Code 1964, § 16-8)  
Sec. 19-9. - Accommodation of diseased patrons prohibited. 
No person suffering from a communicable disease, to the knowledge of the owner, custodian or employee of a massage establishment, shall be accommodated as a patron therein. 
(Code 1964, § 16-9)  
Sec. 19-10. - Responsibility of management for acts of employees. 
The person managing, keeping or operating a massage establishment shall be responsible for the acts of his employees in the conduct of such business. 
(Code 1964, § 16-10)  
Secs. 19-11—19-21. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Payment of taxes prerequisite for obtaining license, § 26-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 19-22. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a massage establishment without first having obtained a license therefor from the building official in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 16-18; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 19-23. - Application generally. 
Application for a license required by this article shall be filed with the building official and shall state the applicant's name and address and the name and address of the proposed massage establishment. Such application shall also give such other information as may be required by the building official. 
(Code 1964, § 16-19; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 19-24. - Approval of application by chief of police. 
No license required by this article shall be issued unless the application therefor is first approved, in writing, by the chief of police. Such approval shall not be granted if the chief of police finds that any person mentioned in section 19-6 is to be or is employed in such establishment. 
(Code 1964, § 16-20)  
Sec. 19-25. - Approval of application by director of public health. 
No license required by this article shall be issued unless the application therefor is first approved, in writing, by the director of public health. Such approval shall not be granted if the director finds that the establishment does not comply with any applicable health law, ordinance or regulation of the state or city.  
Sec. 19-26. - Certificate of occupancy prerequisite to issuance. 
No license required by this article shall be issued unless a certificate of occupancy for the premises has been issued by the building official. 
(Code 1964, § 16-21)  
Sec. 19-27. - Fee. 
The annual fee for a license required by this article shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such establishment and such fee shall not be prorated. No refund shall ever be made of any such license fee. 
(Code 1964, § 16-22)  
Sec. 19-28. - Posting. 
A license issued under this article shall be posted at all times in a conspicuous place at the establishment for which it was issued. 
(Code 1964, § 16-23)  
Sec. 19-29. - Expiration and renewal. 
Every license issued under this article shall expire on December thirty-first next following its issuance and the establishment shall not be operated after such expiration unless the license is renewed by complying with all provisions of this article. 
(Code 1964, § 16-24)  
Sec. 19-30. - Revocation. 
Any license issued under this article may be revoked by the city council for a violation of this chapter or any ordinance of the city or any law of the state by the licensee. Revocation shall be effected by written notice to the licensee. 
(Code 1964, § 16-25)  
Chapter 20 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 20-1. - Sound and vibration. 
(a)  Legislative findings. The city council of the City of Pasadena finds and declares: 
(1)  That sound and vibration of such character, intensity and duration as are reasonably calculated to be detrimental to the health, welfare or safety of a reasonably sensitive person degrades the environment of the city to a degree which: 
a.  Is harmful and hazardous to the health, welfare and safety of it's inhabitants; 
b.  Interferes with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property and recreation and with the conduct and operation of business and industry; and 
c.  Is a nuisance in fact. 
(2)  The effective control and elimination of excessive sound and vibration is essential to the furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the city's inhabitants. 
(b)  Definitions. The following definitions shall apply to this article and appropriate court shall take judicial notice of same. 
Ambient sound pressure level: Composite of sound in the environment excluding the specific sound under investigation. 
A-weighted network: dB(A) frequency response characteristics provided by a standard sound level meter which attempts to duplicate the response of the human ear to a measured sound pressure level. 
Decibel (dB): A measurement used to express the sound pressure level or intensity of sound. It is defined as a dimensionless unit related to the logarithm of the ratio of a measured quantity to a reference quantity. 
Equivalent continuous sound pressure level (L eq ): Used to denote the average sound pressure level in dB(A) during a specified period of time. 
Octave band analysis: A detailed measurement that divides sound into component or octave bands which are limited to a specific frequency range. Sound pressure levels are assigned to each octave band. The specific frequency range is considered to be an octave in width when the upper band edge frequency is twice the lower band edge frequency. 
Octave band analyzer: An instrument that measures sound pressure levels within a specific frequency range denoted as an octave band. 
Octave band center frequency: A designation for the octave band frequency widths. The octave band center frequency is the geometric mean of the upper and lower band edge frequencies. 
Peak sound pressure level: Used to denote the maximum instantaneous sound pressure level during a specified period of time. 
Person: A person, firm, association, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private in nature. 
Real property boundary: An imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned or in possession of one person from that real property owned or in possession of another. 
Receiving real property: Any property outside the real property boundary of the sound source. 
Reference quantity: The reference quantity used is 0.00002 Newtons per meter squared (N/m 2 ); this quantity is further defined as zero dB. 
Residential property: Any location used for noncommercial purposes as a place of abode by any person. 
Sound: Any pressure variation that can be detected by the human ear. 
Sound amplifying equipment: Any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other. 
Sound level meter: An instrument which includes a microphone, amplifier, RMS detector, integrator or time averager, output meter, and weighting networks to measure sound pressure levels and that meets the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) specifications. 
Vibration: An oscillatory motion of solid bodies described by displacement, velocity or acceleration. 
(c)  Prohibited conduct. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of sound or vibration or to discharge or allow the escape of any sound or vibration: 
a.  Of such character, intensity, volume or duration as to be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or annoying to a reasonably sensitive person within the area or property receiving such sound or vibration; or 
b.  That causes adverse psychological or physiological effects detrimental to the health, welfare, or safety of a reasonably sensitive person within the area or property receiving such sound or vibration; or 
c.  Which is in violation of standards prescribed by this article. 
(2)  It shall be prima facie unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of sound or to discharge or allow the escape of any sound in such a manner as to cause or create a sound pressure level which reaches or exceeds the following standards when measured at any point within the real property boundary of the receiving real property: 
a.  A peak sound pressure level of seventy-five (75) dB(A) at any time on any receiving property. 
b.  A peak sound pressure level of ten (10) dB above the ambient measured on any nonresidential property location between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
c.  A peak sound pressure level of five (5) dB above the ambient measured on any residential property location between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
d.  A peak sound pressure level of ten (10) dB above ambient as measured in any octave band center frequency as follows: 
Octave Band Center Frequencies (Hertz) 
63 	125 	250 	500 	1000 	2000 	4000 	8000 
 
(3)  It shall be prima facie unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of vibration or to discharge or allow the escape of any vibration in such a manner as to cause by such operation a vibration that can be detected without the aid of instruments at any point within the receiving real property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to use, operate or permit to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound, including but not limited to amplification equipment contained in or mounted on a motor vehicle in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated. The operation of such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, device or amplification equipment in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(d)  Noisy animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird that causes or makes frequent or long and continued sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace, or safety of ordinary, reasonable persons of normal sensibilities and ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living who reside in the vicinity thereof is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful as a sound nuisance in violation of this chapter, regardless of whether the sound so created by said animal or bird is within the permissible levels specified in section 20-1(c)(2) of this Code. 
(e)  Measurements and standards. 
(1)  Measurement of sound may be made, as applicable, with a sound level meter or with an octave band analyzer meeting the standards prescribed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
A calibration check shall be made before and after the time of any sound measurement. Sound measurements shall be obtained in a manner that provides proper representation of the sound in question. A microphone windscreen shall be used when necessary to avoid interference from the wind. The instrument shall be positioned at arms length or positioned on a stationary tripod with the microphone positioned in such a manner that will avoid any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the sound in question. Traffic, aircraft, and other sound shall not be considered except in instances where they interfere with the sound of interest or ambient samples. 
To establish a representative sound sample, at least three (3) sound measurements should be taken within an hour period on at least two (2) separate occasions. Sound samples shall be obtained specifically during sound producing and nonproducing or ambient conditions. 
Ambient sound pressure level shall be obtained in the same manner as described above during periods of ambient conditions. Ambient sound pressure levels shall be obtained as soon as possible and at the same location used to obtain sound pressure levels of the sound of interest. 
(2)  The city or its designated agents or representatives may inspect from time to time any installation, premises, equipment, devices and appurtenances thereto that may, can or do cause sounds or vibrations and the city may take measurements and make analysis of such sound or vibration. Where directed, the owner shall provide assistance in obtaining normal operating conditions during periods of measurement. 
(3)  The city may order the owner, lessee or any agent of any source of sound and/or vibration which may be or is in excess of that permitted by this chapter or the regulations adopted hereunder to furnish such information, plans, specifications, analysis, performance data and tests or examinations as will disclose the nature, effects, extent, quantity, watts or degree of sound or vibration which are or may be discharged from such source. 
(f)  Penalties and remedies. 
(1)  Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues and shall be punishable as such. 
(2)  The penalty provided for herein shall be in addition to any other legal remedies available to the city to prevent and prohibit any such violation of this article. The city may institute any appropriate administrative action or proceeding or any action at law or equity to require compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  Defenses. It is an affirmative defense to prosecution for an offense established in this chapter that: 
(1)  The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime. 
(2)  The sound was produced by an authorized emergency vehicle. 
(3)  The sound was produced by emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, or to restore property to a safe condition, or to protect persons or property from imminent danger, following a fire, accident or natural disaster. 
(4)  The sound was generated: 
a.  At a lawfully scheduled stadium event; 
b.  By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a permitted parade; 
c.  By spectators and participants at a lawfully scheduled amphitheater event; 
d.  By patrons and participants using cannons and gunfire during historical battle reenactments for which a pyrotechnic permit was obtained and the explosives were inspected by the fire marshal; 
e.  By a pyrotechnic display that was inspected and approved by the fire marshal; 
f.  By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, fiesta, or concert which was sponsored, cosponsored, or permitted by the city; or 
g.  Any other lawful activity which constitutes protected expression pursuant to the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. 
(5)  The sound was produced by aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport, or railroad equipment in operation on railroad rights-of-way. 
(6)  The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or garden tool, lawn mower, or any other similar device used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and which device did not produce a sound exceeding eighty-five (85) dB(A) when measured from the nearest residential property where the sound is being received and was used for the maintenance or upkeep of the property on which it was used. 
(7)  The sound was produced by the operation of any air conditioning unit which did not produce a sound exceeding sixty-five (65) dB(A) on nonresidential property, when measured at or near fifteen (15) feet from the air conditioning unit producing the sound being measured. 
(8)  The sound was produced by church bells or church chimes when used as a part of a religious observance or service during daytime hours and which did not exceed five (5) continuous minutes in duration in any one-hour period. 
(Code 1964, § 17-7; Ord. No. 85-205, § 1, 10-15-85; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 98-77, § 1, 5-19-98; Ord. No. 95-15, § 1, 1-31-95; Ord. No. 04-73, §§ 1, 2, 4-6-04) 
Cross reference— Central loudspeakers prohibited at drive-in theaters, § 5-29; operation of vehicles so as to produce "tire squeal," § 36-74.  
Sec. 20-2. - Abandoned iceboxes, refrigerators, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building, unattended, any icebox, refrigerator or any other container designed to be airtight, if such icebox, refrigerator or other container has a door equipped with a catch or a lock which may not be released from the inside. 
(Code 1964, § 17-1)  
Sec. 20-3. - Prohibiting firearms, air guns, etc., and their discharge in, across or near public squares, parks, or streets. 
(a)  Any person who shall discharge any gun, pistol or other firearm of any description, or who shall shoot an air gun, air pistol, bow and arrow or any like device, in, along, or near any public street, public park, or street within the city shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Any person who shall possess any gun, pistol, firearm of any description, bow and arrow, or any like device in a public park within the city, except the Pasadena Police Department firing range, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to bow and arrow, in a public park where there is conducted an archery range maintained or approved by the City of Pasadena Recreation Department. 
(Code 1964, § 17-3; Ord. No. 74-75, § 1, 4-16-74) 
Cross reference— Streets generally, Ch. 32.  
Sec. 20-4. - Possession of paints or markers by persons under eighteen years of age. 
(a)  No person under the age of eighteen (18) shall intentionally or knowingly possess in a public place or on the property of another any paint in a spray can or any marker containing a fluid which is not water soluble and has a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface of three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch or greater. 
(b)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under this section that the person younger than eighteen (18) years of age: 
(1)  Is in the presence of an adult parent or legal guardian having supervisory responsibility over him, and such adult permits the possession or use of the paint or marker only under the adult's supervision; 
(2)  Is a student using paint or a marker while under the supervision of his or her teacher; or 
(3)  Is an employee using paint or a marker at the direction and under the supervision of his or her employer. 
(c)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 92-165, § 1, 8-11-92)  
Sec. 20-5. - Possession of tobacco products by minors. 
(a)  Definitions. As used this section the following words and phrases shall have the meanings specified: 
Minor means any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age. 
Tobacco product means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, chewing tobacco, or dipping tobacco. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  It is unlawful for a minor to possess a tobacco product within the city. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any minor to falsely state to any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city that such minor is not a minor or for any minor to present to any person engaged in the business of selling tobacco products within the corporate limits of the city any document that purports to establish that such minor is not a minor. 
(c)  It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(1) that the minor who possessed a tobacco product: 
(1)  Is an employee of a person holding a permit issued by the state authorizing such person to engage in the business of being a distributor, wholesaler, bonded agent or retailer of tobacco products, and such tobacco product is possessed by the minor on the premises of his or her employer for the purpose of carrying out the business of such employer; or 
(2)  Is in the presence of his or her adult parent, guardian or spouse or other adult having custody of such minor by virtue of the order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  Subsection (a) of this section shall have no application if the possession in question occurs at a location or under circumstances which also render such possession a violation of Section 48.01 of the Penal Code. 
(e)  Any minor violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 96-23, § 2, 3-5-96)  
Secs. 20-6, 20-7. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed §§ 20-4—20-7, which pertained to loitering in public places, loitering on property of another, unlawful entry, suspicious intrusion, possession of bookmaking paraphernalia and derived from Code 1964, §§ 17-5, 17-6, 19-8; Ord. No. 1820, § 1, adopted June 14, 1966 and Ord. No. 71-269, § 1, adopted Sept. 14, 1971.  
Secs. 20-8, 20-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 84-34, §§ 1 and 2, enacted Feb. 21, 1984, repealed the provisions formerly codified as §§ 20-8 and 20-9, derived from Ord. No. 1882, §§ 1—3, adopted Nov. 22, 1966, and prohibiting the sale to minors, with an exception, of glue and cement containing volatile solvents, and prohibiting the public intoxication resulting from the inhalation of such solvents.  
Sec. 20-9.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed § 20-9.1 which pertained to possession of drugs and derived from Ord. No. 78-60, §§ 1—6, adopted May 9, 1978.  
Sec. 20-9.2. - Forfeiture and disposal of money or property pursuant to "Controlled Substances Act." 
(a)  When money or property is forfeited pursuant to Article 4476-15, the Controlled Substances Act, and an order of forfeiture is entered by the district court authorizing the City of Pasadena or its police department to use the funds or property forfeited, the money or property shall be used as provided in subsection (c) below. 
(b)  A copy of all orders described in subsection (a) hereof shall be forwarded to the city controller, the city secretary and the mayor. 
(c)  All money forfeited to the city shall be transmitted to the city controller for deposit and shall be credited to police department budget, narcotics suppression Fund No. 06-2258. 
(d)  All property forfeited to the City of Pasadena shall be inventoried as is other city property and the inventory shall be sent to the city controller. The City of Pasadena shall maintain, use, repair, and operate for official purposes all property forfeited by it and the mayor shall assign the property to the appropriate department of the city. If there is an outstanding security interest, an interest of a bona fide lienholder, or another party who holds an interest in the property in the nature of a security interest, that interest may be purchased pursuant to established purchase procedures. 
(e)  All property forfeited pursuant to Article 4476-15 V.A.C.S. and this section which has fulfilled its usefulness shall be sold under the provisions of section 30-49, et seq., of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, where applicable. 
(Ord. No. 80-38, §§ 1—5, 3-11-80; Ord. No. 83-196, § 1, 7-26-83)  
Sec. 20-10. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed § 20-10 which pertained to prescriptions for pharmaceutical preparations containing codeine and derived from Ord. No. 69-307, § 1, adopted Dec. 23, 1969.  
Sec. 20-11. - Damaging, altering, tampering with, etc., traffic or street signs, signals, testing devices, etc. 
(a)  No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface, injure, damage, destroy, knock down or remove any city traffic-control device, signal, marking, marker or sign, or any city street sign or marker, or the post or mounting thereof, excluding such damage as occurs to such device, signal, marking, marker, or sign laid in or painted on the pavement in any public street of the city by lawful travel over or upon the same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, other than persons supervised by the traffic director or his duly authorized representatives, to tamper with, manipulate, alter, move or in any way injure, deface or damage any city load-actuated traffic counters, radar equipment, sonar equipment, other electronic or electric devices, or any other city traffic testing or measuring equipment, or accessories, components or parts thereof. 
(c)  The city does hereby offer a reward of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) to be paid to any person furnishing information leading to the apprehension, arrest and final conviction of any person for the violation of any provision of this section. Any person claiming the right to be paid such reward must file a notice of such claim in writing with the city council not later than ninety (90) days from and after the date of the final conviction of any person for such violation in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such notice shall fully state the circumstances under which such person laid the information before the authorities, leading to said apprehension, arrest and final conviction, the full name of the claimant, and the names and addresses of any witnesses upon whom claimant relies to verify his claim. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-79, 28-167, 28-168), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Traffic-control devices generally, § 36-87 et seq.  
Sec. 20-12. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-309, § 5, adopted Oct. 26, 1971, repealed Ord. No. 69-119, adopted June 3, 1969, from which former § 20-12, pertaining to the storing or parking of inoperable motor vehicles or motor vehicles constituting safety hazards, etc., was derived.  
Sec. 20-13. - Auctions prohibited within one hundred feet of private residence. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold a public auction within one hundred (100) feet of a private residence within the city. Any violation of this section shall be declared a misdemeanor and shall be punishable, upon conviction, by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each and every day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 68-21, §§ 1, 2, 2-6-68)  
Sec. 20-14. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 87-133, § 1, adopted July 28, 1987, repealed § 20-14, pertaining to interfering with, molesting, etc., city officers or policemen, which derived from Ord. No. 68-48, §§ 1—3, adopted April 2, 1968.  
Sec. 20-15. - Trespass on school property—Definition, acts included. 
(a)  School, as used herein includes any public, private or parochial nursery school, kindergarten, grade school, grammar school, high school, junior high school, college, university, or junior college, or any combination of two (2) or more of the foregoing. 
(b)  School premises, as used herein means any real estate used, occupied, or in any manner dedicated to exclusive use or occupancy as a school, or as a part or appurtenance thereof, including but not limited to buildings, dormitories and other structures, campuses, athletic fields, tennis courts, walks and roadways, so used, occupied or dedicated. 
(c)  Trespass, as used herein shall include the meaning ordinarily attributed to that term in law, but in any event, shall include the following whether within such ordinary meaning or not: 
(1)  The act or conduct of any person in wilfully remaining upon any school premises for the purpose or with the intention of begging or of soliciting funds or property, or of displaying or offering for sale or taking orders for any services or goods, wares, merchandise or other articles of whatever character, after such person has been requested to leave such premises by the principal, president or other administrative head of such school or an authorized representative. 
(2)  The act or conduct of any person in wilfully remaining upon or failing or refusing to leave any such school premises upon receiving a lawful request to do so from the principal, president or other administrative head of such school, or an authorized representative. 
(3)  The act or conduct of any person in operating or propelling any commercial motor vehicle on or through the grounds or upon any roadway of any such school. Provided, that this paragraph shall not apply to any such act or conduct which has for its purpose the transaction of some bona fide business directly connected with the operation or objects of such school, nor to any person operating such vehicle on school premises by invitation of the principal, president or other administrative head of such school, or an authorized representative. This paragraph shall be construed (but not by way of limitation) to prohibit the use, by any person operating any such vehicle, of any school premises or roadway as a mere passageway, but shall not be construed to apply to any roadway dedicated to public use generally. 
(4)  The act or conduct of any person in wilfully causing or permitting any motor vehicle or other property or object in the possession of or under the control of such person to remain on any school premises after such person has received from the principal, president, or other administrative head of such school, or any authorized representative, a lawful request to remove the same. 
(5)  The act or conduct of any person in depositing or causing to be deposited on any such school premises any trash, rubbish, refuse, discarded articles or litter of any character, except in places or receptacles provided or authorized for such purpose by the principal, president or other administrative head of such school. 
(6)  The act or conduct of any person in possessing or wilfully bringing upon any school premises any explosive, firearm or any dangerous weapon. This paragraph shall not apply to peace officers, officials, employees and contractors of such school, nor to any person lawfully resident on such school premises. 
(Ord. No. 71-156, § 1, 6-1-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-156 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 herein as §§ 20-15 and 20-16 was at the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 20-16. - Same—The act prohibited. 
It shall hereafter be unlawful and constitute an offense for any person to trespass on school premises, or any part thereof, located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 71-156, § 2, 6-1-71) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 20-15.  
Sec. 20-17. - Failure to return library materials. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly fails to return library materials to the City of Pasadena Public Library which were loaned to the actor or borrowed in the actor's name. 
(b)  The actor's intent and knowledge shall be presumed if: 
(1)  Pursuant to agreement, the library materials were to be returned on a date specified; 
(2)  Actual notice is given or notice in writing is sent by depositing in the United States mail said notice addressed to the actor at his address shown on the records of the library stating that the library materials were not returned on the date specified; and 
(3)  The library material is not returned to the owner within twenty (20) days of receipt of such notice. 
(c)  If notice is given in accordance with subsection (2) of this section, it is presumed that the notice was received no later than five (5) days after it was sent. 
(d)  In prosecution under this section, it is no defense that the actor, though the actual borrower, no longer possesses the library materials. 
(e)  In prosecution under this section, it is an affirmative defense that another borrowed the library material in the name of the actor without his effective consent. 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined any amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). Each day of the continuance of such violation shall be considered a separate offense and each and every day shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 76-145, § 1, 8-24-76)  
Sec. 20-18. - Leaving child unattended in motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if he intentionally or knowingly leaves a child in a motor vehicle for longer than five (5) minutes, knowing that the child is: 
(1)  Younger than seven (7) years of age; and 
(2)  Not attended by an individual in the vehicle who is fourteen (14) years of age or older. 
(b)  The terms "knowingly" and "intentionally" as used in this section shall have the same meaning as set out in the definitions of these terms in the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 83-353, § 1, 11-15-83; Ord. No. 84-282, § 1, 11-13-84)  
Secs. 20-19—20-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-58, adopted Mar. 25, 1997, amended Art. II, §§ 20-25—20-27 and Art. III in their entirety to read as herein set out. Former Arts. II and III derived from Ord. No. 71-218, adopted July 21, 1971; Ord. No. 81-74, adopted Mar. 24, 1981; and Ord. No. 90-127, adopted July 24, 1990. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-25. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Achromatic. Colorless, lacking in saturation or hue. Without limitation, grays, tans and light earth tones shall be included, but white and black and any bold coloration that attracts attention shall be excluded from the definition of achromatic. 
Adult bookstore. An establishment whose primary business is the offering to customers of books, magazines, films or videotapes (whether for viewing off-premises or on-premises by use of motion picture machines or other image-producing devices), periodicals, or other printed or pictorial materials which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult cabaret. An establishment whose primary business is the offering to customers of live entertainment which is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities, or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult encounter parlor. An establishment whose primary business is the provision of premises where customers either congregate, associate, or consort with employees who engage in specified sexual activities with or in the presence of such customers, or who display specified anatomical areas in the presence of such customers, with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers. 
Adult lounge. An adult cabaret, as defined above, which is a permitted or licensed premises, pursuant to the Texas Alcoholic Beverages Code, where alcoholic beverages may be served or sold. 
Adult modeling studio. An establishment whose primary business is the provision to customers of figure models who are so provided with the intent of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and who engage in specified sexual activities or display specified anatomical areas while being observed, painted, painted upon, sketched, drawn, sculptured, photographed, or otherwise depicted by such customers. 
Adult movie theatre. An establishment, containing a room with tiers or rows of seats facing a screen, or projection area, whose primary business is the exhibition to customers of motion pictures which are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to such customers and which are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Applicant. The applicant for a permit shall be the intended operator of the enterprise. 
Church. A building, whether situated within the city or not, in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious worship. 
Commercial multi-unit center. A building or structure, including a shopping mall or strip shopping center, containing three (3) or more separate premises, each of which is offered by lease or otherwise for separate occupancy or control and each of which occupies an enclosed area having its own door or entranceway opening onto public property, a public way, or a common area. 
Conduct any business in an enterprise. Any person who does any one (1) or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business in an enterprise. 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the enterprise premises where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the enterprise premises; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the enterprise premises; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the enterprise premises; or 
(5)  Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the enterprise premises. 
Customer. Any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter an enterprise in return for the payment of an admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters an enterprise and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of an enterprise operating a private club. 
Director. The chief of police and such employee(s) of the police department as he may designate to perform the duties of the director under this article. 
Display surface. The entire surface of a sign, on one (1) side, devoted to exhibiting advertising. The display surface shall not include the sign frame and incidental supports thereto. 
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of an enterprise or who works in or about an enterprise and who receives compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the enterprise or from the customers therein. 
Enterprise. An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult encounter parlor, adult lounge, adult modeling studio, adult movie theatre or any establishment whose primary business is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "enterprise" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the licenses held; 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
(3)  Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers. 
Entertainment. Any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors, or customers. The term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses, or other employees exposing specified anatomical areas or engaging in specified sexual activities in the presence of customers. 
Exterior portion. Any part of the physical structure of an enterprise, including a wall, veneer, door, fence, roof, roof covering, or window, which is visible from any public way or public property. 
Licensed day-care center. A facility licensed by the State of Texas, whether situated within the city or not, that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than twelve (12) children under fourteen (14) years of age, where such children are not related by blood, marriage or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for less than twenty-four (24) hours a day, regardless of whether or not the facility is operated for a profit or charges for the services it offers. 
Multifamily tract. Any residential tract that contains any building or buildings or portion or portions thereof, that is designed, built, rented, leased, sold, let out or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied, in separate units, each containing living, sleeping and food preparation facilities, as the homes or residences of three (3) or more families, groups, or individuals living independently of each other. 
Operator. The manager or other natural person principally in charge of an enterprise. 
Owner or owners. The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all general partners if a partnership, or the corporation if a corporation and all officers, directors, and persons holding fifty (50) per cent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
Permit. A current, valid permit issued by the director pursuant to the terms of this article to an operator for an enterprise. 
Public park. A publicly owned or leased tract of land, whether situated in the city or not, designated, dedicated, controlled, maintained and operated for use by the general public for active or passive recreational or leisure purposes by the city or any political subdivision of the state and containing improvements, pathways, access or facilities intended for public recreational use. The term "public park" shall not include parkways, public roads, rights-of-way, esplanades, traffic circles, easements or traffic triangles unless such tracts or areas contain and provide improvements or access to a recreational or leisure use by the public. A current list of public parks shall be compiled and revised by the director of the parks and recreation department and maintained for public inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
Residential. Pertaining to the use of land, whether situated within the city or not, for premises such as homes, town homes, patio homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, condominiums and apartment complexes, which contain habitable rooms for nontransient occupancy and which are designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking, and eating therein. A premises which is designed primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating therein shall be deemed to be residential in character unless it is actually occupied and used exclusively for other purposes. Hotels, motels, boarding houses, nursing homes, college or university dormitories, hospitals, and nursery schools shall not be considered to be residential. The term "residential" shall also include any unimproved tract designated for tax appraisal purposes as residential by the Harris County Appraisal District if situated in the city or by the appraisal district of the county in which the tract is situated if not situated in the city. The term additionally shall include any tract, that, based upon the records of the planning official has been subdivided or platted for residential use, but that is not yet designated for tax appraisal purposes as residential. 
School. A building, whether situated within the city or not, where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the playgrounds, stadia and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith. The term is limited to: 
(1)  Public and private schools used for primary or secondary education, in which any regular kindergarten or grades one through 12 classes are taught; and 
(2)  Special education facilities in which students who have physical or learning disabilities receive specialized education in lieu of attending regular classes in kindergarten or any of grades one through 12. 
Sign. Any display, design, pictorial, or other representation, which shall be so constructed, placed, attached, painted, erected, fastened or manufactured in any manner whatsoever so that the same is visible from the outside of an enterprise and that is used to seek the attraction of the public to any goods, services or merchandise available at such enterprise. The term "sign" shall also include such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any exterior portion of any enterprise as well as such representations painted on or otherwise affixed to any part of the tract upon which such an enterprise is situated. 
Specified anatomical areas. 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Buttocks; 
c.  Female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities. 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttocks or female breast or breasts; or 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
Tract. A contiguous parcel of land under common ownership, whether situated within the city or not. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-26. - Permit—Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any business in an enterprise located within the city unless there is a permit for the enterprise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate or conduct any business in an enterprise located within the city unless the permit is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the enterprise in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the premises. 
(c)  In any prosecution under subsection (a) above, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then posted as provided in subsection (b). 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-27. - Same—Applications. 
(a)  Applications for a permit, whether original or renewal, must be made to the director by the intended operator of the enterprise. Applications must be submitted by hand delivery by the intended operator to the chief of police during regular working hours: 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, city holidays excepted. Application forms shall be supplied by the director. The intended operator shall be required to give the following information on the application form: 
(1)  a. 
The name, street address, and mailing address if different, and Texas driver's license number of the intended operator; 
b.  The name and street address, and mailing address if different, of the owner(s); 
(2)  The name under which the enterprise is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided; 
(3)  The telephone number of the enterprise; 
(4)  The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the enterprise is to be located; 
(5)  If the enterprise is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the enterprise for which the permit is sought, and the date on which the enterprise began operations as an enterprise at the location for which the permit is sought; and 
(6)  If the enterprise is not in operation, the expected startup date which shall be expressed in number of days from the date of the issuance of the permit. If the expected startup date is to be more than ten (10) days following the date of issuance of the permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the same. 
(b)  The application shall be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  Payment in full of a fee of: 
a.  Four hundred seventy-five dollars ($475.00) for an original application; or 
b.  Two hundred twenty-five dollars ($225.00) for a renewal application, as applicable, by certified check, cashiers check or money order, which fee shall not be refundable under any circumstances; 
(2)  A certified copy of the assumed name certificate filed in compliance with the Assumed Business or Professional Name Act (Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, Business and Commerce Code, Chapter 36) if the enterprise is to be operated under an assumed name; 
(3)  If the enterprise is a Texas corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto; 
(4)  If the enterprise is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto; 
(5)  If the enterprise is a limited partnership formed under the laws of Texas, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Revised Limited Partnership Act (Article 6132a-1 Texas Revised Civil Statutes); 
(6)  If the enterprise is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto, filed in the office of the Secretary of State under the Texas Revised Limited Partnership Act (Article 6132a-1 Texas Revised Civil Statutes); 
(7)  Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the enterprise is to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed; 
(8)  If the persons identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land in item (7) are not also the owners of the enterprise, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the owners or proposed owners of the enterprise to have or obtain the use and possession of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the enterprise for the purpose of the operation of the enterprise; 
(9)  Any of items (2) through (8), above shall not be required for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously furnished the director with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current. 
(c)  The application shall contain a statement under oath that: 
(1)  The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and 
(2)  The applicant has read the provisions of this article. 
(d)  A separate application and permit shall be required for each enterprise. 
(e)  Each applicant shall, following the filing of the application and payment of the filing fee, place signs, at least 24 inches × 36 inches in size, that provide notification and information specifically stating "SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS PERMIT APPLICATION PENDING" and the date on which the application was filed along with the notation: "For further information, contact the Police Chief of the Pasadena Police Department." All lettering on the signs must be at least 1½ inches × 2 inches in size for each letter on the sign. It shall be the duty of each applicant as to each particular application to erect at least one such sign along each of the property's public road or highway frontages so as to be clearly visible from the public road or highway. If a property does not have a public road or highway frontage, then signs shall be placed upon the property at a point visible from the nearest public right-of-way. Said signs shall be erected not less than three (3) days after the filing of the application for the sexually oriented business permit and shall be checked daily by the applicant and reposted as required to ensure that they remain posted until the application has been approved or denied. 
(f)  Every applicant shall give notice of the application by publication at his own expense in two (2) consecutive issues of a newspaper published in the official newspaper of the City of Pasadena. The notice shall be printed in ten-point boldface type and shall include: 
(1)  The fact that a sexually oriented business permit has been applied for; 
(2)  The street address, including suite or unit number, if any, of the place of business for which the permit is sought; 
(3)  The names of the businesses and, if the business operated under an assumed name, the trade name; and 
(4)  If the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers. 
The notices shall be published within seven (7) days after the application is filed with the director. 
(g)  The director shall cause to be prepared and transmitted to the mayor and the city council, with a copy to the city attorney, a monthly report summarizing all applications submitted under this section, and including the name of the proposed enterprise and the street address of the proposed location. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-28. - Same—Term; renewal. 
Each permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year and shall expire on the anniversary of its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, or surrendered. Each permit shall be subject to renewal as of its expiration date by the filing of a renewal application with the director. Renewal applications must be filed at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration date of the permit that is to be renewed. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-29. - Same—Issuance or denial. 
(a)  Within twenty (20) days of receipt of any application, either original or renewal, the director shall grant or deny the requested permit and give written notice to the applicant as to the decision, unless such time period is extended at the request of the applicant as provided in subsection (d) below. 
(b)  The director shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant's enterprise is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any school, church, public park, or licensed day-care center. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's enterprise to the nearest point on the property line of such school, church, public park, or licensed day-care center. 
(2)  The applicant's enterprise is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any other enterprise for which there is a permit. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's enterprise to the nearest point on the property line of any other enterprise. 
(3)  Fifty (50) per cent or more of the tracts within a circular area, as described herein, are residential in character. The radius of such circular area shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, and the center of such circular area shall correspond the midpoint of a line joining the two (2) most distant points on the boundary of the tract on which the enterprise is located; multifamily tracts shall be counted as multiple residential tracts based upon the tax records acreage of the multifamily tract according to the following formula: each one-eighth acre of land or fraction thereof shall be equivalent to one (1) residential tract. For purposes of this calculation a residential tract or multifamily tract shall be considered to be in the circular area in its entirety if any portion of it lies within the circular area. 
(4)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application. 
(5)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application. 
(6)  The applicant's enterprise is not in compliance with section 20-33 and section 20-34 of this Code. The director may allow any noncompliance with section 20-33 or section 20-34 to be cured during the director's review period established in subsection (d), below, provided that it must be cured before the notice of decision on the permit is issued. 
(7)  The application of the enterprise does not meet any other requirement of this article. 
(8)  The operator has had a permit revoked for the same enterprise within the one-hundred-eighty-day period next preceding the date that the application was filed. 
(9)  The applicant has not demonstrated that the owner of the enterprise owns or holds a lease for the property or the applicable portion thereof upon which the enterprise will be situated or has a legally enforceable right to acquire the same. 
(c)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal application is timely filed as provided in section 20-28 of this Code, the property uses and measurements for the renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the original application for the enterprise was filed. If not timely filed, renewal application shall be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all respects as original applications. 
(d)  In the event that the director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within thirty (30) days of the receipt of its application by the director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with section 20-33 or section 20-34 of this Code. An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the director within fifteen (15) days after he is given notice of such denial. The director's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the director's decision on the issuance of a permit. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing official to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The hearing official shall not have participated in any investigation or decision relating to the denial of the permit. At the hearing, the hearing official shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the director, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(e)  The hearing official shall conduct the hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The hearing official shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the hearing official shall be final subject to the provisions of section 20-39 of this Code. 
(f)  Failure of the director to give timely notice of his action on an application, or failure of the hearing official to timely conduct or give notice of his decision on an appeal from the director's decision, shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of a temporary permit upon written demand therefor filed by the applicant with the director unless the delay resulted from a written request for a delay or deferral by the applicant. Such a temporary permit shall only be valid until the third day after the director gives notice of his action on the application or the hearing official gives notice of his decision on the appeal, as applicable. 
(g)  In any instance in which the applicant's establishment is to be situated within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, as measured hereunder, from another proposed establishment for which a previously filed permit application has been denied, and the previously filed application is still subject to appeals, the director may grant the permit on a conditional basis, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application. A permit so issued may be withdrawn and denied effective upon the third day after notice thereof is given to the operator following the resolution of the appeals on the prior permit. In case of denial, the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal hereunder as if the permit had been denied in the first instance. 
(h)  The provisions of item (2) of subsection (b) of this section, above, shall not be construed to prohibit an enterprise for which there is a permit from relocating to another location situated within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of its existing location, provided that the proposed location complies with all applicable requirements of this article other than its proximity to its own existing enterprise location. An original permit application shall be required to be filed for the proposed relocation, and the director shall conditionally grant the application, if granted, on the stipulation that the permit will not actually be issued until the applicant discontinues operation at its existing location and surrenders the permit for its existing location. Any such relocation must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that the permit is conditionally granted or the conditional grant of the application will become void. Pending the removal of the enterprise to its new location, both the old and new locations shall be deemed to be operating under a permit for the purpose of measurements to locations of other proposed enterprises for which applications may be filed. 
(i)  If any instance in which the proposed enterprise tract description submitted by an applicant pursuant to section 20-27(b)(4) of this Code, above, for a permit reflects a tract or parcel of land that has resulted from a subdivision of property for which compliance with the applicable subdivision requirements of this Code was required, and the director determines that the property has not been lawfully subdivided in accordance therewith, then the director shall cause all measurements and determinations regarding the issuance of the permit to be made on the basis of the parent tract from which the subdivision was made, rather than the subdivided tract. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-30. - Same—Transfer upon change. 
(a)  A permit is personal to the owner(s) and the operator designated in the application holds the permit on the owner(s)' behalf as the owner(s)' agent, provided it may be transferred pursuant to this section. A transfer application must be filed by the tenth day next following any change of the owner(s) or operator designated on the application. In the event that a transfer application is not timely filed, then the permit shall be invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of the enterprise, and any transfer shall require the filing of an original permit application and be subject to the regulations applicable thereto. For purposes of measurements between enterprises under section 20-29(b)(2) of this Code, an establishment for which the permit has become invalid by operation of this section shall be treated as though it had a permit until the permit is revoked pursuant to section 20-31 of this Code. 
(b)  The director shall prescribe a form on which permit transfer applications shall be made. The form shall include a statement under oath that the original application remains correct as previously submitted in all respects except those that are amended hereby. The transfer application shall contain a statement under oath that the individual signing the transfer application has personal knowledge of the information contained therein and that the information is true and correct and shall not be complete unless accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). Transfer applications shall be filed in the same place and at the same time as original applications and the fee shall be payable in the same manner as for original applications, as provided in section 20-27 of this Code. 
(c)  Transfers shall be reviewed, issued and subject to appeal in the same manner as original applications, pursuant to section 20-29 of this code, except that items (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (b) shall not apply, and they shall be issued for the remaining term of the permit to be transferred. 
(d)  No change in ownership of an enterprise or transfer of a permit for an enterprise shall be allowed during the pendency of any administrative proceeding under section 20-31 of this Code, from the time that any request for revocation or suspension has been filed with the hearing official until the hearing official's order is final. Any such transfer or attempted transfer shall confer no rights whatever in the permit for the enterprise to the putative transferee. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-31. - Same—Revocation or suspension. 
(a)  The director shall have the authority to request the revocation of a permit for any one (1) or more of the following reasons: 
(1)  The owner or operator of the permitted enterprise knowingly allowed a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter an enterprise; 
(2)  The permitted enterprise does not conform to the provisions of section 20-33 and section 20-34 of this Code; 
(3)  Three (3) or more cumulative violations of any of the offenses contained in Chapter 21, Chapter 43, Section 22.011, or Section 22.021 of the Texas Penal Code or of the offenses contained in this article or in article III of this chapter have occurred on the premises of the permitted enterprise. These violations must have occurred in a consecutive period of twelve (12) months, and the owner, operator or any manager licensed under article III of this chapter; (i) knowingly allowed such violations to occur; (ii) did not make a reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of such violations; or (iii) should have known that such violations were occurring or did occur; 
(4)  The operator of the permitted enterprise gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the original, renewal or transfer application form; 
(5)  The enterprise has not been open for business for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days, unless due to circumstances beyond the control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all attendant circumstances, to open or reopen the establishment; 
(6)  That there was a change of owner or operator for which a transfer application was not timely filed pursuant to section 20-30 of this Code; or 
(7)  That the permit was erroneously issued in contravention of the criteria of this article. 
(b)  The director shall have sole authority to initiate any action for revocation of a permit. 
(c)  The director shall cause to be prepared and transmitted to the mayor and the city council, with a copy to the city attorney, a monthly report summarizing the number and type of violations set forth under subsection (a) of this section for each permitted enterprise; provided, the director may withhold from such report factual information that may tend to compromise an ongoing investigation. 
(d)  Prior to revocation of a permit, the director shall investigate the grounds alleged to determine whether probable cause for revocation may exist and, if so, shall notify the owner(s) and operator in writing of reasons for the proposed revocation and grant such owner(s) and operator the opportunity to appear before a hearing official to be designated by the mayor and confirmed by the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth under section 20-29 of this Code, at a time and place specified within such notice. The hearing official designated shall not have participated in any investigation of the alleged grounds for the revocation. Such hearing shall be held not less than thirty (30) days after the notice is given. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the director. Such rules shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, crossexamine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. If, after the hearing, the hearing official finds that the permit should be revoked, he shall issue a written order revoking such permit which shall be effective as provided in section 20-39 of this Code. If the hearing official determines, based upon the nature of the violation, that the ends of justice would be served by a suspension in lieu of a revocation, he may suspend the operation of the permit for a period of time to be stated in the order of suspension, not to exceed two (2) months; however, a suspension may not be ordered if the grounds are based upon item (6) or (7) of subsection (a), above. 
(e)  An enterprise shall be treated as having a permit for purposes of measurements under section 20-29(b)(2) of this Code, pending the final disposition of any court action involving judicial review of a permit revocation. An establishment holding a suspended permit shall be treated as having a permit for the purpose of measurements made under section 20-29 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-32. - Other permit provisions. 
(a)  A permit is valid only at the location for which it is issued. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change, deface, or alter a permit. 
(c)  A permit may be canceled upon written request of the owner(s) or operator and surrender of the permit itself to the director. Permits shall be surrendered at the same place and at the same time as provided in section 20-27(a) of this Code. The surrender of a permit shall be effective upon its filing in the office of the captain of the vice division. 
(d)  A permit shall not constitute authorization to operate the enterprise as an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. Each enterprise that also constitutes an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall require an additional permit under article II of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-33. - Exterior portions of enterprises. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of an enterprise to allow the merchandise or activities of the enterprise to be visible from any point outside such enterprise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an enterprise to allow the exterior portions of the enterprise to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an enterprise to allow exterior portions of the enterprise to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall apply to an enterprise if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The enterprise is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the enterprise, are painted the same color as one another or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-34. - Signage. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other city ordinance, or regulation to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of any enterprise or any other person to erect, construct, or maintain any sign for the enterprise other than one (1) primary sign and one (1) secondary sign, as provided herein. 
(b)  Primary signs shall have no more than two (2) display surfaces. Each such display surface shall: 
(1)  Not contain any flashing lights; 
(2)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(3)  Not exceed seventy-five (75) square feet in area; and 
(4)  Not exceed ten (10) feet in height or ten (10) feet in length. 
(c)  Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings or pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only: 
(1)  The name of the enterprise; and/or 
(2)  One (1) or more of the following phrases: 
a.  Adult bookstore. 
b.  Adult movie theatre. 
c.  Adult encounter parlor. 
d.  Adult cabaret. 
e.  Adult lounge. 
f.  Adult novelties. 
g.  Adult entertainment. 
h.  Adult modeling studio. 
(3)  Primary signs for adult movie theatres may contain the additional phrase, "Movie Titles Posted on Premises." 
(d)  Each letter forming a word on a primary sign shall be of a solid color, and each such letter shall be the same print-type, size and color. The background behind such lettering on the display surface of a primary sign shall be of a uniform and solid color. 
(e)  Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface. Such display surface shall: 
(1)  Be a flat plane, rectangular in shape; 
(2)  Not exceed twenty (20) square feet in area; 
(3)  Not exceed five (5) feet in height and four (4) feet in width; and 
(4)  Be affixed or attached to any wall or door of the enterprise. 
(f)  The provisions of item (1) of subsection (c) and subsections (c) and (d) shall also apply to the secondary signs. 
(g)  Any sign located on the premises of a commercial multiunit center containing an enterprise that displays the name, or any portion of the name of the enterprise, any name under which any enterprise was formerly operated on the premises, or that contains any of the terms set forth in item (2) of subsection (c) or any other terminology that is commonly used to identify, or is associated with the presence of a sexually oriented business, shall comply with all restrictions of this section. The intent of this subsection is to prevent the use of signage identifying the commercial multi-tenant center itself from being used as a subterfuge to evade the restrictions on sexually oriented business signs set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-35. - Persons younger than eighteen prohibited from entry; attendant required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to allow a person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age to enter or be on the premises of an enterprise at any time that the enterprise is open for business. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of each enterprise to ensure that an attendant is stationed at each public entrance to the enterprise at all times during such enterprise's regular business hours. It shall be the duty of the attendant to not allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to enter the enterprise. It shall be presumed that an attendant knew a person was under the age of eighteen (18) years unless such attendant asked for and was furnished: 
(1)  A valid operator's, commercial operator's, or chauffeur's driver's license; or 
(2)  A valid personal identification certificate issued by the Texas Department of Public Safety reflecting that such person is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-36. - Notices. 
(a)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the director of any other city office, division, department or other agency under this article to any applicant, operator or owner of an enterprise may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the most recent address as specified in the application for the permit, or transfer application which has been received by the director, or any notice of address change which has been received by the director. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail. In the event that any notice given by mail is returned by the postal service, the director shall cause it to be posted at the principal entrance to the establishment. 
(b)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to the director by any person under this article shall not be deemed given until and unless it is received in the office of the captain of the vice division at the time(s) and in the manner provided for filing of applications in section 20-27(a) of this Code. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each owner who is designated on the permit application and each operator to furnish notice to the director in writing of any change of residence or mailing address. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-37. - Penalty. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code, as amended. Each day any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-38. - Authority to file suit. 
The city attorney is hereby authorized to file suit to enjoin the violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-39. - Judicial review. 
(a)  Any owner, operator, or applicant of an enterprise who is aggrieved by a decision that denies, suspends, or revokes a permit, and who has complied fully and timely with all applicable provisions pertaining to appeals of decisions in this article may seek appropriate judicial relief by writ of mandamus or other available remedy in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  The person aggrieved by the decision of the city may seek judicial review of such decision immediately following the decision. The city attorney shall cooperate with the aggrieved party in seeking an expedited disposition of the matter. 
(c)  The decision of the hearing official suspending or revoking permit under section 20-31 of this Code shall be final as of the date written notice of the hearing official's decision is given to the owner or operator of the enterprise, but in order to afford the permit holder an opportunity to seek judicial review shall not be effective for the purposes of enforcement of the decision by the director until the twentieth day following such notice. If the permit holder initiates litigation for the purpose of seeking judicial review within the twenty-day period, then the decision shall not be effective for purposes of enforcement prior to the sixtieth day following such notice. This subsection shall apply only to a decision sustaining the suspension or revocation of a permit for an existing enterprise, and shall not apply to a decision sustaining the denial of an initial application for a proposed enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-40. - Access, visibility, lighting, supervision. 
Terms in this section shall be governed by the definitions in section 20-41 of this Code. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any owners, operator or manager of any enterprise to permit any employee to provide any entertainment to any customer in any separate area within an enterprise to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier regardless of whether entry to such separate area is by invitation, admission fee, club membership fee or any form of gratuity or consideration. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of an enterprise to allow immediate access by any police officer, city fire department official or health officer to any portion of the premises of the enterprise upon request for purpose of inspection of such premises for compliance with this article, or any other applicable law. 
(3)  Each enterprise shall be equipped with lighting fixtures or sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at four (4) feet above floor level. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of an enterprise to ensure that at least one (1) on-site manager is on duty on the premises at all times during which the enterprise is open for business or during which customers are on the premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of any owner, operator or manager of an enterprise to ensure that all persons acting as managers or entertainers on the premises hold [sic] and under article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
DIVISION 2. - EMPLOYEE CONDUCT AND OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 20-41. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning. 
Conduct any business in an enterprise. Any person who does any one (1) or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business in an enterprise: 
(1)  Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the premises of the enterprise where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the enterprise or the activities of the premises of the enterprise; 
(2)  Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the premises of the enterprise; 
(3)  Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the premises of the enterprise; 
(4)  Acts as a door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons into the premises of the enterprise; or 
(5)  Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the premises of the enterprise. 
Customer. Any person who: 
(1)  Is allowed to enter an enterprise or any portion of an enterprise in return for the payment of an admission fee, membership fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; 
(2)  Enters an enterprise or any portion of an enterprise and purchases, rents or otherwise partakes of any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered therein; or 
(3)  Is a member of and on the premises of an enterprise operating as a private or membership club or an enterprise that reserves any portion of the premises of the enterprise as a private or membership club. 
Director. The chief of police and such employee(s) of the police department as he may designate to perform the duties of the director under this article. 
Employee. Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of an enterprise, works in or about an enterprise or who conducts any business in an enterprise and who receives or has the expectation of receiving any compensation from the operator, or customers of the enterprise. By way of example, rather than limitation, the term includes the operator and other management personnel, clerks, dancers, models and other entertainers, food and beverage preparation and service personnel, door persons, bouncers, and cashiers. It is expressly intended that this definition cover not only conventional employer-employee relationships but also independent contractor relationships, agency relationships, and any other scheme or system whereby the employee has an expectation of receiving compensation, tips, or other benefits from the enterprise or its customers in exchange for services performed. 
Enterprise. An adult bookstore, adult cabaret, adult encounter parlor, adult lounge, adult modeling studio, adult movie theatre or any establishment whose primary business is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its customers, and which is distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "enterprise" shall include any premises for which a permit is required under either or both of articles II and III of this chapter. However, the term "enterprise" shall not be construed to include: 
(1)  Any business operated by or employing licensed psychologists, licensed physical therapists, licensed athletic trainers, licensed cosmetologists, or licensed barbers performing functions authorized under the licenses held; 
(2)  Any business operated by or employing licensed physicians or licensed chiropractors engaged in practicing the healing arts; or 
(3)  Any retail establishment whose major business is the offering of wearing apparel for sale to customers. 
Entertainer. Any employee of an enterprise who performs or engages in entertainment. 
Entertainment. Any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, fashion show, modeling performance, pantomime, role playing, encounter session, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease that involves the display or exposure of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. The term "entertainment" shall include any employee or entertainer exposing and specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities whatever in the presence of customers. 
Manager. Any person who supervises, directs or manages any employee of an enterprise or any other person who conducts any business in an enterprise with respect to any activity conducted on the premises of the enterprise, including any "on-site manager." 
On-site manager. A person charged by an owner or operator of an enterprise with the responsibility for direct supervision of the operation of the enterprise and with monitoring and observing all areas of the enterprise to which customers are admitted at all times during which the enterprise is open for business or customers are on the premises of the enterprise. 
Operator. The manager or other natural person principally in charge of an enterprise. 
Owner or owners. The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all general partners if a partnership, or the corporation if a corporation. 
Permit. A current, valid permit issued by the director pursuant to the terms of this article. 
Separate area. Any portion of the interior of an enterprise separated from any other portion of an enterprise by any wall, partition or other divider. 
Specified anatomical areas: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Buttocks; 
c.  Female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities: 
(1)  Human genitals in a discernible state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair, buttock or female breast or breasts; 
(4)  Any combination of the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-42. - Cumulative. 
The provisions of this article are expressly made cumulative of other applicable laws including, without limitation, articles II and III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS; EMPLOYEES 
 
Sec. 20-43. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person who does not hold a permit to act as an entertainer or a manager of or in an enterprise. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator and owners of each enterprise to ensure that no person acts as an entertainer or manager of or in the enterprise unless that person holds a permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-44. - Issuance of permits. 
(a)  Any person who desires to obtain an original or renewal permit shall make application to the director in person at the offices of the chief of police between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 p.m., Monday, Wednesday or Friday, city observed holidays excepted. The application shall be made under oath upon a form prescribed by the director and shall include: 
(1)  Proof of the date of birth of the applicant and the identity of the applicant, including at least one photographic identity card issued by a governmental agency; 
(2)  A list of any criminal charges pending, convictions, and time of service in jail or prison as related to any felony or misdemeanor; and 
(3)  Two (2) passport-type photographs of the applicant of a size specified by the director, which shall become part of the photographic identity cards if a permit is issued. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable processing fee of twenty-nine dollars ($29.00). Each applicant shall be required to provide fingerprints to be used to verify the applicant's identity and criminal history information. Each applicant shall sign a waiver and authorization form authorizing the director to request on behalf of the applicant criminal history reports from the Texas Department of Public Safety and any appropriate federal agency. 
(c)  The director shall issue the permit within ten (10) days from the date of filing of the application unless he finds that the applicant has been convicted of or spent time in jail or prison for felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude offense. If the application is not granted, then the applicant shall be mailed notice of the grounds and or their right to provide evidence and request a hearing within ten (10) days from the date of filing of the application. 
(d)  Any applicant whose application is denied and who requests a hearing on the denial shall be granted a hearing within ten (10) days following the receipt of the request by the vice division of the police department. If the hearing committee rules against the applicant, then the applicant shall be given notice of the right to seek an injunction or judicial review of the decision as provided in article 6252-13d of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
(e)  In the event that the director fails to issue or deny a permit application within the time specified in subsection (c) or to provide a hearing within the time specified in subsection (e), then the applicant shall, upon written request, be immediately issued a temporary permit which shall be valid until the third day after the applicant is given notice of the decision of director or the hearing committee. 
(f)  No permit application shall be accepted nor shall a permit be issued to any person who does not provide proof that he is at least eighteen (18) years old. Any permit issued by virtue of any misrepresentation or error to any person under age eighteen (18) shall be void. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 3-24-98; Ord. No. 99-194, § 2, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 20-45. - Term, transfer, amendment. 
(a)  A permit is valid for two (2) years from the date of its issuance. 
(b)  A permit is personal to the named permit holder and is not valid for use by any other person. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall notify the chief of police of the police department of his new address within ten (10) days following any change of his address. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-46. - Revocation. 
In the event that the director has reasonable grounds to believe that any permit holder has given materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the original or renewal application, or has been convicted of, or spent time in jail or prison for the offense of theft, fraud, or any felony within the meaning of the criminal laws of this state, or has submitted an incomplete application, or for an offense as specified in section 20-44, then the director may revoke the permit following a notice of the grounds and a hearing as provided in section 20-44 of this Code. In the event that the hearing committee determines that the permit should be revoked, then it shall issue its final decree to be effective in thirty (30) days following the mailing of notice of the decree to the permit holder in order to allow the permit holder an opportunity before the permit must be surrendered to seek an injunction or judicial review of the decision as authorized in article 6252-13d of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 3-24-98; Ord. No. 99-194, § 2, 10-12-99)  
DIVISION 4. - CONDUCT OF ENTERTAINERS 
 
Sec. 20-47. - Conduct of employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any entertainer to touch a customer or the clothing of a customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any entertainer to approach closer than three (3) feet to any customer while engaging in entertainment or while exposing any specified anatomical areas or engaging in any specified sexual activities. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any employee to engage in entertainment or to expose any specified anatomical areas or engage in any specified sexual activities in the presence of a customer in any separate area within an enterprise to which entry or access is blocked or obscured by any door, curtain or other barrier separating entry to such area from any other area of the enterprise. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
DIVISION 5. - PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 20-48. - Penalties. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Secs. 20-49—20-53. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ARCADES AND ADULT MINI-THEATRES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 20-54. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed, unless the context of their use clearly indicates another meaning: 
Adult arcade shall mean any premises that is subject to regulation under Chapter 243 of the Local Government Code, as amended, to which members of the public or members of any club, group or association are admitted and permitted to use one (1) or more arcade devices. 
Arcade device shall mean any coin- or slug-operated or electronically or mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or effectuates the dispensing of entertainment, that is intended for the viewing of five (5) or fewer persons in exchange for any payment of any consideration. 
Adult mini-theatre shall mean any premises that is subject to regulation under Chapter 243 of the Local Government Code as amended, to which members of the public or members of any club, group or association are admitted and permitted to use one or more "mini-theatre devices." 
Entertainment shall mean: 
(1)  Any live exhibition, display or performance; 
(2)  Any still picture(s) or movie picture(s), whether mechanically, electrically or electronically displayed; or 
(3)  Any combination of the foregoing, in which the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities are depicted. 
Individual shall mean only a natural person. 
Mini-theatre device shall mean any coin or slug-operated or electrically or electronically or mechanically controlled machine or device that dispenses or effectuates the dispensing of entertainment, that is intended for the viewing of more than five (5) persons but less than one hundred (100) persons in exchange for any payment of any consideration. The term "mini-theatre device" shall not include any conventional motion picture screen or projection area designed to be viewed in a room containing tiers or rows of seats with a viewer seating capacity of one hundred (100) or more persons. 
Operator shall mean the individual who is principally in charge of the management of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
Owner or owners shall mean the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all general partners if a partnership, or the corporation and all officers, directors, and persons holding fifty (50) per cent or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. 
Permit shall mean a current, valid permit issued by the police chief under this article to an operator for an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
Police chief shall mean the chief of police and any employee(s) of the police department assigned by him to perform the duties prescribed in this article. 
Premises shall mean a building; provided, that if a building has been physically divided into separate units that each have their own individual means of ingress or egress to the exterior of the building and which are offered by lease or otherwise for separate use and control, then it shall refer to each such separate unit. 
Specified anatomical areas shall mean: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region or pubic hair; 
b.  Buttock; 
c.  Female breast or breasts or any portion thereof that is situated below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
d.  Any combination of the foregoing; or 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly erect state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall mean: 
(1)  Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal; 
(2)  Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy; 
(3)  Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions, buttock or female breast; or 
(4)  Any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-55. - Remedial effect. 
The provisions of this article are remedial and they shall, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, be construed to apply to all adult arcades or adult mini-theatres, both now existing and hereafter established. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-56. - Supplemental effect. 
The provisions of this article are supplemental and shall be cumulative with all other laws and ordinances applicable in any manner to an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre or to any owner or operator thereof. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-57. - Penalty for article violations. 
(a)  The violation of any provision of this article, including the doing of anything which is herein prohibited or declared to be unlawful or the failure to do anything or perform any duty which is required herein, shall be punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Local Government Code. Each day that any violation shall continue shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
(b)  The revocation or suspension of any permit shall not prohibit the imposition of a criminal penalty, and the imposition of a criminal penalty shall not prevent the revocation or suspension of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-58. - Notices. 
(a)  Any notice required or permitted to be given by the police chief or any other city officer or agency under this article to any applicant, operator or owner of an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre may be given either by personal delivery or by certified United States mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the most current address as specified in the application for the permit, or any amendment thereof which has been received by the police chief. Notices mailed as above shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States mail and shall be presumed to have been received on the third regular postal delivery day thereafter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any notice or order posted upon any adult arcade or adult mini-theatre pursuant to this article, except that a notice of a hearing under division 4 may be removed after the hearing has been conducted. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the actor had the prior express consent of the police chief to remove the notice or order. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 
 
Sec. 20-59. - Required; posting. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or conduct any business in an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre unless there is a permit for the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, operate, manage or conduct any business in an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre unless the permit is posted at the place designated therefor on the diagram submitted with or adopted in the permit application pursuant to section 20-60(c) of this Code and in such a manner that it is conspicuous to patrons of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(c)  In any prosecution under subsection (a), above, it shall be presumed that there was no permit at the time of the alleged offense, unless a permit was then posted as provided in subsection (b), above. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-60. - Application. 
(a)  To obtain a permit, whether initial or renewal, the intended operator of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall file an application with the police chief on a form prescribed by the police chief for that purpose. On the application, the applicant shall set forth the following information: 
(1)  The full name of the intended operator, his residence street address, and mailing address if different, and his driver's license or Texas Department of Public Safety personal identification number. 
(2)  The name of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(3)  The street address and real property description of the tract or parcel of land upon which the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre will be located. 
(4)  The names, residence street addresses, and mailing addresses if different, of the owners of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre and the type of business entity (proprietorship, partnership or corporation). 
(5)  The name, mailing address and telephone number of a person who will act as the applicant's liaison with the police chief for purposes of the permit inspection required under section 20-61 of this Code. Such person must be available to come to the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre upon one (1) hour's notice given between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday, holidays excepted, upon request by the police chief to the telephone number designated during the time that the license application is pending hereunder and must be authorized to act for the applicant in matters relating to the inspection of the premises during the time that the license application is pending hereunder. 
(b)  The application shall contain the following statement: 
"I represent that I have personal knowledge of all statements made in this application and all information furnished herewith and that all of the same is true and correct." 
(c)  The application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre showing a plan thereof specifying the location of one (1) or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. Such diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be posted pursuant to section 20-59(b) of this Code, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The police chief shall waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(d)  The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant. 
(e)  The application shall not be complete unless it is accompanied by a nonrefundable adult arcade or adult mini-theatre permit fee of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). 
(f)  Applications and other notices required or permitted to be given to the police chief under this article must be submitted by hand delivery by the intended operator to the office of captain of the chief of police, during regular working hours 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, city holidays excepted. 
(g)  A separate permit shall be required for each adult arcade or adult mini-theatre, and a permit shall only be valid for the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre described in the application. 
(h)  Where a premises is so configured and operated as to constitute both an adult arcade and an adult mini-theatre, then the operator may apply for and obtain a combined permit authorizing operation as both an adult arcade and an adult mini-theatre. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-61. - Issuance or denial by police chief. 
(a)  The police chief shall complete the actions required in this section resulting in the giving of his notice of the issuance or denial of the permit by the twentieth day next following the date of his receipt of a completed application. The foregoing time period may be extended to the thirtieth day by the police chief upon notice to the applicant that the police chief has been unable, after diligent effort, to schedule the conduct of any required inspections of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre with the liaison person designated therefor in the application by the nineteenth day next following the date of his receipt of the application. The time period may also be extended to a date mutually agreeable to the police chief and the applicant or his inspection liaison person if the applicant or liaison person has requested that any inspection or reinspection be delayed for the applicant's convenience. Any extensions and the basis therefor shall be documented in the police chief's file regarding the application. 
(b)  The police chief shall grant the permit unless: 
(1)  After a permit issuance inspection of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre, or reinspection if duly requested, it is found that the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre does not comply with the view or lighting requirements of division 3 of this article; 
(2)  The police chief is unable to schedule and conduct a permit issuance inspection of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre by contacting the liaison person at the telephone number designated in the application; or 
(3)  The operator has had a permit revoked for the same adult arcade or adult mini-theatre within the one-hundred-eighty-day period next preceding the date that the application was filed. 
(c)  No fee shall be imposed for the initial inspection of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre, unless subject to the additional special inspection fee provided below. A reinspection to verify the correction of deficiencies noted on a previous inspection shall only be made upon written request of the applicant or his designated liaison person and prior payment of a nonrefundable reinspection fee of sixty dollars ($60.00). Inspections at an applicant's specially requested times or outside the regular working hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., on Monday through Friday, whether on an initial or reinspection basis, will be subject to prior payment of a nonrefundable and additional special inspection fee of thirty dollars ($30.00), per inspection. 
(d)  Permits that are awarded shall be furnished to the operator. If a permit is denied, then a notice thereof setting forth the specific reason(s) therefor shall be given to the applicant and the owners. Permits and notices of denial may be given as provided in section 20-58 of this Code. 
(e)  Failure of the police chief to give timely notice of his action on an application within the limitation of time specified in subsection (a) or any extension authorized pursuant thereto shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of a temporary permit upon written demand therefor filed by the applicant with the police chief. Such a temporary permit shall only be valid until the third regular postal delivery day after the police chief gives notice of his action on the application pursuant to subsection (d), above. 
(f)  The fees prescribed in this article shall only be payable by certified check, cashier's check or money order. If payment thereon is not honored, the police chief may suspend the permit, if issued, until payment is made by written notice to the operator. 
(g)  Within twenty (20) days of receipt of any application, either original or renewal, the director shall grant or deny the requested permit and give written notice to applicant as to the decision, unless such time period is extended at the request of the applicant as provided in subsection (i) below. 
(h)  The director shall issue a permit to the applicant unless one (1) or more of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  The applicant's arcade/theatre is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any school, church, public park, or licensed day-care center. Measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, or objects from the nearest point on the property line of the applicant's arcade/theatre to the nearest point on the property line of such school, church, public park, or licensed day-care center. 
(2)  The applicant's arcade/theatre is located within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of any other arcade/theatre for which there is a permit. Measurements shall be made in a straight line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest point on the property line of any other arcade/theatre. 
(3)  Fifty (50) per cent or more of the tracts within a circular area, as described herein, are residential in character. The radius of such circular area shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, and the center of such circular area shall correspond the midpoint of a line joining the two (2) most distant points on the boundary of the tract on which the arcade/theater is located; multifamily tracts shall be counted as multiple residential tracts based upon the tax records acreage of the multifamily tract according to the following formula: each one-eighth ( 1/8 ) acre of land or fraction thereof shall be equivalent to one (1) residential tract. For purposes of this calculation, a residential tract or multifamily tract shall be considered to be in the circular area in its entirety if any portion of it lies within the circular area. 
(4)  The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on the application; 
(5)  The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application; 
(6)  If the applicant's arcade/theatre is not in compliance with sections 20-64, 20-68, 20-68.1, and 20-68.2 of this code, the director may allow any non-compliance with sections 20-64, 20-68, 20-68.1, and 20-68.2 to be cured during the director's review period, provided that it must be cured before the notice of decision on the permit is issued. 
(i)  In the event that the director determines that an applicant is not eligible for a permit, the applicant shall be given notice in writing of the denial within thirty (30) days of the receipt of its application by the director, provided that the applicant may request, in writing, that such period be extended for an additional period of not more than ten (10) days at any time before the notice is issued in order to make modifications necessary to comply with section 20-64, section 20-68, and section 20-68.1, and section 20-68.2 of this code. An applicant may appeal the decision of the director regarding such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the director within fifteen (15) days after he is given notice of such denial. The director's decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the director's decision on the issuance of a permit. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set out the grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing official to be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. The hearing official shall not have participated in any investigation or decision relating to the denial of the permit. At the hearing, the hearing official shall receive oral and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted under rules issued by the director, which shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be represented by legal counsel. 
(j)  The hearing official shall conduct the hearing within thirty (30) days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the applicant requests an extension in writing. The hearing official shall render a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within fifteen (15) days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the hearing official shall be final, subject to the provisions of section 20-39 of this code. 
(k)  Failure of the director to give timely notice of his action on an application or failure of the hearing official to timely conduct or give notice of his decision on an appeal from the director's decision, shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of a temporary permit upon written demand therefore filed by the applicant with the director unless the delay resulted from a written request for a delay or deferral by the applicant. Such a temporary permit shall only be valid until the third day after the director gives notice of his action on the application or the hearing official gives notice of his action on the application or the hearing official gives notice of his decision on the appeal, as applicable. 
(l)  In any instance in which the applicant's establishment is to be situated within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet, as measured hereunder, from another proposed establishment for which a previously filed permit application has been denied, and the previous application is still subject to appeals, the director may grant the permit on a conditional basis, subject to the outcome of the appeals on the previous application. A permit so issued may be withdrawn and denied effective upon the third day after notice thereof is given to the operator following the resolution of the appeals on the prior permit. In case of denial, the applicant shall have the same rights of appeal hereunder as if the permit had been denied in the first instance. 
(m)  The provisions of item (2) of subsection (b) of this section, above, shall not be construed to prohibit an enterprise for which there is a permit from relocating to another location situated within one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet of its existing location, provided that the proposed location complies with all applicable requirements of this article other than its proximity to its own existing enterprise location. An original permit application shall be required to be filed for the proposed relocation, and the director shall conditionally grant the application, if granted, on the stipulation that the permit will not actually be issued until the applicant discontinues operation at its existing location and surrenders the permit for its existing location. Any such relocation must be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date that the permit is conditionally granted or the conditional grant of the application will become void. Pending the removal of the enterprise to its new location, both the old and new locations shall be deemed to be operating under a permit for the purpose of measurements to locations of other proposed enterprises for which applications may be filed. 
(n)  If any instance in which the proposed enterprise tract description submitted by an applicant pursuant to section 20-60 (a) (3) of this code, above, for a permit reflects a tract or parcel of land that has resulted from a subdivision of property for which compliance with the applicable subdivision requirements of this code was required, and the director determines that the property has not been lawfully subdivided in accordance therewith, then the director shall cause all measurements and determinations regarding the issuance of the permit to be made on the basis of the parent tract from which the subdivision was made, rather than the subdivided tract. 
(o)  Property uses and distances for original applications shall be determined as of the time that the application is filed. If a renewal application is timely filed as provided in section 20-62 of this code, the property uses and measurements for the renewal application shall be determined as of the time that the original application for the arcade/theatre was filed. If not timely filed, renewal applications shall be subject to the same fees and shall be treated in the same manner in all respects as original applications. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 20-62. - Term. 
Each permit shall be valid for a period of one (1) year and shall expire on the anniversary of its date of issuance, unless sooner revoked, or surrendered. Each permit shall be subject to renewal as of its expiration date by the filing of a renewal application with the police chief. Renewal applications must be filed at least twenty (20) days prior to the expiration date of the permit that is to be renewed and shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-63. - Transfer upon change. 
(a)  A permit shall expire on the tenth day next following any of the following events: 
(1)  A change of the mailing address of the operator or owners of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre; or 
(2)  Any change of the operators or owners of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre; 
unless the operator has obtained a permit transfer/amendment for such changes. 
(b)  The police chief shall prescribe a form on which permit transfer/amendment applications must be made and it shall include a statement under oath that: 
"The original application remains correct as originally submitted and previously amended in all respects except those which are amended hereby." 
The transfer/amendment application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the operator and shall not be complete unless accompanied by a nonrefundable transfer/amendment fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00). The police chief shall cause the amendment or transfer to be issued upon the receipt of a completed application. Applications shall be filed in the manner specified in section 20-60(f) of this Code. 
(c)  Any change in the information specified in subsection 20.60(a) of this Code or any change in the identity or telephone number of the person designated as the inspection liaison or in the plans for the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre as related to a permit application which is pending issuance under section 20-61 of this Code shall be reported in the same manner to the police chief without delay and shall be accompanied by the same fee as specified in subsection (b) of this section. The filing of an amendment to an application which is pending issuance shall have the effect of causing all time periods set forth in section 20-61(a) of this Code to recommence as of the date the police chief receives the amendment. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-64. - Alteration of adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(a)  A permit shall only extend to the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre in the configuration described in the application and the plans submitted with or adopted therein. If an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre remains open during alterations or expansions, then it shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no patron is permitted to use arcade devices or mini-theatre devices situated within any portion of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre which has been altered or added by any alteration or expansion of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre until a new permit has been obtained on the basis of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre as reconfigured by the work. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of an arcade/theatre to allow the merchandise or activities of the arcade/theatre to be visible from any point outside such arcade/theatre. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of an arcade/theatre to allow the exterior portions of the arcade/theatre to have flashing lights or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this article. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of an arcade/theatre to allow exterior portions of the business to be painted any color other than a single achromatic color. This provision shall apply to an arcade/theatre unless the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The arcade/theatre is a part of a commercial multi-unit center; and 
(2)  The exterior portions of each individual unit in the commercial multi-unit center, including the exterior portions of the arcade/theatre, are painted the same color as one another, or are painted in such a way so as to be a component of the overall architectural style or pattern of the commercial multi-unit center. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to require the painting of an otherwise unpainted exterior portion of an arcade/theatre. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 98-51, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 20-65. - Persons on duty during operation. 
It shall be the duty of the owners and operator of each adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to ensure that at least one (1) person who is charged with the responsibility for the operation of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre is on duty at the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre and situated in each manager's station designated pursuant to section 20-60(c) of this Code at all times that any patron is present in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-66. - Conduct in adult arcades or adult mini-theatres. 
It shall be unlawful for the owners or operator and it shall also be unlawful for any agent or employee present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to knowingly allow or permit any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, indecent exposure, lewd conduct or masturbation to occur in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre or to knowingly allow or permit the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to be used as a place in which solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy or oral copulation occur. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-67. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any applicant, operator or owner who is aggrieved by any decision of the police chief relating to his duties and authority under this division in the issuance of permits shall be entitled to a hearing to be conducted in the same manner specified in division 4 of this article for permit revocations, except that the grounds considered in the hearing shall be as applicable under this article; provided, that a written notice of the request for the hearing setting forth the grounds must be received by the police chief within fifteen (15) days from the date that notice of the action complained of is given to the hearing applicant. The applicant, owner or operator shall be entitled to three (3) days' notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  Upon receipt of an appeal, the police chief shall refer the matter to the hearing committee for scheduling. If it will not be possible to hear and resolve the appeal within ten (10) days after the date it was received by the police chief, then the police chief shall issue a temporary permit until the matter can be heard. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 99-194, § 1, 10-12-99)  
DIVISION 3. - ADULT ARCADE, ADULT MINI-THEATRE DESIGN 
 
Sec. 20-68. - View from manager's station. 
(a)  If an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre has one (1) manager's station designated pursuant to section 20-60(c) of this Code, then the interior of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of every area of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from that manager's station. If an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre has two (2) or more manager's stations designated pursuant to section 20-60(c) of this Code, then the interior of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one (1) of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre, to ensure that the view area specified in subsection (a) remains unobstructed by any merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times that any patron is present in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the plan filed pursuant to section 20-60(c) of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-68.1. - Wall penetrations. 
(a)  In addition to any other requirements of this article, no adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be configured in such a manner as to have any opening in any partition, screen, wall or other barrier that separates viewing areas for arcade devices or adult mini-theatre devices from other viewing areas for arcade devices or adult mini-theatre devices. This provision shall not apply to conduits for plumbing, heating, air conditioning, ventilation or electrical service, provided that such conduits shall be so screened or otherwise configured as to prevent their use as openings that would permit any portion of a human body to penetrate the wall or barrier separating viewing areas. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to ensure that the premises is monitored to assure that no openings are allowed to exist in violation of subsection (a), above, and to ensure that no patron is allowed access to any portion of the premises where any opening exists in violation of subsection (a), above, until the opening has been repaired. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-68.2. - Lighting. 
(a)  Each adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be equipped with lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at four (4) feet above the floor level. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents and employees present in an adult arcade to ensure that the illumination described in subsection (a), above, is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
DIVISION 4. - PERMIT REVOCATION 
 
Sec. 20-69. - Grounds. 
(a)  A permit for an adult arcade or adult mini-theatre may be revoked as provided in this division after a hearing conducted by a hearing committee appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council if the hearing committee finds from a preponderance of the evidence adduced at such hearing that: 
(1)  The configuration or lighting equipment of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre has been changed so that it is no longer in compliance with the view area lighting or wall penetration requirements of division 3 of this article; 
(2)  That a cumulative total of four (4) or more violations of any of sections 20-65, 20-66, 20-68(b) or 20-68.1(b) has occurred with the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre in a consecutive period of six (6) months; or 
(3)  That the operator of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre has knowingly allowed or permitted any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, indecent exposure, lewd conduct or masturbation to occur in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre or has knowingly allowed or permitted the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to be used as a place in which solicitation for sexual intercourse, sodomy, or oral copulation occur. Knowledge of such activities shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal by the operator, in any instance where there have been convictions in a court of original jurisdiction for four (4) or more offenses arising on separate occasions in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre and relating to the above activities within a continuous period of one (1) year. The appeal of a conviction shall not prevent its consideration, unless and until it is reversed or set aside, and a disposition by deferred adjudication shall be considered in the same manner as a conviction. 
(b)  The police chief shall not request a hearing by the hearing committee on any alleged grounds for revocation until he has caused an investigation to be made thereupon and determined that grounds for revocation may, in probability of fact, exist. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 99-194, § 2, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 20-69.1. - Notice of hearing. 
(a)  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date set for the revocation hearing by the hearing committee, the operator of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre shall be given a written notice by the police chief which shall set forth: 
(1)  The grounds upon which the police chief will seek revocation of the permit; 
(2)  That a hearing has been scheduled thereon before the hearing committee and the time, date and place of the hearing; and 
(3)  That the operator and owners may appear, may be represented by counsel, may present evidence and may cross examine witnesses presented by the police chief. 
(b)  The foregoing notices shall be given as provided in section 20-58 of this Code. Additionally, a copy thereof shall be posted at each public entrance to the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre upon the door and the notice shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, both to be done one (1) time at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 99-194, § 2, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 20-69.2. - Hearing committee. 
The hearing committee shall consist of three (3) members and two (2) alternates appointed by the mayor and confirmed by city council. Only evidence presented at the hearing may be considered and the burden of proof shall be on the police chief. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 99-194, § 1, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 20-69.3. - Order of the hearing committee. 
The hearing committee shall announce their decision by written order. If, after the hearing, the committee finds that the permit should be revoked, the committee shall issue a written order revoking such permit. If the hearing committee determines, based upon the nature of the violation, that the ends of justice would be served by a suspension in lieu of a revocation, the hearing committee may suspend the operation of the permit for a period of time to be stated in the order of suspension, not to exceed two (2) months. Notice of the decision shall be given to the operator, owners, and any other persons appearing at the hearing and claiming an interest in the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre by providing each a copy of the order in the manner specified in section 20-58 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97; Ord. No. 99-194, § 1, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 20-69.4. - Posting, removal of permit, discontinuation of use as adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(a)  If the permit is revoked or suspended, the police chief shall also post a copy of the order at each public entrance of the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre upon the door and shall remove the permit from the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for the operator, any owner or any agent or employee of the operator or any other person upon the adult arcade or adult mini-theatre to refuse to surrender the permit after notice that it has been suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-69.5. - Judicial review. 
The procedures set forth under section 20-39 of this Code shall apply to denials, suspensions and revocations of permits for adult arcades and adult mini-theatres under this article. 
(Ord. No. 97-58, § 2, 3-25-97)  
Sec. 20-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUNKED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-126, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed Art. IV, §§ 20-71—20-80, which pertained to junked vehicles and derived from Ord. No. 82-305, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1982 and Ord. No. 85-191, §§ 1, 2, adopted Sept. 24, 1985. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 90-126 enacted provisions designated as a new Art. IV, §§ 20-71—20-79, to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 7; junk and secondhand goods, Ch. 17; junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, § 17-16 et seq.; disposition of unclaimed property in possession of police department, § 30-49 et seq.; removal or impoundment of parked or standing vehicles, § 36-182. 
 
Sec. 20-71. - Short title. 
This article shall be titled as the "Pasadena Junked Vehicle Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 20-72. - Definitions. 
As used in this article: 
Antique auto means a passenger car or truck that is at least twenty-five (25) years old. 
Collector means the owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires, trades or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore, preserve and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
Demolisher means a person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle. 
Junked vehicle: 
(a)  In this article, "junked vehicle" means a vehicle that: 
(1)  Is self-propelled; and 
(2)  Is: 
(A)  Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or 
(B)  Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than: 
i.  Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or 
ii.  Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property. 
(b)  For purposes of this article, "junked vehicle" includes a motor vehicle, aircraft, or watercraft. This article applies only to: 
(1)  A motor vehicle that displays an expired license plate or does not display a license plate; 
(2)  An aircraft that does not have lawfully printed on the aircraft an unexpired federal aircraft identification number registered under Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47; or 
(3)  A watercraft that: 
(A)  Does not have lawfully on board an unexpired certificate of number; and 
(B)  Is not a watercraft described by Section 31.055, Parks and Wildlife Code. 
Motor vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in Subchapter A of Chapter 501, Texas Transportation Code, Certificate of Title Act: 
(1)  Any motor driven or propelled vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state; 
(2)  A trailer or semi-trailer, other than manufactured housing, that has a gross vehicle weight of four thousand (4,000) pounds; 
(3)  A travel trailer; 
(4)  An all-terrain vehicle or a recreational off-highway vehicle, as those terms are defined by Section 502.001 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, designed by the manufacturer for off-highway use that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state; or 
(5)  A motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped that is not required to be registered under the laws of this state. 
Special interest vehicle means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 03-252, § 1, 12-23-03; Ord. No. 07-355, § 1, 12-18-07; Ord. No. 15-034, § 1, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 20-73. - Junked vehicle declared public nuisance. 
(a)  A junked vehicle, including a part of a junked vehicle, that is visible at any time of the year from a public place or public right-of-way, is detrimental to the safety and welfare of the public, tends to reduce the value of private property, invites vandalism, creates a fire hazard, is an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and is detrimental to the economic welfare of the city by producing urban blight adverse to the maintenance and continuing development of the city and is a public nuisance. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if that person maintains a public nuisance as determined under this section. 
(c)  A person who commits an offense under this section is, on conviction, subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). On conviction, the court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 15-034, § 2, 4-21-15)  
Sec. 20-74. - Investigation. 
The code compliance officer, or his designated representative, may enter upon private property in order to determine whether a public nuisance exists under section 20-73 and for the purposes specified in this article's procedures to examine a vehicle or vehicle part, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle, and remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part that constitutes a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 20-75. - Procedures for abatement of public nuisance. 
The city council hereby establishes the following procedures for the abatement of a public nuisance, as defined in section 20-73 above, from private property, public property, or public rights-of-way as authorized by Chapter 683, Subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code, and amendments thereto. 
(1)  Administration. 
a.  The code compliance officer of the Code Enforcement department is hereby authorized to administer the procedures set forth in this article. 
b.  The judge of the municipal court is hereby designated the official of the city authorized to preside over all public hearings herein provided and to issue orders necessary to enforce the procedures set forth in this article. 
c.  The procedures in this article must be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part from property may be by any duly authorized person. 
(2)  Notice provisions for a public nuisance on private or public property. For a public nuisance on public or private property, the code compliance officer must give not less than ten (10) days' written notice of the nature of the public nuisance which notice shall state: 
a.  The nature of the public nuisance on private property; 
b.  That the nuisance must be removed and abated not later than the 10th day after the date on which the notice was personally delivered or mailed; and 
c.  That a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. 
1.  The notice must be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a five-day return requested, or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service to: 
(a)  The last known registered owner of the nuisance; 
(b)  Each lienholder of record of the nuisance; and 
(c)  The owner or occupant of: 
(1)  The property on which the nuisance is located; or 
(2)  If the nuisance is located on a public right-of-way, the property adjacent to the right-of-way. 
If notice is returned undelivered by the United States Postal Service, action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not earlier than the 11 th day after the date of the return. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the nuisance is unknown, notice may be placed on the nuisance, or if the owner is located, personally delivered. 
(3)  Reconstruction of junked vehicle. Any junked vehicle which has been removed under the terms of this article shall not be reconstructed or made operable. 
(4)  Public hearing. A hearing must be held not earlier than the 11 th day after the date of the service of notice, before the judge of the municipal court of the city, if such hearing is requested by the person who receives notice of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, any lienholder of record, the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the vehicle is located. A request for hearing under this section must be made before the expiration of the ten-day period after the date on which the notice described in section 20-75(2) of this article, was personally delivered or mailed. A request for hearing under this section must be made in writing. 
(5)  Court order. At the conclusion of a public hearing under subsection (6) above, the judge of the municipal court of the city upon a finding that a public nuisance exists shall order the removal of such junked vehicle or junked vehicle part. Such order shall include a description of the motor vehicle and the correct identification number and license plate number of the vehicle if such identification number and license number are available at the site. 
For an aircraft such order must include the aircraft's description and federal identification number as described by Federal Aviation Administration aircraft registration regulations in 14 C.F.R. Part 47. For a watercraft, such order must include the watercraft's description and identification number as set forth in the watercraft's certificate of number. 
(6)  Removal. When the owner or occupant has failed to abate a nuisance within the time hereinabove specified or fails, refuses or neglects to comply with the order of the court under section 20-75(5) of this article, the code compliance officer shall arrange for the disposal of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part by removal to a scrapyard, demolisher, or any suitable site operated by the city for processing as scrap or salvage. The process of disposal must comply with the provisions of section 20-75(3) of this article. The city may operate a disposal site if the city council determines that commercial channels of disposition are not available or are inadequate, and it may make final disposition of the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, or the city may transfer the junked vehicle or junked vehicle part to another disposal site if the disposal is only as scrap or salvage. 
(7)  Notice to the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation. The code compliance officer shall give notice to the Texas State Department of Highways and Public Transportation not later than five (5) days after removal of a junked vehicle or junked vehicle part, citing Chapter 683, Subchapter E of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, and this article, setting forth all identification numbers and such other descriptions as may be available at the site and requesting cancellation of the certificate of title to such junked vehicle pursuant to Chapter 501 of the Texas Transportation Code, as amended. 
(8)  Exceptions. This article shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part 
a.  That is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
b.  That is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property if the vehicle or part and the outdoor storage area, if any, are maintained in an orderly manner, not a health hazard and screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or shrubbery. An opaque cover placed over or on a car or vehicle or vehicle part, alone, shall not constitute adequate screening from public view. 
c.  In this section: 
(1)  "Antique vehicle" means a passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old. 
(2)  "Motor vehicle collector" means a person who: 
(A)  Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and 
(B)  Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest. 
(3)  "Special interest vehicle" means a motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist. 
(9)  Relocation of junked vehicle. Relocation of a junked vehicle that is a public nuisance to another location in the City of Pasadena, Texas after a proceeding for the abatement and removal of the public nuisance has commenced has no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new location. 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 92-157, § 2, 8-4-92; Ord. No. 07-355, § 1, 12-18-07; Ord. No. 15-034, § 3, 4-21-15)  
Secs. 20-76—20-78. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 03-252, § 2, adopted December 23, 2003, repealed former §§ 20-76—20-78, which pertained respectively to post-removal probable cause hearing, conduct of hearing, and decisions of the hearing officers and their effect, and derived from Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, adopted July 24, 1990.  
Sec. 20-79. - Effect of article on other statutes or ordinances. 
This article does not affect any law authorizing the immediate removal, as an obstruction to traffic, of a vehicle left on public property or public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 90-126, § 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 20-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - JUVENILE CURFEW 
 
Sec. 20-81. - Definitions. 
That the following words, terms, and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their usage clearly indicates another meaning: 
Emergency shall mean an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term shall include but not be limited to a fire, natural disaster, vehicular accident, or a serious medical condition of sudden onset. 
Guardian shall mean the person who, under a court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor or the public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
Minor, for the purposes of this article, shall mean any person under eighteen (18) years of age or as herein otherwise specifically indicated. 
Parent shall mean the natural mother or father, adoptive mother or father of a minor, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child. 
Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office buildings, transport facilities, theaters, gamerooms, shops, shopping malls, or any other place for the sale of merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 1, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 1, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 1, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 20-82. - Offenses. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor twelve (12) years of age or under to be upon any public place in the city during the period from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. on any day of the week. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any minor, thirteen (13) years of age or older and under the age of eighteen (18) years, inclusive, to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the city during the hours as follows: 
10:00 p.m. Sunday and 6:00 a.m. Monday; 
10:00 p.m. Monday and 6:00 a.m. Tuesday; 
10:00 p.m. Tuesday and 6:00 a.m. Wednesday; 
10:00 p.m. Wednesday and 6:00 a.m. Thursday; 
10:00 p.m. Thursday and 6:00 a.m. Friday; 
12:00 midnight Friday and 6:00 a.m. Saturday; and 
12:00 midnight Saturday and 6:00 a.m. Sunday. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any minor, thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive, to remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about, in or upon any public place in the city, on school days, between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on a Monday through Friday, inclusive. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor, thirteen (13) to sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor, to allow or permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in section 20-82(a)—(c) of this article. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 2, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 2, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 2, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 20-83. - Compulsory school age to be in attendance at school; parental duties imposed. 
(a)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, other than a minor that has been suspended or expelled from school, shall be at any place within the city except in attendance at school between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. during any school day, unless the minor has written proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that particular time, or unless the minor is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor. 
(b)  Each parent or legal guardian of a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the minor from behaving contrary to subsection (a) of this section. No person shall fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this section. 
(c)  Any person who violates subsection (b) of this section is guilty of failing to supervise a minor of compulsory school age. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 3, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 3, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 3, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 20-84. - Children suspended or expelled from school to remain under supervision; parental duties imposed. 
(a)  If a minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, is suspended or expelled from school, then each parent or legal guardian of the minor shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion: 
(1)  The duty to personally supervise the minor, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the minor, at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled; and 
(2)  The duty to prohibit the minor from being at any public place at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the following circumstances: 
a.  When the minor is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 
b.  When the minor is on an emergency errand; or 
c.  When the minor is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code. 
d.  When the minor is employed pursuant to approval of school authorities, during the times that the minor is actually on the job or traveling directly from the job site. 
No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the duties imposed by this section. 
(b)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, that has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision provided or arranged by a parent or legal guardian pursuant to section (a)(1) of this section. 
(c)  No minor between the ages of six (6) and sixteen (16), inclusive, that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the circumstances described in sections (a)(2)a—(a)(2)d of this section. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence violate this section. Such violation shall be a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 4, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 4, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 4, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 20-85. - Defenses. 
(a)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 20-82 of this article that: 
(1)  The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian; 
(2)  The minor was accompanied by a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; 
(3)  The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency; 
(4)  The minor was attending a school, religious, or government-sponsored activity or was traveling to or from school, religious, or government-sponsored activity; 
(5)  The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or coming directly from lawful employment; 
(6)  The minor was on the sidewalk of the place where he or she permanently resides; 
(7)  The minor was engaged in, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function or activity for which the application of section 20-82 of this article would contravene his or her rights protected by the Texas or United States Constitution; 
(8)  The minor is married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code. 
(b)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 20-83 of this article that the minor, at the time he or she was found at a place other than in school, was not required by law to be in attendance at school. 
(c)  It is a defense to prosecution under section 20-82, 20-83 or 20-84 of this article that the minor has been directed by his or her parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor, to engage in a specific activity or to carry out express instructions, during the time that the minor is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or responsibilities. 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 5, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 5, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 5, 2-5-02)  
Sec. 20-86. - Supplemental effect. 
The provisions of this article are supplemental and shall be cumulative with all other laws and ordinances applicable in any manner to juveniles. 
(Ord. No. 93-155, § 6, 10-5-93; Ord. No. 98-86, § 6, 6-2-98; Ord. No. 02-44, § 6, 2-5-02)  
Secs. 20-87—20-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - MINORS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Possession of paints or markers by persons under eighteen, § 20-4; possession of tobacco products by minors, § 20-5. 
 
Sec. 20-91. - Discharge of firearms by minors; responsibility to avoid same. 
(a)  The purpose of this section is education and training to reduce the discharges of firearms by minors and the tragedies that often result from those discharges. 
(b)  As used in this section the following words shall have the meanings ascribed herein: 
(1)  Adult means any person who is eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(2)  Child means any person who is younger than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(3)  Firearm means any device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using the energy generated by an explosive or burning substance or any device readily converted to that use. 
(4)  Range means any public or private facility at which firearms training or practice, or both, is conducted under controlled circumstances intended to encourage the safe handling of firearms and at which procedures or facilities are in place that are intended to prevent the projectiles discharged from the firearms from causing any damage to persons or property. 
(c)  It is unlawful for a child intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence to discharge a firearm within the city. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any adult intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence to facilitate, suffer or permit the discharge of a firearm by a child by allowing the child to obtain unsupervised access to the firearm. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any adult intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence to facilitate, suffer or permit the physical possession of a firearm by a child by allowing the child to obtain unsupervised access to the firearm. 
(f)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsections (c), (d) or (e) that: 
(1)  The firearm was possessed or discharged upon a range and under the supervision of an adult; or 
(2)  The child's access to firearms was obtained as a result of an unlawful entry; or 
(3)  The discharge or possession of the firearm was justified as provided in Chapter 9 of the Texas Penal Code; or 
It is additionally a defense to prosecution under subsection (d) or (e) that the actor had taken reasonable precautions under the attendant circumstances to ensure that minors would not have the ability to obtain access to the firearm without supervision. Such precautions could include, but need not be limited to: 
(1)  Storage of the firearm in a place where, at the time the access was obtained, an unsupervised child would not reasonably have been expected to have been able to gain access; or 
(2)  Storage of the firearm in a locked safe, locked rack, locked hard case, locked soft case, locked drawer, locked cabinet or other locked container; or 
(3)  Installation of a lock on the firearm to prevent its normal function and discharge. 
(g)  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. To the extent that any conduct in violation of this section also constitutes a violation of state law, then the conduct shall be punishable under the applicable state law. 
(h)  If a person who allegedly violated this section is the parent or guardian of a child who is accidentally shot, no prosecution of the person shall be made pursuant to this section prior to at least seven (7) days after the date of the discharge of the firearm. 
(Ord. No. 93-184, §§ 2, 3, 10-26-93)  
Sec. 20-92. - Social functions with alcoholic beverages and drugs attended by minors. 
(1)  Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following words or terms shall have the meanings ascribed thereto. 
(a)  Minor shall mean any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverage shall have the meaning as defined in Section 1.04, Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code, as amended. 
(c)  Drug shall have the meaning as defined in Section 481.002, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended. 
(d)  Residence or premises shall mean a motel room, hotel room, home, apartment, condominium, or other dwelling unit, including the curtilage of the dwelling unit, or a hall, meeting room, or other place of assembly, whether occupied on a temporary or permanent basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or specifically for social functions, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
(e)  Open party shall mean a social gathering at a residence or premises at which nonfamily or nonrelated persons are present. 
(2)  Open party. It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having possession or control of a residence or premises to allow an open party to take place at such residence or premises if alcoholic beverages or drugs are possessed, consumed, or used by any minor thereat if such person knew or reasonably should have known of the existence of such possession, consumption, or use. It shall be a defense to prosecution hereunder that such person took reasonable measure to prevent or eliminate any prohibited possession, consumption, or use of an alcoholic beverage or drug as set forth herein. 
(3)  Exceptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(a)  The possession, consumption, or use of an alcoholic beverage by a minor while in the presence of such minor's parent, legal guardian, grandparent, or aunt or uncle if such parent, legal guardian, grandparent, or aunt or uncle is not a minor; or 
(b)  The possession, consumption, or use of a drug by a minor pursuant to a lawful prescription issued by a medical doctor. 
(4)  Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 94-65, §§ 1—4, 4-5-94)  
Secs. 20-93—20-99. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - CRIMINAL STREET GANGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 97-200, adopted Oct. 21, 1997, added a new Art. V, §§ 20-80—20-84. Inasmuch as there already exists an Art. V and provisions designated as §§ 20-81—20-84, at the editor's discretion, said new provisions have been redesignated as Art. VII, §§ 20-100—20-104. 
 
Sec. 20-100. - Definitions. 
Criminal street gang means three (3) or more persons having a common identifying sign or symbol or an identifiable leadership who continuously or regularly associate in the commission of criminal activities. For the purposes of this chapter, it shall not be necessary to show that a particular conspiracy, combination or conjoining of persons possesses, acknowledges or is known by any common name, common identifying sign or symbol, or identifiable leadership, when the conspiracy's existence, in law or in fact, can be demonstrated by a preponderance of other competent evidence. However, any evidence reasonably tending to show or demonstrate, in law or in fact, the existence of a criminal street gang, or membership in, or association with any criminal street gang or criminal combination shall be admissible in any action or proceeding brought under this chapter. 
Criminal street gang member means any person who actually and in fact belongs to or claims to be a member of a criminal street gang, or any person who knowingly associates with a criminal street gang or it's members, or voluntarily associates himself or herself with a course or pattern of gang-related criminal activity, whether in a preparatory, executory, or cover-up phase of any activity, or who knowingly performs, aids, or abets any such activity. 
Gang related criminal activity means any activity committed with the intent to establish, maintain, or participate in a combination or in the profits of a combination or as a member of an identified criminal street gang, or activity that any persons commits or conspires to commit one or more of the following: murder, capital murder, arson, aggravated robbery, robbery, burglary, theft, aggravated kidnapping, kidnapping, aggravated assault, aggravated sexual assault, sexual assault, forgery; any gambling offense, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution, or compelling prostitution; unlawful manufacture, transportation, repair, or sale of firearms or prohibited weapons; unlawful manufacture, delivery, dispensation, or distribution of a controlled substance or dangerous drug, or unlawful possession of a controlled substance or dangerous drug through forgery, fraud, misrepresentation, or deception; any unlawful wholesale promotion or possession of any obscene material or obscene device with the intent to wholesale promote the same; any unlawful employment, authorization, or inducing of a child younger than seventeen (17) years of age in an obscene sexual performance; any felony offense under Chapter 32 of the Texas Penal Code; any offense under Chapter 36 of the Texas Penal Code; or any offense under Chapter 34 of the Texas Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, 10-21-97)  
Sec. 20-101. - Nuisance declared. 
(a)  A gang that continuously or regularly associates in organized criminal activities or that engages in a pattern of criminal or gang-related criminal activity is directly and indirectly injurious to the public health, safety, peace, and welfare, and is declared to be a public nuisance. Any person who associates with others to engage in organized criminal activity as a member or associate of a gang or criminal street gang is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. No person shall intentionally or knowingly keep, maintain, facilitate, permit, or participate in such nuisance. 
(b)  Every building or place used by members or associates of a criminal street gang for the purpose of meeting, associating, gathering, planning, or committing illegal acts, including, but not limited to any violation of this code and those offenses listed in section 20-80, on two (2) or more occasions within any twelve (12) month period, is declared to be a public nuisance. No person shall keep, maintain or participate in such public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, 10-21-97)  
Sec. 20-102. - Notice prior to civil suit—Opportunity to abate. 
(a)  Before the filing of criminal complaint under section 20-81 (b) of this chapter, the city shall, by personal service or by certified mail, provide to the owner of the place at which the nuisance is located, or the agent of the owner, written notice of the following: 
(1)  That a nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists at the place specified in the notice; 
(2)  That the owner of the place or his or her agent has fourteen (14) days from the mailing of the notice or seven (7) days from personal service of the notice to appear at the city at the address provided in the notice to arrange to take action to abate the nuisance; and 
(3)  That failure to appear at the city within the time indicated may result in the city filing a criminal complaint under section 20-81 (b) to abate the nuisance. 
(b)  If the owner of the place or his or her agent does not appear at the city as requested within the time periods described above, the city may file a complaint under section 20-81(b) of this chapter. If the owner or his or her agent appears before the city in the time prescribed, the owner or his or her agent may agree to comply with reasonable recommendations requested by the city designed to abate the nuisance. If the owner, or his or her agent, does not affirmatively agree in writing to follow the city's recommendations, and/or subsequently fails to comply with those recommendations, the city may proceed to file a complaint under this chapter. The city shall also provide the owner of the place or his or her agent with written notification by personal service or by certified mail sent to the last known address of the owner or agent that he or she has failed to satisfactorily comply with the requested recommendations and that the city intends to file civil suit to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, 10-21-97)  
Sec. 20-103. - Remedies. 
In any suit to abate a nuisance as declared and defined in this chapter or to otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city may seek any and all remedies available or provided, by law, including, but not limited to, fines and injunctions to perpetually restrain all persons from using the place in which such a nuisance is maintained for any purpose for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, 10-21-97)  
Sec. 20-104. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person, organization, association, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter, in addition to other legal and equitable remedies available to the city, including, but not limited to, injunctions to abate the nuisances described in this chapter, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day during which a violation of this chapter continues or is permitted to exist shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 97-200, 10-21-97)  
ARTICLE VIII. - REGULATION OF SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY 
 
Sec. 20-105. - Finding and intent. 
The city council finds that sex offenders that use physical violence and who are convicted of preying on others are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the health, safety, and welfare of our citizens. Sex offenders are likely to use physical violence, to repeat an offense, have many more victims than are ever reported, are prosecuted for only a fraction of their actual sexual offenses, and children not only lack the ability to protect themselves, but additional measures should be taken to keep known sex offenders from having access to children in areas where children generally feel safe. 
It is the intent of this article to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in concentrated numbers wherein registered sex offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary or permanent residency. 
(Ord. No. 2007-172, § 2, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 20-106. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Permanent residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days. 
Temporary residence means a place where the person abides, lodges, or resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where the person routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent residence. 
(Ord. No. 2007-172, § 2, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 20-107. - Sex offender residency prohibition, penalty, and exceptions. 
(a)  If a person is required to register on the Texas Department of Public Safety's sex offender database it is unlawful for that person to establish a permanent or temporary residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of any premise where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, neighborhood, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined Section 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. It shall be prima face evidence that this section applies to such a person if the person's record appears on the database. 
(b)  For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one (1) property, measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever is closer to the nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein. 
(c)  Any person violating a provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine in accordance with the general penalty, section 1-7 of this Code. 
(d)  Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the state's child safety ban. A person, as described in subsection (a), residing within one thousand (1,000) feet of those places where children commonly gather does not commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply: 
(1)  The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender registration laws of the State of Texas prior to the date of the adoption of this section; 
(2)  The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this section would not apply to the person. 
(Ord. No. 2007-172, § 2, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 20-108. - Property owners prohibited from renting real property to sex offenders. 
It is unlawful to let or rent any place, structure or part thereof, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence pursuant to the terms of this article, if such place, structure or part thereof, is located within one thousand (1,000) feet, as defined in section 20-107(b), of any premises where children commonly gather, including a playground, school, day care facility, video arcade facility, public or private youth center, neighborhood, or public swimming pool, as those terms are defined in Section 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas. Prior to renting any premises, all persons renting property in the City of Pasadena for permanent residence are required to first check the resident through the Texas Department of Public Safety Registered Sex Offender website at (https://records.txdps.state.tx.us/DPS_WEB/Sor/index. aspx?PageIndex=Caveats&SubmitType=Name) or to call the Pasadena Police Department at 713-475-7830 to obtain necessary information to assure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 2007-172, § 2, 5-22-07)  
Sec. 20-109. - Penalty. 
That it shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this chapter shall be fined in a sum of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 2007-172, § 2, 5-22-07)  
ARTICLE IX. - PROHIBITING THE POSSESSION, SALE, OFFER TO SELL, BARTER OR TRADE OF EITHER AN ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCT OR PSYCHEDELIC/HALLUCINOGENIC COMPOUNDS 
 
Sec. 20-110. - Possession of illegal smoking product or synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogenic compound. 
(a)  No person shall possess, sell, offer to sell, barter or trade any illegal smoking product or psychedelic/hallucinogenic compound. 
(b)  Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 13-089, § 2, 7-2-13)  
Sec. 20-111. - Definitions. 
(a)  Person shall be defined as an individual, corporation, retailer, wholesaler, partnership, association of any other legal entity. 
(b)  Possess means actual care, custody, control, or management. 
(c)  Illegal smoking product shall be defined as any plant or other substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend thereof, including any of the marketed names of illegal smoking products; regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which consists of or contains any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any quantity of a synthetic chemical substance, including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, listed by name in this section or contained within the following structural classes defined in this section: 
(1)  Naphthoylindole: any compound structurally derived from 3-(1-naphthoyl)indole or 3-(2-naphthoyl)indole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent. 
(2)  Naphthylmethylindole: any compound structurally derived from 1H-indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl)methane or 1H-indol-3-yl-(2-naphthyl)methane by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent. 
(3)  Napthylindolecarboxamide: any compound structurally derived from N-(naphthalen-1-yl)-1H-indole-3-carboxamide or N-(naphthalen-2-yl)-1H-indole-3-carboxamide by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent. 
(4)  Naphthoylpyrrole: any compound structurally derived from 3-(1-naphthoyl)pyrrole or 3-(2-naphthoyl)pyrrole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent. 
(5)  Napthylmethylindene: any compound structurally derived from 1-(1-naphthylmethyl)indene or 1-(2-naphthylmethyl)indene by substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent. 
(6)  Phenylacetylindole: any compound structurally derived from 3-phenylacetylindole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent. 
(7)  Benzoylindole: any compound structurally derived from 3-benzoylindole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent. 
(8)  Adamantoylindole: any compound structurally derived from 3-(1-adamantoyl)indole or 3-(2-adamantoyl)indole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring to any extent. 
(9)  Adamantylindolecarboxamide: any compound structurally derived from N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1H-indole-3-carboxamide or N-(adamantan-2-yl)-1H-indole-3-carboxamide by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring to any extent. 
(10)  Adamantylindazolecarboxamide: any compound structurally derived from N-(adamantan-1-yl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide or N-(adamantan-2-yl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide by substitution at the 1-position nitrogen atom of the indazole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indazole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the adamantyl ring to any extent. 
(11)  Aminooxobutylindazolecarboxamide: any compound structurally derived from N-(1-amino-3-methyl-1-oxobutan-2-yl)-1H-indazole-3-carboxamide by substitution at the 1-position nitrogen atom of the indazole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indazole ring to any extent. 
(12)  Tetramethylcyclopropylindole: any compound structurally derived from 3-(2,2,3,3-tetramethylcyclopropylcarbonyl)indole by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the tetramethylcyclopropyl ring to any extent. 
(13)  Tetramethylcyclopropane-thiazole carboxamide: any compound structurally derived from 2,2,3,3-tetramethyl-N-(thiazol-2-ylidene)cyclopropanecarboxamide by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the thiazole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the thiazole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the tetramethylcyclopropyl ring to any extent. 
(14)  Quinolinylindolecarboxylate: any compound structurally derived from quinolin-8-yl indole-3-carboxylate by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not substituted in the quinoline ring to any extent. 
(15)  Cyclohexylphenol: any compound structurally derived from 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol by substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, benzyl, halobenzyl, alkenyl, haloalkenyl, alkoxy, cyanoalkyl, hydroxyalkyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl, (N-methylpiperidin-2-yl)alkyl, (4-tetrahydropyran)alkyl, or 2-(4-morpholinyl)alkyl, whether or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent. 
(16)  Cannabinol derivatives, except where contained in marihuana, including tetrahydro derivatives of cannabinol and 3-alkyl homologues of cannabinol or of its tetrahydro derivatives. 
(d)  Synthetic psychedelic/hallucinogen shall be defined as any substance, regardless of the purpose the substance is marketed for, which consists of or contains any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that contains any quantity of a synthetic chemical substance, including its salts, isomers, and salts of isomers, listed by name in this section or contained within the following structural classes defined in this section: 
(1)  Compounds structurally derived from 2,5-dimethoxyphenethylamine by substitution at the 1-amino nitrogen atom with a benzyl substituent including, but not limited to the following: 
a.  Compounds further modified by: 
(i)  Substitution in the phenethylamine ring at the 4- position to any extent (including alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents); or 
(ii)  Substitution in the benzyl ring to any extent (including alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents); and 
b.  By example, compounds such as: 2C-B NBOMe (25B-NBOMe), 2C-C NBOMe (25C- NBOMe), 2C-D NBOMe (25D-NBOMe), 2C-E NBOMe (25E-NBOMe), 2C-H NBOMe (25H-NBOMe), 2C-I NBOMe (25I-NBOMe), 25I-NB, 25I-NBF, 25-NBOH, 2C-N NBOMe(25N-NBOMe), 2C-P NBOMe (25P-NBOMe) 
(2)  2,5-Dimethoxyphenethylamine and any compound structurally derived from 2,5- Dimethoxyphenethylamine by substitution at the 4-position of the phenyl ring to any extent (including alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents), including but not limited to the following compounds such as: 2C-B, 2C-C, 2C-D, 2C-E, 2C-I, 2C-N, 2C-P, 2C-T-2, 2C-T-4, 2C-7 
(3)  2,5-Dimethoxyamphetamine and any compound structurally derived from 2,5-Dimethoxyamphetamine by substitution at the 4- position of the phenyl ring to any extent (including alkyl, alkoxy, alkylenedioxy, haloalkyl, or halide substituents), including but not limited to following compounds: DOB, DOC, DOET, DOI, DOM, DON, DOPR 
(Ord. No. 13-089, § 2, 7-2-13)  
Chapter 21 - MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 98-8, adopted January 13, 1998, repealed Ch. 21 in it entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 21 derived from the following ordinances: 
Ord. No. 	Date 	Ord. No. 	Date 
70-151 	 8- 4-70 	83-24 	 1-25-83 
74-100 	 5-21-74 	84-13 	 1-24-84 
75-18 	 4-22-75 	86-243 	10-28-86 
77-182 	 9-27-77 	94-173 	 9-13-94 
			
 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; application of electrical code to mobile homes, § 12-3; payment of taxes prerequisite for obtaining license or permit, § 26-1 et seq. 
State Law reference— Uniform standards code for mobile homes, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 5221f. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 21-1. - Definitions. 
The words and phrases to be given special definitions and contained in this chapter are defined as follows. Words or phrases not specially defined herein shall be defined in accordance with their accepted meaning as used in context with the pertinent subject or as further defined in other ordinances or resolutions passed by the city council. 
Mobile home: A detached single family structure designed for long term occupancy that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable by a separate source of propulsion in one (1) or more sections which in the traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width and forty (40) body feet or more in length, when erected on site is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. 
Nonconforming manufactured home park (previously "mobile home park"): A group of three (3) or more mobile homes and/or manufactured homes located on a tract of land under one ownership, operated as a business investment of the owner. Also a mobile home park that was in existence prior to passage of this article originally authorized to place manufactured homes, mobile homes and temporary travel trailers each located on a space leased to its occupants who own or lease the living unit as their primary or temporary residence. 
Manufactured home: A detached single-family structure designed for long term occupancy that was constructed on or after June 15, 1976, intended to be permanently placed at one (1) location, transportable by a separate source of propulsion in one (1) or more sections which in the traveling mode is twelve (12) body feet in width and fifty (50) body feet or more in length, when erected on site is six hundred (600) or more square feet, and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems. The term does not include a recreational vehicle as that term is defined by 24 C.F.R. 3282.8 (g). 
Manufactured home park: A group of three (3) or more manufactured homes located on a tract of land under one (1) ownership, operated as a business investment of the owner. A manufactured home park consists of only manufactured homes or travel trailers each located on a space leased to its occupants who own or lease the living unit as their primary residence. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be located on sites overnight or for other short periods of time as a temporary dwelling. These units have a degree of comfort and construction not acceptable as permanent living quarters and are so classified by any of the following characteristics: 
(1)  Is specifically designated by the manufacturer as a travel trailer; 
(2)  Is not greater than eight (8) feet in body width; 
(3)  Is not greater than forty (40) feet in body length; 
(4)  Is constructed to include propulsion as the source of, and integral to the unit; 
(5)  Is equipped with permanently attached wheels and/or axles which are essential to its function. 
Manufactured home placement: The process of moving a manufactured home onto a lot outside or inside of a manufactured home park or private property and receiving the necessary utility and inspection approvals prior to occupancy of the manufactured home. 
License: An authorization, or written evidence thereof, issued by the city, to maintain and operate a manufactured home park within its corporate limits, and an authorization, or written evidence thereof, to place a manufactured home on private property. 
Occupant: A person having custody and control of a manufactured home, or a member of the family of such person, within the third degree of consanguinity or the second degree of affinity, and living with such person in such home. 
Owner: Any person, firm, partnership, corporation, association, organization, or groups thereof, who has title to or control, direction, maintenance, and supervision of a manufactured home park or a manufactured home. 
Parking space or stall: An area of sufficient size to accommodate two (2) automobiles, minimum dimensions of such area to be eight and one-half (8½) feet wide by eighteen (18) feet long per automobile. 
Permanent foundation: An engineered concrete slab that meets the minimum loading specifications of the City of Pasadena. 
Permit: An authorization, and the written evidence thereof, issued by the city to construct and equip a manufactured home park which, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be any manufactured home park other than one owned and operated by the government of the United State, the State of Texas, or political subdivisions thereof, within the city limits under the terms of this chapter. 
Plat: The map, drawing or chart on which a developer's plan of a manufactured home park is presented with the city form of dedication and recorded with Harris County. 
Side center-point of a manufactured home: A point within the plane of the exterior side wall of a manufactured home located one-half (½) of the total distance from the front to the back of the unit, and one-half (½) of the total distance from the top to the bottom of the unit. 
Street: Any street, area, avenue, boulevard, drive, public place or highway designed for or commonly used for the purpose of travel by vehicles within the corporate limits of the city. Distinctions are made in this chapter between public, or streets outside the premises of a manufactured home park, and private, or streets inside the manufactured home park premises. 
Tenant: A person having custody and residing in a manufactured home mobile home or travel trailer. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-2—21-8. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MANUFACTURED HOME TAXATION, MOVING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 21-9. - Ad valorem taxation; manufactured home moving permits and fee. 
(a)  Any manufactured home or mobile home located within a manufactured home park or upon a private lot or tract of land as of January first (tax assessment date) of each year shall be rendered for taxation by the manufactured home or mobile home owner to the building official as provided for in the Property Tax Code, Sections 1.04(2), (3), 11.01, and 25-08, Vernon's Annotated Texas Statutes as amended. If both the land and the manufactured home or mobile home are owned by the same person, the manufactured home or mobile home shall be rendered as real property. If the owner of the manufactured home or mobile home is not the owner of the land, the manufactured home or mobile home shall be the liability of the owner of the manufactured home or mobile home and not a liability of the landowner. The "Over 65 Residential Homestead Exemption" shall be granted in those cases where applicable. Persons paying taxes under this section shall be issued a small sticker or decal indicating the taxes have been paid for the current year. Such sticker or decal shall be displayed in such a manner and location on said manufactured home or mobile home so as to be visible from the nearest street or drive within the manufactured home park or upon the private lot. Each manufactured home park owner shall inform the permit department in writing on "manufactured home information" cards furnished by the city of each manufactured home and mobile home located in his park as of January first. 
(b)  Before any manufactured home shall be moved within the city limits of Pasadena, either entering or leaving a manufactured home park or a private lot or tract of land, a manufactured home moving permit must be obtained for such move. Said permit shall be issued by the Permit Division and shall be issued to the owner of said manufactured home being moved or to the manufactured home moving contractor involved in moving said manufactured home. The manufactured home moving permit shall state the name and address of the manufactured home moving contractor, the name and address of the manufactured home owner, the present location and the proposed location of the manufactured home, the type, size and serial number of the manufactured home. All taxes, fees and other adjudicated debts owing to the city by said manufactured home owner shall be made in full payment before said permit shall be issued. Persons issued a permit under this section shall be issued a sticker or decal indicating the date of issue and the present and proposed locations of the manufactured home. Such sticker or decal shall be affixed to the manufactured home, approximately six (6) feet above the ground or road surface on the side nearest the center of the roadway, and shall remain affixed to the manufactured home until it arrives at its proposed location. 
(c)  Before issuance of a permit to move a manufactured home which was located in the city on January first to a location outside the city, prior to the establishment by the city council of the current year's tax rate, an estimated tax based on the current year's appraisal method and the previous year's tax rate shall be made. Such payment may be made "under protest", subject to appellate procedures provided under the Property Tax Code. 
(d)  Any movement of a manufactured home permitted herein shall comply with traffic regulations. 
(e)  The most recently approved Certified Harris County Tax Roll shall be used for the purpose of determining all manufactured homes and mobile homes which exist within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena at passage of this article. Any manufactured homes and mobile homes not appearing on said tax roll shall be deemed to not have been in place at passage of this article. Anyone hereafter claiming to have a manufactured home or mobile home within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena prior to passage of this article, and such manufactured home or mobile home is not shown on said tax roll, can present the building official any information substantiating the claim. The determination of the building official shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-10—21-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - MANUFACTURED HOMES LOCATED OUTSIDE MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-15. - General prohibition. 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no mobile home or travel trailer shall be parked for use or occupancy on any tract of ground within the city limits except in a duly authorized manufactured home park. In no case shall a manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer be parked for residential use and occupancy in any subdivision with deed restrictions, duly filed for record with Harris County, which expressly prohibit such activity. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
DIVISION 2. - TEMPORARY LOCATION 
 
Sec. 21-16. - Temporary location. 
The building official may permit the parking for use or occupancy of a manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer outside of a duly authorized manufactured home park for a period of time not exceeding ten (10) days when such manufactured home or travel trailer is occupied by persons employed in the operation of a temporary recreational, amusement, or civic activity; or for a period of time not exceeding one hundred twenty (120) days when such manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer is parked adjacent to and in conjunction with the construction of a residence; or that period of time not exceeding the duration of actual construction of a nonresidential structure. Such temporary parking for use or occupancy of a manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer shall be permitted only when the manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer is parked on the same premises on which the activity is located and only when adequate sanitary facilities are available upon the premises for the use of the occupants of the manufactured home, mobile home or travel trailer. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-17. - Parking of manufactured homes, mobile homes or travel trailers on streets. 
No person shall park any manufactured home upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city for a period of more than four (4) hours. No person shall likewise park, place, or locate any travel trailer, as defined in section 21-1 of this article, upon any public street within the corporate limits of the city for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours. Any mobile home or travel trailer shall be parked parallel to the right side curb, completely clear of driving lanes or areas of the street or park, and facing in the direction which traffic shall be designated to travel on such street or in such driving area. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
DIVISION 3. - PERMANENT LOCATION 
 
Sec. 21-18. - Application of division; authority for permanent location. 
The provisions of this division shall apply to a manufactured home permanently located on real property within the city outside an authorized manufactured home park. Such location is authorized, when all of the provisions of this division are complied with and when the license required by this chapter has been obtained. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-19. - Compliance with building code and other ordinances; supervision and inspection of placement. 
All applicable requirements of the building code of the city and other ordinances applicable to the installation of plumbing, electricity, water and gas must be complied with and the necessary permits acquired prior to a manufactured home being placed on a private lot under the provisions of this division. The building official shall supervise and inspect the permanent placement of a manufactured home in compliance with this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-20. - Location with respect to other structures; set-back requirements. 
All manufactured home placement occurring outside of a manufactured home park shall be so situated upon the lot or tract of land so as to not be within ten (10) feet of any building except it shall be not closer than ten (10) feet in an end-to-end placement or fifteen (15) feet in an end-to-side or side-to-side placement with any other manufactured home. The manufactured home(s) shall be placed in accordance with the front setback requirements of the recorded subdivision plat. If the manufactured home(s) is/are not within a recorded subdivision plat, or within a recorded plat not indicating a front building setback, the setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from the front of the property. A ten-foot setback shall be required from each side of the property, and an eight-foot setback shall be required from the rear of the property unless the property contains a rear utility easement of a greater width. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-21. - Removal of tires, wheels and suspension components under manufactured home. 
The tires and wheels of a manufactured home subject to this division shall be removed. The suspension components comprised of axles, shackles, springs and other protrusions beneath the frame shall also be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-22. - Manufactured home foundation. 
Every manufactured home space shall be provided with an engineered concrete foundation to which the manufactured home is permanently attached and bolted. Further, each manufactured home unit shall provide devices for anchoring the unit to prevent over turning or uplift. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to insure that the anchorage system shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift as required in the building code for buildings and structures, based upon the size and weight of the units. Failure to have adequate anchorage and foundation at all times shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-23. - Water and sewer connections. 
A manufactured home governed by this division shall be connected to and provided with water lines and sanitary sewer connections. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-24. - Parking requirements. 
The lot or tract of land upon which the manufactured home(s) is/are situated shall be large enough to accommodate two (2) parking stalls for each living unit for the off-street parking of automobiles. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-25. - Driveway. 
There shall be a driveway constructed upon a lot or tract of land upon which a manufactured home is located under this division. Such driveway shall lead from the public street to the manufactured home or adjacent to the manufactured home and it shall be constructed in accordance with the manufactured home park standards prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-26. - Minimum lot size/configuration. 
All manufactured home placement occurring outside of a manufactured home park shall be required to have both a minimum lot area of five thousand (5,000) square feet for each manufactured home/dwelling located on the lot and a minimum width of fifty (50) feet at the front property line for each manufactured home/dwelling unit located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-27. - Skirting. 
Each manufactured home shall provide skirting of material and composition so as to prevent the ingress of rodents and other animals beneath the manufactured home. Skirting shall be attached to the manufactured home with galvanized screws or bolts prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for said unit. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-28—21-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-34. - Mobile homes prohibited. 
No mobile homes shall be placed or permitted within any manufactured home park in the City of Pasadena. Any new placement of a manufactured home in an existing nonconforming manufactured home park shall be allowed, however, any new placement of a mobile home is specifically prohibited. At such time as a mobile home is removed from a nonconforming manufactured home park, it shall be unlawful to replace a mobile home in the vacated space. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-35. - Travel trailers. 
Travel trailers shall be allowed to be placed within a manufactured home park or nonconforming manufactured home park subject to the regulations herein and provided that adequate sanitary facilities of said park are available for immediate connection from the travel trailer. Such rental shall be by the day, week, or month and said occupant shall not remain in said park for a cumulative period of time exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days within any given calendar year or for two (2) consecutive one hundred eighty (180) day periods in two (2) consecutive calendar years. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-36. - Nonconforming manufactured home parks prohibited. 
No new nonconforming manufactured home parks shall be permitted to be constructed within the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-37. - Limited placement exemption for nonconforming manufactured home parks. 
Any new placement of a manufactured home in a nonconforming manufactured home park shall be subject to the unit separation and setback requirements of Ordinance No. 94-173. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-38—21-41. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MANUFACTURED HOME PARK DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Sec. 21-42. - Manufactured home park design standards. 
All manufactured home park construction and installation required or permitted by this article shall conform to the building code of the city and manufactured home park standards, set out below. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-43. - Minimum size development. 
Any manufactured home development shall contain no fewer than five (5) acres for initial development. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-44. - Density. 
The maximum density of a manufactured home development shall not exceed eight (8) spaces per gross acre of site area. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-45. - Open space. 
Not less than eight (8) per cent of the gross site area shall be devoted to open space for parks and recreation facilities; generally provided in a central location or, in larger courts, decentralized. Recreation area includes space for community buildings and community use facilities, such as guest parking, adult recreation, child play area and swimming pools. Forty (40) per cent of the total open space area shall be used as park area, with the remaining sixty (60) per cent used for recreation play area. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-46. - Streets and street widths. 
All streets shall be privately owned and maintained and shall conform to the following specifications and in no case shall be less than the following: 
(1)  Twenty-four-foot pavement (back to back of curb) standards with concrete curb and gutter both sides of street. A four-foot sidewalk is required on one (1) side of street. Parking shall not be on street due to safety and public convenience. 
(2)  Twenty-eight-foot pavement standards (back to back of curb) with concrete curb and gutter both sides of street. A four-foot sidewalk required on one (1) side of street. Parking may be designated on one (1) side of street and shall be appropriately painted and striped to designate such areas. 
(3)  Private streets in excess of twenty-eight-foot pavement width and curb and gutter may be accepted with approval from the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-47. - Dead-end streets and culs-de-sac. 
(a)  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs projected to be continued in future manufactured home park expansion or when designed as culs-de-sac. Temporary turn-arounds shall be provided on projected streets until such time as they are extended. 
(b)  Culs-de-sac shall, generally, not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length and shall have a turn-around of not less than sixty (60) feet in diameter. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-48. - Sidewalks. 
Paved sidewalks shall be provided on one (1) side adjacent to all private streets within the manufactured home park. Sidewalks to be composed of portland cement concrete, constructed four (4) feet, zero (0) inches in width with a four-inch thickness, six-inch by six-inch No. 10 wire mesh reinforcing throughout. Contraction joints at six-foot, zero-inch intervals. Subgrade to consist of two (2) inches of bank sand fill. Concrete to have a minimum cement content of four and five-tenths (4.5) sacks per cubic yard. All construction to comply with Manufactured Home Park Standards, Exhibit B, typical details. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-49. - Limitation on access ways to streets. 
If a manufactured home park opens onto a major thoroughfare or a collector street, as designated by the city, there shall be not more than two (2) driveways or places of access, ingress or egress. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-50. - Driveway openings. 
Driveway openings shall comply with Ordinance No. 1818 and Ordinance No. 69-254 requiring culverts in open ditches adjacent to all public streets and are adjacent to the construction site. 
(1)  Maximum width of drives, thirty-five (35) feet, zero (0) inches, minimum twenty (20) feet, zero (0) inches. 
(2)  Minimum driveway separation twenty (20) feet, zero (0) inches. 
(3)  No opening of a drive within thirty-five (35) feet, zero (0) inches of an intersection. 
(4)  All driveways to be according to standards. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-51. - Utility easements. 
Easements shall be provided for installation of utilities, exclusive of water and sewer which shall be the responsibility of the owner. Easements shall conform to Section 21 of the Basic Subdivision Ordinance. All public utility companies will install, own, operate and maintain a system of underground distribution, except for the service lateral to the manufactured home unit, of said utility. At the company's option, certain lots adjacent to overhead distribution facilities will be served from the overhead distribution system. Developers will provide required easements, clear such easements of all obstructions to company's trenching operation and bring same to final grade, all at no cost or expense to the company, before company installs any facilities. Developer must coordinate easement layout with company prior to final approval of manufactured home park plat and must coordinate location and installation of other utilities, if any, in these easements to minimize interference with company's cable installations. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-52. - Drainage easements. 
Where a manufactured home park is traversed by a watercourse, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such watercourse, and of sufficient width, as determined by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-53. - Drainage system. 
(a)  General. No lot in any manufactured home park which is subject to flooding by rainfall shall be approved until drainage facilities adequate to carry off such rainfall have been provided, as determined by the director of public works. 
(b)  Required facilities. All necessary storm drainage facilities including enclosed storm sewers, bridges, storm water detention basins, culverts, and watercourse improvements, to carry off storm water within the manufactured home park and integrate such manufactured home park drainage with the overall urban drainage system, shall be installed in accordance with the then current requirements of the city public works department. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-54. - Sanitary sewage system. 
Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot in all manufactured home parks where connection is to be made immediately to a community disposal system or to a public sewage system. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to secure Texas State Health Department approval of the proposed system. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-55. - Water system. 
All water supply, treatment, storage and distribution facilities shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the Standard Specifications of the City of Pasadena, the then current policies and specifications of the director of public works and the Texas State Department of Health. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-56. - Fire hydrants. 
Every manufactured home park shall be provided with standard fire hydrants as part of the water distribution system in accordance with current specifications and so that each space is within five hundred (500) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-57. - Lighting. 
All streets shall be lighted at night with a minimum intensity of .2 foot candles illumination. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-58. - Fence, screening and landscaping. 
Manufactured home parks shall be enclosed with an approved fence not less than seven (7) feet in height, with no openings to adjoining property other than the required entrances and exits to streets or public walkways. A landscape area five (5) feet in width shall be required along all public rights-of-way. Landscape improvements shall comply with (b) and (e) through (j) of section 9-196, Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-59. - Manufactured home foundation or supports. 
Every manufactured home space shall be provided with either an engineered concrete foundation to which the manufactured home is permanently attached and bolted; or with concrete pads (thirty-inch by thirty-inch by four-inch minimum thickness and reinforced with six-inch by six-inch No. 6 wire mesh) which shall serve as foundations for jacks or other devices used to support and level the manufactured home, and complying with typical detail standards. Such devices shall be located in parallel strips at the outside edges of the manufactured home and elsewhere as needed. Further, each manufactured home unit shall provide devices for anchoring the unit to prevent over turning or uplift. It shall be the responsibility of the manufactured home park owner to insure that the anchorage system shall be adequate to withstand wind forces and uplift as required in the building code for buildings and structures, based upon the size and weight of the units. Failure to have adequate anchorage, foundation, and concrete pads under the jacks or other supporting devices at all times shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-60. - Manufactured home patio or porch. 
Each space within the manufactured home park shall have constructed a four-inch thick concrete slab with minimum thirty-two-square-foot area, reinforced with six-inch by six-inch wire mesh and designed to meet Exhibit B, patio detail and cross section of a typical lot. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-61. - Minimum size of spaces; use of space restricted to one manufactured home or travel trailer. 
No space in a manufactured home park shall be less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area. No more than one (1) manufactured home or travel trailer shall be permitted on a single space. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-62. - Setback requirements for units and manufactured homes. 
Each manufactured home adjacent to a manufactured home park street or driveway shall be set back at least fifteen (15) feet therefrom. Each manufactured home located in a manufactured home park and adjacent to a public street shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-63. - Clearance between manufactured homes. 
Manufactured homes shall maintain a minimum clearance of twenty (20) feet between any point of the adjacent manufactured homes. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-64. - Off-street parking and guest parking. 
Each unit in a manufactured home park shall be so laid out as to be provided with two (2) parking stalls adjacent thereto and behind the street curb line or within a common off-street parking lot. Tandem parking shall be specifically disallowed. Parking stalls shall be designed so as to be accessible only from one (1) or more manufactured home park streets and not from any abutting public streets. Guest parking should be made available at a ratio of one (1) parking space per ten (10) manufactured home units. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-65. - Water lines and sewer connections. 
Each unit in a manufactured home park shall be provided with water lines and sanitary sewer connections, subject to all applicable ordinances, rules and regulations of the city and in accordance with the manufactured home park standards prescribed by this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-66. - Skirting. 
Each manufactured home shall provide skirting of material and composition so as to prevent the ingress of rodents and other animals beneath the manufactured home. Skirting shall be attached to the manufactured home with galvanized screws or bolts prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy for said unit. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-67—21-70. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 21-71. - Construction permit required. 
No manufactured home park shall be constructed within the corporate limits of the city, unless the owner hereof has obtained a permit in accord with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-72. - Private streets and construction. 
All streets shall be constructed of six-inch reinforced concrete (No. 4 rods, two (2) feet on center set on metal chairs, three thousand (3,000) psi concrete) or flexible base with one and one-half-inch wear coarse hot mix asphalt approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-73. - Flexible base. 
Those materials meeting oval base shall be either crushed limestone, asphalt, concrete, or cement stabilized sand and shall meet the following specifications: 
(1)  Crushed limestone. This material shall be crushed and shall consist of durable particles of crushed limestone mixed with approved binding material, and shall be used as a foundation course for surface course or other base courses. State Highway Spec. No. 247 and shall be six-inch minimum thickness. 
(2)  Cement stabilized sand. This material shall conform to the requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Item 275/276 Stabilized Sand Base Mixture at six-inch thickness. 
(3)  Hot mix asphalt concrete base. This material shall conform to the requirements of the Texas Department of Transportation Standard Specifications for Item 340-A Asphalt Stabilized Base Mixture at four-inch thickness. The aggregate percentage and grading shall be designed by an independent laboratory for approval by the director of public works prior to the placement thereof. 
The mixture when designed and tested in accordance with these specifications and methods outlined in Texas Highway Department Bulletin C-14, shall have the following laboratory density and stability and shall be laid with six-inch minimum thickness: 
Density 
(per cent) 	Stability 
(per cent) 
 
92—96 .....   Minimum 30 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-74. - Sidewalks. 
Paved sidewalks shall be provided on one side adjacent to all private streets within the manufactured home park. Sidewalks to be composed of Portland cement concrete, constructed four (4) feet, zero (0) inches in width with a four-inch thickness, six-inch by six-inch No. 10 wire mesh reinforcing throughout. Contraction joints at six-foot, zero-inch intervals. Subgrade to consist of two (2) inches of bank sand fill. Concrete to have a minimum cement content of four and five-tenths (4.5) sacks per cubic yard. All construction to comply with Manufactured Home Park Standards, Exhibit B, typical details. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-75. - Streets—Construction procedures. 
Prior to placing of the base material, the prepared subgrade shall be checked for conformity with grades and lines established. 
(1)  Crushed limestone and cement stabilized sand. The flexible base courses shall be delivered in approved vehicles of uniform capacity and dumped and spread uniformly on the prepared subgrade in layers of the loose measure thickness as specified hereinafter. Materials so delivered shall be placed and shaped before the end of the workday. Isolated areas having an excess of course or fine materials shall be loosened, removed and replaced with materials conforming to the gradations as set forth previously. 
All flexible base material shall be spread in uniform layers and moistened and bladed and rolled until a minimum of ninety-five (95) per cent of proctor density has been obtained. 
(2)  Hot mix asphalt base material. This material shall be placed with an approved spreader capable of handling hot bituminous mixtures of specified evenness. The material shall be delivered in approved vehicles with clean smooth beds lightly oiled to prevent adhesion of the mixture to the truck bodies. The mixing plant, asphalt heating equipment and mixing and construction methods not outlined herein shall conform to those outlined in the Texas Highway Department Standard Specifications, Item 340. Construction shall be done in accordance with Section 340.6 of the Texas Highway Department Item 340. Compaction equipment shall include a pneumatic tired roller, a three-wheel and tandem flat wheel roller. Placing and finishing of the paving mixture shall meet the requirements set forth by the director of public works and the City of Pasadena "Standard Specifications". 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-76. - Streets, alleys and sidewalks (design standards and specifications). 
(a)  Plans. Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and crown; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type as required, location in relation to center line and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines; the proposed street grading slopes, for each of the different types of streets and alleys in the manufactured home park. 
(b)  Alignment of each street, alley, sidewalk and crosswalkway showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the center line and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection alley or drainage easement; the station and with another street, radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street. 
(c)  Location, description, and elevation of bench marks; the top of curb grade at each curb end, each fifty-foot station and each end of each curb return; the center line grade at each end and at each fifty-foot station of alleys; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location; and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the profiles of streets, alleys, and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed center line. 
(d)  All plans shall show scale, north arrow and date. Plan and profile shall be drawn to scale of one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one (1) inch equals five (5) feet vertically. 
(e)  All street and alley plans and profiles shall bear the seal of a registered professional engineer. 
(f)  Concrete curb shall consist of portland cement concrete (two thousand five hundred (2,500) psi) with or without reinforcing steel as required, constructed on six-inch compacted lime stabilized subgrade or an equivalent with this specification and in conformity with lines and grades established by the project engineer and details shown on the plans. Concrete shall contain not less than four and five-tenths (4.5) sacks of cement per cubic yard, with a compressive strength of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) pounds per square inch. Reinforcing steel shall be deformed bars continuous longitudinally of No. 3 size, and complying with City of Pasadena, Manufactured Home Park Standards, Exhibit B, typical details. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-77. - Drainage and drainage structures (design standards and specifications). 
(a)  Plans. The required plans shall show the following information: 
(1)  Construction details of all drainage structures including dimensions, reinforcing, and components such as grates and manhole covers. 
(2)  Alignment of drainage easements showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve, the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another drainage easement, the location of each drainage structure, and the location and size of all storm sewers. 
(3)  The center line grade at each end of each fifty-foot station of drainage ditches, the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection, the flow line elevation of each storm sewer, at each point of change, each end, and at the intervening gradients. 
(b)  Drainage computations. 
(1)  Run-off rates shall be computed as determined by the director of public works. In all cases run-off rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing run-off water to the proposed manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-78. - Sanitary sewers (design standards and specifications). 
(a)  All gravity sewers shall be schedule 40, polyvinyl chloride (PVC) drain-waste-vent pipe or better conforming to A.S.T.M. and the National Sanitation Foundation Standard 14 and Commercial Standard CS 272-65 and CS 207-60. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral sewer mains within the manufactured home park area shall be six (6) inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of one and six-tenths (1.6) feet per second. 
(c)  All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum anticipated flow from the entire area tributary to the line as approved by the director of public works. 
(d)  Lift stations shall be furnished where necessary, of such size and design as approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-79. - Water mains (design standards and specifications). 
(a)  All water distribution mains shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC) A.W.W.A., C-900 class 150 or better. Other suitable material may be used when authorized by the director of public works. 
(b)  The minimum size of lateral water mains shall be six (6) inches in diameter, except that a small main may be used when a looped system designed to serve less than eighteen (18) families is approved by the director of public works. 
(c)  All principal mains shall be of sufficient size to meet all anticipated requirements of the system as approved by the director of public works. 
(d)  The layout of mains shall assure two-way flow at all points in the system, with the exception of extensions on culs-de-sac and other dead ends approved by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Secs. 21-80—21-83. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - PLAT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 21-84. - Application generally. 
Application for a construction permit required by this article shall be made in writing and filed with the building official only after the plat has been approved by the City of Pasadena and filed with Harris County. Such application shall be submitted on a form prepared by the official and shall include, but not be limited to, the name and address of the parties to be in charge of the proposed manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-85. - Fees. 
Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the developer may seek the advice of the planning department or the planning commission, in order to determine the feasibility of the proposal before substantial expense is incurred, to acquaint him with any plans and requirements for the area and to ascertain that the proposed development meets the primary objectives of this chapter. A filing fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46 shall be paid by the developer for review of the project and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena. Upon submittal of a preliminary and a final plat, a filing fee according to chapter 28, article IV, section 28-46 shall be paid by the developer for review of the project and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part, whether approval is granted or not. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 18-102, § 3, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 21-86. - Map and preliminary plat to accompany application. 
Each application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a location map, showing the location within the city of the platted property, and a preliminary plat of the proposed manufactured home park. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-87. - Approval or disapproval of preliminary plat by planning and zoning commission—Generally. 
(a)  The applicant shall present the preliminary plat filed with such application and fees to the city planning and zoning commission for review at a regularly scheduled commission meeting. Within thirty (30) days after such presentation, the commission shall act on the preliminary plat, and written notice shall be given of its decision. If the plat is disapproved, such notice shall state the reasons for disapproval. The applicant or his agent shall be entitled to present evidence and argument to the commission. 
(b)  If the preliminary plat is disapproved, it may be resubmitted to the planning and zoning commission with the necessary recommended changes, and the commission must act upon such plat within thirty (30) days from the resubmission date. 
(c)  In the event the planning and zoning commission fails to act on a preliminary plat within the time prescribed by this section, the plat shall be deemed approved fraud or material misrepresentation in such application or plat, however, shall wholly defeat and bar such automatic approval. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-88. - Same—Appeal from disapproval. 
(a)  Within ten (10) days after planning and zoning commission action disapproving a plat in accord with section 21-80, the applicant may file, with the city secretary, a written notice of appeal to the city council, in original and ten (10) copies, setting forth the prior actions on the application and plat, the objections thereto, and the action desired by the applicant. No appeal to the city council shall be permitted on any revised preliminary plat until a rehearing thereon has been held by the planning and zoning commission. 
(b)  If an appeal under this section is on an unrevised preliminary plat, the city council hearing fee shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). 
(c)  The city secretary, upon approval by the mayor, shall fix a date for the hearing of an appeal under this section by the city council, which date shall fall within thirty (30) days after the filing of the appeal notice. The city secretary shall notify the applicant of the date, time and place of the hearing, at least ten (10) days prior to such date. 
(d)  The planning and zoning commission and the applicant for a permit under this division shall be entitled to present evidence and argument in all hearings under this section, subject to the rules and orders of the city council. 
(e)  The city council shall affirm, reverse or modify the action of the planning and zoning commission within fourteen (14) days after the hearing of an appeal under this section. In the event the city council fails to act on an appeal within the period of time prescribed therefor by this section, the planning and zoning commission action of record shall be affirmed. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-89. - Final plat—Filing; form; accompanying plans and specifications. 
When a preliminary plat of a proposed manufactured home park is approved in accordance with the provisions of this division, a final plat thereof must be filed with the planning and zoning commission within six (6) months of the date of preliminary plat review. The final plat shall meet all requirements of a preliminary plat filed under this division and shall be on reproducible film, linen or other material, safe and suitable for reproduction. Accompanying the final plat shall be a complete set of plans and specifications, scaled no smaller than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet, prepared by a registered professional engineer of the State of Texas, for the construction of streets, parking areas, storm drainage, water lines, sewer lines, buildings and other facilities required by this chapter, which shall establish alignment and grades, type 3 of construction and other requirements in accordance with the manufactured home park standards prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-90. - Same—Approval or disapproval; recording. 
(a)  The applicant shall present a final plat filed pursuant to section 21-82 to the planning and zoning commission and such commission shall act on such plat within thirty (30) days after its presentation and file the same with the department of building inspection within thirty-seven (37) days after its presentation. In the event the planning and zoning commission fails to act upon such plat within thirty (30) days, the same shall be deemed approved as of the thirty-sixth day after its presentation to the commission. 
(b)  After approval of the final plat of a manufactured home park, a copy thereof shall be filed in the records of Harris County, Texas. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-91. - Issuance. 
Upon approval of a final plat and associated plans and specifications, as provided for in this division, and upon issuance of the license provided for in this article, the department of building inspection shall issue to the applicant the manufactured home park permit required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-92. - Suspension. 
In the event of violation, during the construction and equipping of a manufactured home park, of any provision of this article or of the permit, plat, application, plans or specifications provided for in this division, the building official shall have the right to suspend the permit issued under this division, and no further work shall be done under such permit until it has been reinstated. In addition, the building official shall have the power to issue stop-work orders and take other corrective action as provided in the building code. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-93. - Termination. 
A permit issued under this division shall automatically terminate, if construction of the manufactured home park is not commenced within six (6) months after the final plat therefor is approved, unless a six (6) month renewal is granted by the building official. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence any work on such manufactured home park after the permit has so terminated. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-94. - Specifications and standards for manufactured home plats. 
(a)  Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. The preliminary plat shall include the following information and other pertinent data as required to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
(1)  Topographic data. 
a.  Existing boundary lines, bearings and distances, and acreage of the proposed manufactured home park. 
b.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent properties as shown by the official records of the county clerk of Harris County with adjacent ties to well established points of league survey corners. 
c.  Location, size and center line of all existing utilities, drainage structures, watercourses, railroads and other physical features affecting the proposed development. 
d.  Location, name, type and width of surfacing of all streets and alleys on or adjoining the proposed development. 
e.  Location, size and purpose of all easements and public areas on or adjoining the proposed development. 
f.  Topographic information including existing and proposed contours at intervals of not more than two (2) feet for grades up to five (5) per cent and not more than five (5) feet for grades over five (5) per cent and based on city standard datum or U.S.G.S. datum, which shall be specified on the plat. 
g.  Information concerning other conditions on the site such as marshes, wooded areas, buildings and other significant features may be required by the planning commission when deemed necessary. 
h.  Information concerning other conditions on adjacent land, such as direction and gradient of ground slope, buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nonresidential land uses of adverse nature may be required by the planning commission when deemed necessary. 
(2)  Title and certificates. 
a.  Present tract designation of record at office of the county clerk, Harris County. 
b.  New city or county block number, if any. 
c.  Title under which manufactured home park is to be recorded. 
d.  Notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum bench marks, and data of survey. 
(3)  Drawings. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches, at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger and shall show the following: 
a.  Existing conditions required in (a)(1), "Topographic data." 
b.  Proposed streets with names, roadway widths and types, central angles of street intersections, approximate grades and gradients; and similar information for alleys and other easements. 
c.  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers. 
d.  Any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, utility facilities or other public uses. 
e.  Any sites for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, industry, churches or other nonpublic uses exclusive of manufactured home dwellings. 
f.  Building setback lines. 
g.  Title, north arrow, scale and date. 
h.  Key map, drawn at a satisfactory scale to show the relation of the property to adjacent existing streets and identifying features for a distance of at least a half-mile. 
i.  Index sheet if plat is drawn on more than one (1) sheet, showing the entire manufactured home park at a suitable scale. 
(b)  Final plats. The final plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Data. 
a.  Primary control points, approved by the director of public works or description and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and all other rights-of-way and identification lines of manufactured home units and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves. 
c.  Name and width of each street. 
d.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements. 
e.  Number to identify each lot, site and block. 
f.  Purpose for which all sites other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments. 
i.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent unplatted land. 
j.  Title, scale, north arrow and date. 
(2)  Titles and certificates. 
a.  Certification of registered professional engineer or registered Texas land surveyor certifying to accuracy of final plat. 
b.  A current title opinion showing land owner. 
c.  Certificate by the director of public works certifying compliance to the appropriate codes and ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(3)  Easement of fee strip instrument. The developer of any manufactured home park plat shall obtain from the holder of any private easement or fee strip within the plat crossed by proposed streets, or alleys, or other public easements an instrument granting to the public the use of said streets, alleys, or easements over and across said private easements or fee strips for construction, operation and maintenance of those public facilities normally using the type of streets, alleys, and easements indicated. A signed copy of this instrument accompanied with a plot plan indicating such easements or fee strips shall be delivered to the planning and zoning commission and the original shall be filed for record. 
(4)  Drawings. Final plat shall be drawn on reproducible film, linen or other material safe and suitable for reproduction. If more than one (1) sheet is necessary, the plat shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire manufactured home park. 
(c)  Standard forms. 
(1)  Approval of Planning Commission. 
This is to certify that the Planning Commission of the City of Pasadena, Texas, has approved this plat of (name of manufactured home park) as shown hereon, and has approved the instruments of dedication for the necessary easements to serve to manufactured home park which have been approved by the City of Pasadena and filed for record with the office of the county clerk of Harris County, Texas. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, witness the official signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Commission of the City of Pasadena, Texas, this the _______ day of ________, 19___. 
	/s/   
      Secretary 
 	 
;sigl; \Chairman  
Secs. 21-95—21-98. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - OPERATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 21-99. - Operating license. 
(a)  Upon approval of the final plat of a proposed manufactured home park, and prior to the issuance of the construction permit, under division 2 of this article, an annual license for the maintenance and operation of such manufactured home park shall be issued to the owner thereof by the city building official, upon payment to him of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Such license shall be valid for one (1) year or twelve (12) consecutive calendar months from the date thereof, unless sooner suspended, revoked or surrendered. Such license may be renewed annually in advance thereafter. 
(b)  No part of the license fee paid under this section shall be refunded for any reason. A license issued under this section shall not be transferable and no vested, irrevocable right is conferred by the issuance of such license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or operate a manufactured home park unless a current license therefor has been issued under this section. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 21-100. - Report of manufactured homes entering park. 
The owner of a manufactured home park shall inform the department of building inspection, in writing, of each manufactured home that enters his park and for which utility and sanitary services are desired, in order to allow such department to inspect the manufactured home location and service connections. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-101. - City agents' right of entry. 
Duly authorized representatives from the departments of planning, health, police, permits and public works shall be permitted access to every manufactured home park and the streets, utility lines and connections and structures thereon, when performing city business, as a condition to the issuance of a permit and license under this article. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-102. - Responsibility of a manufactured home owner. 
(a)  All such responsibilities as enumerated within this chapter. 
(b)  In the event a manufactured home or travel trailer is removed from a manufactured home park, the owner of said manufactured home or travel trailer shall, on the day of departure, provide the owner of the manufactured home park, or his authorized agent with a forwarding address. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Sec. 21-103. - Responsibilities of the manufactured home park owner or agent. 
(a)  All such responsibilities as enumerated in this Chapter 21 of the Code of Ordinances. 
(b)  The owner or his authorized agent shall maintain a register of park occupancy which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Name and address of park residents. 
(2)  Location of each manufactured home within the park by space or lot number and street address. 
(3)  Manufactured home registration data, including make, length, width, year of manufacture and identification number. 
(4)  Moving permit number, if provided by owner of manufactured home or travel trailer. 
(5)  Dates of arrival and departure. 
(6)  Forwarding address, if provided by owner of manufactured home or travel trailer. 
(c)  A new register shall be initiated on January 1 of each year, and the old register shall be retired but shall be retired on the premises for at least one (1) year following the retirement. Registers shall be available for inspection at all reasonable times by an official of the City of Pasadena whose duties may necessitate access to the information contained therein. 
(d)  The owner or authorized agent shall notify park occupants of all applicable provisions of this division and inform each as to duties and responsibilities under this division. 
(e)  Each month every manufactured home park owner or his authorized agent shall inform the permit department in writing on such forms as furnished by the City of Pasadena those forwarding addresses provided by manufactured home or travel trailer owners who have departed during the previous month. 
(f)  The owner of any manufactured home park or nonconforming manufactured home park shall keep said park premises in a safe, clean, and healthy condition. Any lack of maintenance may cause termination of park license. 
(Ord. No. 98-8, 1-13-98)  
Code of Ordinances CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
____________ 
Adopted, March 28, 1972 
Effective, May 1, 1972 
____________ 
Code Reproduced through Supplement No. 21 
Published by Order of the City Council, October, 1983 
____________ 
  
Chapter 22 - MOTOR VEHICLE DEALERS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 90-92, adopted May 22, 1990, repealed former Ch. 22 in its entirety. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 90-92 added a new Ch. 22, pertaining to motor vehicle dealers, to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Code 1964, §§ 18-1—18-7, 18-9, 18-18—18-34, 18-42—18-52 as amended by Ord. No. 1759, §§ 1—3, adopted Jan. 25, 1966. 
Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, adopted August 26, 2003, repealed and replaced former Ch. 22, §§ 22-1—22-48, to read as set forth herein. Formerly, Ch. 22 pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 90-92, § 2, adopted May 22, 1990, Ord. No. 94-34, §§ 1—7, adopted March 1, 1994, Ord. No. 01-97, § 1, adopted June 19, 2001, Ord. No. 03-25, §§ 1 and 2, adopted February 11, 2003, Ord. No. 03-58, § 1, adopted March 18, 2003, and Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, adopted July 8, 2003. 
Cross reference— Auto wreckers, Ch. 7; automobile wrecking yards, § 17-16 et seq.; payment of taxes prerequisite to receiving license or permit, § 26-1 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 36. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 22-1. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
City. The term "city" refers to the City of Pasadena, Harris County, Texas. 
Dealer in new motor vehicles. The term "dealer in new motor vehicles" shall be construed to include and mean any person who, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, publicly engages in, conducts, or carries on the business of buying, selling, offering for sale to the public, consigning to be sold to the public, trading or otherwise dealing in new motor vehicles or new motor vehicle trailers, or both, with and to the public, under a franchise from either a manufacturer or authorized distributor of motor vehicles. 
Dealer in used motor vehicles. The term "dealer in used motor vehicles" shall be construed to include and mean any person who, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, publicly engages in, conducts, or carries on the business of buying, selling, offering for sale to the public, consigning to be sold to the public, trading or otherwise dealing in used motor vehicles or used motor vehicle trailers, or both, with and to the public. 
Demonstrator. The term "demonstrator" shall mean any motor vehicle which has been used by any dealer in new motor vehicles in effectuating sales and which has been driven more than one hundred fifty (150) miles. 
Existing nonconforming license location. The term "nonconforming license location" means the location identified by an applicant for a motor vehicle dealer's license under section 22-22(a)(5) and (6) at which a person will engage in the activities for which a license is required under section 22-21. Said location is also further defined as license location and was lawfully operating prior to June 19, 2001, but is not in conformance with all requirements of this amendment. 
Inoperable used motor vehicle. Any used motor vehicle not capable of spontaneous use and immediate independent propulsion. 
Itinerant dealer. The term "itinerant dealer" shall be construed to include and mean any person who engages in the temporary or transient public business of selling or offering for sale new or used motor vehicles, trailers, or any or all of the same, or publicly exhibiting any or all of the same for public sale, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such public business or conducting such public exhibits, either hires, rents, leases, or occupies any room or space in any building, structure, lot or enclosure in the city in, through or from which such article or articles are or may be sold, offered for sale, or exhibited for sale. The word "temporary," as used herein means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least three (3) months upon which such public business is to be operated or conducted. The word "established," as used herein, means and shall be construed to mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least three (3) months. The word "itinerant," as used above, means and shall be construed to mean such business as may be operated or conducted by a person who does not have a fixed place of business (other than a temporary place as herein defined) in the city or now has his principal place of business in a place other than the city, and moves stock or goods or articles into the city for public sale with the purpose or intention of removing the unsold portion thereof away from the city and ceasing to engage in business in the city before the expiration of three (3) months from the commencement of such business. It is specifically provided that the term "itinerant dealer" shall also include any person engaged in the business or businesses herein above mentioned, who associates himself temporarily with any local licensee under this chapter, by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of the business of any local licensee. 
License location. The term "license location" means the location identified by an applicant for a motor vehicle dealer's license under sections 22-22(a)(5) and (6) at which a person will engage in the activities for which a license is required under section 22-21. 
Outside sales display. The term "outside sales display" shall relate to all non-enclosed portions of a licensed location except for those areas behind an opaque fence where inoperable, wrecked, dismantled, disabled or junked vehicles are kept on site. 
Used motor vehicles. Any self-propelled, free-moving vehicle usually with four (4) wheels constructed to transport passengers, licensed by a state agency as a vehicle, previously owned by a user and placed in service with an accumulation of mileage, not known as a new vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-2. - Identification of demonstrators. 
No motor vehicle which has been used as a demonstrator shall be sold or displayed for sale by any dealer unless the word "demonstrator" appears on a sticker of not less than three (3) inches in diameter attached to the windshield thereof. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 22-3, 22-4. - Reserved.  
Sec. 22-5. - List of salesmen to be posted. 
Each licensed motor vehicle dealer who employs salesmen to assist him in the sale of motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers shall keep posted in the showroom of his business, or in some other conspicuous place, a list of the names of all such salesmen and the number of their licenses issued under this chapter, which list shall be open to the inspection of the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-6. - Sale or exchange of improperly equipped vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle dealer to sell, barter, or exchange any motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer in the city, unless the same is equipped with the safety equipment specified and required by the provisions of any safety equipment ordinance of the city now in effect or which may hereafter be adopted or any safety equipment specified and required by laws of the state. This section shall not apply to sales for dismantling or export from the United States. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-7. - Records to be kept. 
(a)  Every person who, as a dealer, shall make any sale, purchase, transfer or exchange of either a new or used motor vehicle or new or used motor vehicle trailer in the city shall keep a written record of any and all transfers and assignments, if any, made by such person, or chattel mortgages, liens or notes covered by or secured by lien upon such motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers, such record to show the name and address of each transferee, description of the mortgage lien or note transferred and of the property affected thereby, including the VIN, model and license number of the motor vehicle or serial number of the trailer therein involved. 
(b)  Every licensee under this chapter who shall repossess any motor vehicle or trailer or foreclose any lien or mortgage upon any motor vehicle shall keep a written record thereof, and of each such repossession or foreclosure, stating the name of the mortgagor or mortgagors, the amount of indebtedness, principal, interest and other items, if any, separately, the date and manner of foreclosure, whether by suit or private sale, the description of the property repossessed or foreclosed upon, including the VIN, model and license number of the motor vehicle or serial number of the trailer therein involved, and the name and address of the purchaser thereof. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the records required to be kept under this chapter shall be retained for a period of not less than seven (7) years and shall at all times be available and open for inspection by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-8. - Report of purchases and sales to police. 
Every person who, as dealer, shall make a sale, transfer or exchange of a new motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer, or a purchase, sale, transfer or exchange of a used motor vehicle or motor vehicle trailer, shall, when requested, immediately furnish to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative an instrument in writing in the following form: 
Year and Model _____ 	Make and Style _____ 
Motor No. _____ 	License No. _____ 
 
Name of Vendor: _____ 
Address of Vendor: _____ 
City_______ County_______ State _____ 
Name of Transferee or Purchaser: _____ 
City_______ County_______ State _____ 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-9. - Police records kept under chapter to be confidential. 
All records filed with or kept by the police department under and by virtue of this chapter shall be kept confidential by such department and shall not be made available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-10. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. Any infraction of this chapter as determined by the appropriate enforcing officer of these regulations shall be subject to the fines as enumerated in the general penal provisions of section 1-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 22-11—22-19. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DEALER'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 22-20. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful and a Class C misdemeanor for any person, whether for himself or as agent or representative of another, to engage, primarily or incidentally, wholly or part time, in the business of buying, selling, or offering for sale, consigning to be sold, trading, bartering, or otherwise dealing in new or used motor vehicles or motor vehicle trailers, or either or both, within the corporate limits of the city, without first having obtained a license to do so or to violate any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-21. - Separate license for each place of business and each person engaging in business. 
(a)  Every person who desires to maintain and operate more than one (1) place of business or branch office or substitute place of business for which a license is required by this article must designate in his application each and every such place of business, branch office or substitute place of business, giving each address, and pay a separate license fee and secure a separate license for each address. 
(b)  When more than one (1) person desires to engage in a business for which a license is required by this article at the same place of business, each such person must obtain a separate license. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-22. - Application generally. 
(a)  Every applicant for a license required by this article shall make application therefor upon a form to be furnished by the city building official or his duly authorized representative. Said application form shall be signed and sworn to and shall include, but is not limited to, the following information: 
(1)  The name and address under which the business is to be conducted. 
(2)  Whether the applicant is the owner or lessee of the real property occupied. If the applicant is a lessee, he must provide the name and address of the landlord and attach a copy of the lease agreement to the application form. 
(3)  A description of the business. 
(4)  A statement of the method of distribution to be used. 
(5)  The address of the applicant's principal office or establishment. 
(6)  The number, name and location of branch establishments, if any. 
(7)  The trade name of any business or businesses that the applicant was engaged in during the preceding five (5) years of the application date. 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever been arrested, charged and/or convicted of the offense of theft or fraud, or for any felony in this or any state. If the applicant is a partnership, the answer shall be as to all members of the partnership, and if a corporation, it shall be as to all officers of the corporation. 
(9)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of its charter or permit to do business certified by the secretary of state and the names and addresses of the principal officers and of all officers of the corporation. 
(10)  If the applicant is a partnership, the names and addresses of all the partners. 
(11)  If the applicant is neither a partnership nor a corporation, the name and address of the applicant. 
(b)  If the application is by a corporation, the same shall be signed and sworn to by a duly authorized officer thereof; if by a partnership, then by all of the partners therein; and, if by an individual, then by such individual personally. 
(c)  All new license locations selling only used vehicles shall be required to comply with the following requirements as a condition of receiving a license under this article: 
(1)  The entire outside area of the commercial establishment including all motor vehicle display areas, driveways, and means of ingress and egress, and parking areas shall be paved with concrete or blacktop in accordance with city standards. Said paved areas shall be maintained in a good and operable condition. Paving shall be promptly replaced upon determination by the city of any of the following conditions: failure of pavement, vegetative infiltration, excessive drainage slope failure, or any other associated pavement failure. 
(2)  There shall not be in excess of one (1) motor vehicle per each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of outside sales display area. 
(3)  No motor vehicle shall be placed on any city right-of-way or easement for display or storage for any amount of time. 
(4)  There shall not be issued a new license for the operation of a used car lot within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot lines of a residential area or subdivision. Moreover, no existing licensee may expand its used car lot so as to place any portion of such dealership within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot lines of residential area or subdivision unless such expansion is onto contiguous real property owned by the licensee at least since June 19, 2001. 
(5)  Each license location under this article, where inoperable vehicles will be kept on site, shall provide a fenced area to provide storage for inoperable, wrecked, dismantled, disabled or junk vehicles so that such vehicles are not visible to the general public. The fence shall be completely opaque and not extend lower than six (6) feet above grade. 
(6)  All applications for a new license under this article shall also include evidence that the applicant has notified the owners of land located within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the proposed site at least ten (10) days prior to filing the application of their right to a hearing [with] the city building official prior to the license being issued. The hearing shall be to allow citizens to bring to the attention of the building official or his duly authorized representative any applicable laws, ordinances or regulations that would cause the application to be rejected. 
(7)  Upon receipt of an application, the building official shall cause an on-site inspection by himself or his duly authorized representative, fire marshal, and the health department, to investigate the property for compliance with all applicable city ordinances before the initial license shall be issued. The building official or his duly authorized representative shall cause such inspection annually thereafter before each renewal. 
(8)  All license locations for which a license is issued under this article, shall meet the capacity parking requirements as follows before a license will be issued: One (1) parking stall per three thousand (3,000) square feet of area set aside for outside sales display and/or circulation. Said required parking stalls are for the exclusive use of customers and employees, shall not be occupied at any time for sales or service of any vehicle, and shall be contained wholly within license location premises. 
(9)  All repair and service work shall be performed in an enclosed building that: 
a.  Has garage doors, which may remain open during business hours, but shall be closed thereafter; 
b.  Contains a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet; and 
c.  Is set back no less than fifty (50) feet from the front and rear property lines and no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any side property line. 
(10)  All exterior lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare on adjoining properties and shall be generally situated to cast light away from perimeter areas of said used car lot. All lighting plans shall be submitted for approval to the city electrical inspector. Such approval is not only a review of regulatory mandates, but also will signify the most practical solution to avoiding light pollution on adjacent properties by the following methods: location of lighting standards, direction and angle of lighting, height of fixtures, candle power of each light fixture, light spreading hardware. 
(11)  All license locations shall comply with applicable deed restrictions and setback requirements. 
(12)  A transfer of business ownership shall not constitute a cessation of operations. Any license issued under Article II of this chapter may be transferred upon such a change in business ownership; provided, that transferee satisfies the requirements of this chapter. Existing non-conforming status of the lot will continue regardless of business or property ownership as long as there is no discontinuation of the sales activities by a city-licensed motor vehicle dealer of more than sixty (60) days. For purposes of this subparagraph, the term "transfer of business ownership" shall mean a stock sale, an asset sale, or a transfer through probate upon the death of a legal owner of a dealership location. In the event of the death of an owner or part-owner of a dealership location, whereupon the transfer of such ownership interest passes through a probate court, any resulting cessation of business operations is tolled for a period of sixty (60) days following the termination of such judicial proceedings. In the event of a judicial determination of incompetency or a medical doctor's certification of disability or incompetency of the sole owner of a dealership location, any resulting cessation of business operations is tolled, for purposes of this subparagraph, for a period of sixty (60) days following such determination or certification. 
(13)  For purposes of fire prevention and extinguishment, each license location shall be required to meet the following requirements, in addition to any other provisions of this chapter: 
a.  Each vehicle for sale must have direct access to a sixteen (16) foot wide drive aisle and be less than one hundred fifty (150) feet from either (a) the public right-of-way or (b) a 24-foot drive aisle capable of concurrent two-way traffic that extends to the public right-of-way; and 
b.  Each license location shall have a drive aisle at least eighteen (18) feet wide that extends from the public right-of-way into the property a distance adequate to allow the efficient and effective operation of fire apparatus, but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet into the property. Such lane design, which may overlap with any portion of the 16- or 24-foot-wide drive aisle required by the preceding subparagraph, shall require approval of the fire marshal during the permit review process, and upon approval shall be plainly marked to prohibit parking thereon or obstruction thereof in any way. 
For purposes of this subparagraph, a vehicle has "direct access" to a drive aisle if it is either parked beside a drive aisle or parked immediately adjacent to a vehicle that is parked beside a drive aisle. 
(14)  All vehicles displayed for sale must maintain a minimum distance of twenty-four (24) inches from any point of any other vehicle displayed for sale. 
(15)  "Flag strings or pennant strings" shall be specifically prohibited for any license location, and any existing non-conforming license locations are required to remove such items by November 1, 2003. 
(16)  Each new license location is required to be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from any existing license location as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line. Provided, however, this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
a.  Motor vehicle sales locations selling only classic motor vehicles and at which location no such motor vehicles are displayed outside of a completely enclosed showroom. "Classic motor vehicle," as used herein, shall mean a motor vehicle at least twenty-five (25) years old as defined in the Texas Transportation Code. 
b.  The renewal of the license of a motor vehicle sales location that has been licensed continuously since June 19, 2001, when such licensee seeks the renewal license for the same location incorporating an expansion onto contiguous real property owned by the licensee since June 19, 2001. 
(17)  A site plan which shows conformance with the requirements of this chapter must be reviewed and approved by both the planning department and the fire marshal's office and displayed on site by November 1, 2003. 
(d)  All existing license locations, whether conforming or non conforming, shall be required to comply with all requirements contained in these regulations by November 1, 2003, with approval of a site plan in a format prescribed by the planning department required by November 1, 2003, except as follows: 
(1)  There shall not be issued a new license for the operation of a used car lot within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot lines of a residential area or subdivision. 
(2)  All repair and service buildings shall: 
a.  Be set back no less than fifty (50) feet from the front and rear property lines and no less than twenty-five (25) feet from any side property line; and 
b.  Contain a minimum of five hundred (500) square feet. 
(3)  All exterior lighting shall be designed to prevent direct glare on adjoining properties and shall be generally situated to cast light away from perimeter areas of said used car lot. All lighting plans shall be submitted for approval to the city electrical inspector. Such approval is not only a review of regulatory mandates, but also will signify the most practical solution to avoiding light pollution on adjacent properties by the following methods: location of lighting standards, direction and angle of lighting, height of fixtures, candle power of each light fixture, light spreading hardware. 
(4)  Each new license location is required to be a minimum of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet from any existing license location as measured from nearest property line to nearest property line. 
All motor vehicle dealers not having been operating in the same location and continuously licensed (without any suspension or revocation of that license or any relocation or cessation of business operations) pursuant to the licensing requirements of this chapter since June 19, 2001 shall not be entitled to the exemptions provided by this subsection (d). 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 15-082, §§ 2, 3, 7-21-15)  
Sec. 22-23. - Temporary permit pending final action on application. 
Pending final action on an application for a license under this article, the city building official or his duly authorized representative may, in his discretion, grant the applicant a temporary permit authorizing him to engage in the business for which the license is sought for a period not exceeding ten (10) calendar days. Such permit shall not be granted to the same person more than once within any six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-24. - Applicant to have fixed place of business. 
No license shall be granted under this article to a person, including an itinerant dealer, who does not have or prove the bona fide intention to have forthwith upon the issuance of a license a regular established place of business, at a definite and fixed address in the city used to offer for sale motor vehicles by such licensee and which is open to reasonable inspection by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-25. - Applicant's bond. 
Contemporaneously with the applicant's submission of an application for a first license under this article, as well as for all renewal licenses, the applicant shall submit satisfactory proof that the applicant has purchased a properly executed surety bond required under the Texas Transportation Code, as amended, to obtain a motor vehicle dealer general distinguishing number. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-26. - Action by city building official, chief of police or his duly authorized representative on application. 
(a)  Upon receipt of an application for a license under this article, the city building official or his duly authorized representative shall forward said application to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative who shall make or cause to be made such investigations as he may deem necessary including, but not limited to: 
(1)  Whether the applicant has failed to answer or has answered falsely or in a misleading manner any of the questions on the application form. 
(2)  Whether the applicant has been arrested, charged and/or convicted of theft, fraud, or any felony in this or any state. 
(3)  Whether the applicant has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of the civil or criminal laws of this state. 
(4)  Whether the applicant bears a good reputation in the community or communities where he lives or maintains a place of business for honesty and fair dealing. 
The chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall also investigate the location of the applicant's proposed establishment with respect to the present uses made thereof and the spaces to be allocated for the display and storage of motor vehicles. 
(b)  After review of the application and upon completion of his investigation under this chapter the chief of police or his duly authorized representative shall forward his findings to the city building official and stamp the application as either "recommend approval" or "recommend denial." 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-27. - Review by city building official. 
(a)  In determining whether to approve or deny the granting of a license or renewal or amendment of a license, the city building official or his duly authorized representative shall consider each application for a license under this article, review the investigation made by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative and determine whether the applicant has complied with all of the terms of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(b)  The city building official shall deny a license if he determines that the applicant gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or the chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-28. - Fee. 
The fee for a license required by this article shall be non-refundable, payable to the city before the license is issued in the amount enumerated, as follows based upon the number of vehicles offered for sale on the license location premises: Less than thirty (30) = five hundred dollars ($500.00); thirty (30) to seventy (70) = six hundred fifty dollars ($650.00); seventy-one (71) or more = eight hundred dollars ($800.00). Such fee shall be placed in a special fund and shall be used by the city for the enforcement of this chapter and for the enforcement of all provisions of the law regulating the sale, theft or exchange of motor vehicles, motor vehicle trailers, or parts or accessories thereto and for no other purpose except as otherwise provided for in section 22-22(d). 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-29. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  When the city building official approves an application for a license under this article, he shall be authorized, upon payment of the proper license fees by the applicant, to issue the license. 
(b)  In all cases where the city building official refuses to issue the license applied for, the applicant thereof shall have the right to appeal to the city council, by giving written notice to the city secretary of such appeal within ten (10) days after the action of the city building official. In the case of any appeal to the city council, the council shall select a date for the hearing and notify the applicant thereof. The hearing before the council shall be de novo and the applicant shall have the burden of proving that he is entitled to the license. At such hearing, the council shall have the right and authority to consider the information obtained by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative when investigating the applicant and also any report or statement of facts prepared by the city building official in connection with the matter. All such reports and statements shall be open to inspection by the applicant upon request. After such hearing, the council shall decide, by motion, whether or not the license applied for shall be granted or refused. In the event the council grants such license, the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance thereof in the same manner as other licenses are issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-30. - Display. 
A license issued under this article shall at all times be displayed in a conspicuous place in the office of each place of business maintained by the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-31. - Term. 
Licenses issued under this article shall expire on June 1st of each year. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-32. - Amended licenses. 
Any license issued under this article shall apply to the premises described therein, but a licensee may, upon application therefor and the payment of the sum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) to the city permit department for each such application and the turning in of the old license for cancellation, be issued an amended license showing a change of location of the place of business. Such amended license shall expire on the date of the expiration of the license it replaces and shall so state. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-33. - Certified copies. 
Any licensee who desires a certified copy of his license issued under this article shall make a written application therefor, addressed to the city building official, stating therein the number of certified copies desired by the applicant and over his signature, and upon payment made to the city building official in the sum of five dollars ($5.00) for each such certified copy applied for, the city building official is hereby authorized and required to issue and deliver such copy or copies to the applicant and certify in his official capacity that each such copy is a true and correct copy of the original or amended license issued to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-34. - Licensee to engage only in specifically licensed business. 
No person having a license as provided for in this article shall engage in any business herein regulated except that for which such person has been specifically licensed. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-35. - Does not grant vested right. 
No license granted under the terms of this article shall be construed as the grant of a vested right, but shall be subject to such other regulations or amendments as the city council may, from time to time, promulgate in the regulation of the business coming within the scope of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-36. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  If any licensee under this article is convicted of any theft, fraud, or felony, or gives false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process, the city building official shall have the right, power and authority to cancel, revoke, or suspend such license for any period of time after first giving to such licensee written notice of the violations complained of and after allowing for an informal meeting between the city building official and the licensee to discuss such suspension or revocation. In addition, if a licensee is convicted of any three (3) violations of this chapter within a two-year period as measured from infraction date of first violation to the infraction date of third violation, the city building official shall cause the indefinite revocation of license held by licensee. The licensee shall have the right to appeal any such action to the city council. Such appeal must be exercised by the licensee filing written notice thereof with the city secretary within ten (10) days after the city building official's decision. The hearing before the city council on such appeal shall be de novo and, after such hearing, the city council shall announce its decision by motion or other appropriate action. The licensee shall be permitted to continue operating his business pending final action by the city council. Upon license revocation, all rights to operate within city jurisdiction shall cease, regardless of number of locations in operation by licensee. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-37. - Payment of taxes, liens, etc. prerequisite to issuance. 
No license shall be issued under this chapter unless all ad valorem taxes and other taxes, fees, liens, assessments, or charges on property, real, personal or mixed, situated at the proposed license address or location, including interest and penalty, which are due and owing the city are fully paid and proved to be so paid by valid, lawful receipt. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-38. - Placing motor vehicles for sale without consent. 
In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, it shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence sell or offer for sale any motor vehicle on any premises other than a license location in the city without the written consent of the owner of such premises. It shall also be unlawful to offer for sale more than one (1) motor vehicle at one (1) time on any premises other than a license location. Such written consent, to be effective, must be visibly displayed on dash of motor vehicle, and shall be on file with the city building official and the chief of police for the city. 
Any vehicle found to be in violation of this section shall be deemed unlawful and immediately removed to a state-approved licensed storage facility. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Secs. 22-39—22-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SALESMAN'S LICENSE 
 
Sec. 22-47. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a Class C misdemeanor for any person to engage as a salesman, full or part time, in the business of selling new or used motor vehicles or new or used motor vehicle trailers in the city unless such person shall first obtain a license to do so or to violate any other provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall likewise be unlawful and a Class C misdemeanor for any licensed motor vehicle dealer to allow any person to act as a salesman for his business who has not obtained a salesman's license as provided for in this article. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-48. - Temporary license. 
Pending final action on an application for a salesman's license under this article, the city building official may, in his discretion, grant the applicant a temporary license for a period not exceeding ten (10) calendar days. Such temporary license shall not be granted to the applicant more than once within any six (6) months period. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-49. - Application generally. 
It shall be the duty of each applicant for a salesman's license to apply for the license required by this article in the same manner as prescribed in section 22-22, and to specifically furnish on the application form provided by the city building official the applicant's name, age, present address, former addresses and places of employment during the preceding five (5) years, and the handwritten signature of the applicant and of the dealer employing the applicant as well as any other information requested by the application form. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-50. - Action on application by the city building official and chief of police or his duly authorized representative. 
Any application for a salesman's license shall be acted upon by the city building official and the chief of police or his duly authorized representative in the same manner and respect as is provided for in this chapter for applications for motor vehicle dealer's licenses. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-51. - Fee. 
The fee for a salesman's license required by this article shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) payable to the city and delivered to the permit department prior to issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-52. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  After an application for a license under this article has been reviewed by the chief of police or his duly authorized representative he shall forward his findings to the city building official and stamp the application as either "recommend approval" or "recommend denial." If the applicant has been convicted of any theft, fraud, or felony, or has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of the civil or criminal laws of this state, or has submitted an incomplete application, the city building official shall have the right to deny the issuance of such license. The city building official shall deny a license if he determines that the applicant gave false or misleading information in the material submitted to the city building official or to the chief of police or his duly authorized representative during the application process. 
(b)  In all cases where the city building official refuses to renew the salesman's license applied for, the applicant thereof shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the manner provided for in section 22-29(b). 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-53. - Contents. 
Each license issued under this article shall be numbered and shall contain the signature, social security number, and state driver's license number of the licensee as well as the signature of his employer. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-54. - Exhibition. 
The holder of any license issued under this article shall exhibit that license to any police officer or other authorized agent of the city showing proper identification. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-55. - Not transferable; endorsement if licensee changes employers. 
A salesman's license issued under this article shall not be transferable. However, it shall be lawful for a salesman to use the same license after changing employment from one (1) employer to another, providing the fact of such change of employment is endorsed on the license by the city building official and a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) is paid for making the notation of such change and investigation incident thereto. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-56. - Term; renewal. 
A license issued under this article shall expire on June first each year. Such license may be renewed annually upon payment of the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Sec. 22-57. - Cancellation. 
If, after granting any salesman's license under this article, any such licensee is convicted of theft, fraud or any felony, or has been found guilty of misrepresentation or fraud within the meaning of either the civil or criminal laws of this state, or has misrepresented any answer on the application, such license may be cancelled by the city building official. Any licensee whose license is cancelled may appeal to the city council as provided for in section 22-36(a). 
(Ord. No. 03-174, § 2, 8-26-03)  
Chapter 23 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Municipal court, Art. VIII. 
Cross reference— Bonds for clerks of municipal court, § 2-5; duty of chief of police to attend municipal court and execute process issued therefrom, § 30-3; authority of chief of police to designate police officers to attend municipal court and to serve warrants issued by the judge thereof, § 30-5. 
State Law reference— Corporation court generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1194 et seq.; Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. Name of court changed to "Municipal Court," Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1194A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 23-1. - Judges generally. 
(a)  The office of judge of the municipal court is hereby created. Such judge shall be appointed by the mayor, with the confirmation and approval of the city council, and he/she shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The judge of the municipal court shall be the chief judge and director of and presiding judge of the municipal court system. 
(b)  There are hereby created nine (9) part-time associate judges of the municipal court. One (1) associate judge shall be designated by the mayor as senior associate judge. The associate judges shall have duties and responsibilities as designated by the judge of the municipal court, and in the absence of the judge of the municipal court, act in his/her place. 
(c)  Such judges shall have all the powers and duties and jurisdiction and authority as is now or hereafter may be conferred upon municipal courts by the laws of this state and the charter and ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  The judges of the municipal court referred to in subsections (a) and (b) shall serve for a term of office of two (2) years unless the council should provide for a longer term pursuant to Article XI, Section 11 of the Texas Constitution. A municipal court judge who is not reappointed by the 91 st day following the expiration of a term of office shall, absent action by the appointing authority, continue to serve for another term of office beginning on the date the previous term of office expired. 
(e)  Compensation for associate judges shall be determined as described on Exhibit "A" attached to Ord. No. 97-194, and as may be from time to time adjusted pursuant to Ordinance No. 96-2. 
(Code 1964, § 10-1; Ord. No. 97-194, § 1, 10-21-97; Ord. No. 11-006, §§ 1—3, 1-25-11) 
Charter reference— Judge of court, Art. VIII, § 2. 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Government Code, § 29.005.  
Sec. 23-2. - Monthly report of judge. 
The judge of the municipal court shall, upon request, provide to each member of the council a copy of the monthly report that is required by the State of Texas in such form as may be from time to time required by the State of Texas. 
(Code 1964, § 10-2; Ord. No. 11-006, § 5, 1-25-11)  
Sec. 23-3. - Seal. 
The municipal court shall be provided with a seal with star in the center and the words "MUNICIPAL COURT PASADENA, TEXAS" engraved around the star. The impression of the seal of the court must be attached to all papers issued out of the court except subpoenas and must be used to authenticate the official acts of the clerk and of the judge. The court seal may be created by electronic means, including optical imaging, optical disc, or other electronic reproduction technique that does not permit changes, additions or deletions to an original document created by the same type of system. A seal created by electronic means may be either black and white or with gold stars, lettering and borders on a black background. The official form of the court seal may be viewed in person in the office of the clerk or online at the municipal court's address on the City of Pasadena website. 
(Code 1964, § 10-3; Ord. No. 11-006, § 6, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Electronically created records, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 45.012.  
Sec. 23-4. - Court days. 
The municipal court shall be open for the transaction of business at dates and times designated by the presiding judge, provided that any deviation from the schedule of normal business hours provided for conduct of city business generally shall first be approved by the mayor. 
(Code 1964, § 10-4; Ord. No. 11-006, § 7, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Court may sit at any time, Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 4.15.  
Sec. 23-5. - Disposition of fines and costs. 
All fines and costs imposed by the municipal court shall be paid over to the city controller and shall thereafter be allocated to the general fund and the several special funds of the municipal court as may exist at the time of imposition of the fines. All state traffic fines and costs as may be required by state law to be remitted to the controller shall be promptly paid to the state controller in the manner and in the amounts as may be required by state law. 
(Code 1964, § 10-6; Ord. No. 11-006, § 8, 1-25-11)  
Sec. 23-6. - Authority of judge to order return of property held for evidence. 
The municipal court judge shall have the authority to order that property in possession of the police department be returned to its rightful owner after final disposition of the case in which such property is being held for evidence or during the pendency of an action as specifically authorized and permitted by Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 47.01 et seq. and Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 38.34. 
(Ord. No. 68-38, § 1, 3-26-68; Ord. No. 11-006, § 9, 1-25-11) 
Cross reference— Disposition of unclaimed property in possession of police department, § 30-49 et seq.  
Sec. 23-7. - City to furnish supplies and forms. 
The city shall purchase and furnish to the judge of the municipal court all necessary supplies and forms required in the business to be transacted by the court and the officers thereof. 
(Code 1964, § 10-8)  
Sec. 23-8. - Special expense. 
(a)  A special expense of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is imposed for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest for each offense under Section 38.10, Texas Penal Code (bail jumping and failure to appear), or each offense under Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Transportation Code, § 543.009, violation of written promise to appear. 
(b)  Special expenses of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest, and the additional expenses described in Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 17.04 and Art. 17.08, may be imposed by the municipal court, after due notice. 
(c)  A person on personal cash, or surety bond who does not appear as provided in the cash, or surety bond shall be notified of a hearing date for the court to consider the special expenses pursuant to subsection (b), payment to the court of the principal sum (amount) of the bond, plus all necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in any arrest for failure to appear. If the hearing on special expense and/or other necessary and reasonable expenses is conducted as a part of the bond forfeiture action, then the procedural rules that govern bond forfeitures generally shall apply. If the hearing is conducted not as a part of the bond forfeiture action, ten (10) days' notice of the hearing shall be given by the city marshal by personal or substituted service in substantial conformity with Rule 106, Texas Rules of Civil Procedure. Any of the expenses found to be due by the court may be collected by the city in accordance with the general laws of the state that govern collection of civil judgments generally. 
(d)  All special expenses provided for in this section shall be paid into the city treasury for the use and benefit of the city. 
(e)  This section applies only to the collection of special expenses after release following arrest for an offense committed on or after September 1, 1983. For the purposes of this section, an offense is committed before the effective date if any element of the offense occurs before the effective date. The collection of a special expense after release following arrest for an offense committed before the effective date of this section is covered by the law in effect when the offense was committed, and the former law is continued in effect for this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 83-347, § 1, 11-22-83; Ord. No. 11-006, §§ 10—12, 1-25-11)  
Sec. 23-9. - Work to discharge fines; work-release. 
(a)  (1)  The judge may require a defendant who fails to pay a previously assessed fine or costs, or who is determined by the court to have insufficient resources or income to pay a fine or costs, to discharge all or part of the fines or costs by performing community service. A defendant may discharge an obligation to perform community service under this article by paying at any time the fine and costs assessed. 
(2)  The judge's order requiring a defendant to participate in community service work under section (a)(1) must specify the number of hours the defendant is required to work. 
(3)  The judge may order the defendant to perform community service work under this article only for a governmental entity or a nonprofit organization that provides service to the general public that enhances social welfare and the general well-being of the community. A governmental entity or nonprofit organization that accepts a defendant under this article to perform community service must agree to supervise the defendant in the performance of the defendant's work and report on the defendant's work to the judge who ordered the community service. 
(4)  A judge may not order a defendant to perform more than sixteen (16) hours per week of community service under this section unless the judge determines that requiring the defendant to work additional hours does not work a hardship on the defendant or the defendant's dependents. 
(5)  A defendant is considered to have discharged one hundred dollars ($100.00) of fines and costs for each eight (8) hours of community service performed under this section. Credit for work release will hereafter be controlled by amendments to state law; provided, however, the city may from time to time provide for credit in an amount greater than that provided by state law, but not less than that provided by state law. 
(6)  Neither the municipal court judge nor any officer or employee of the City of Pasadena is liable for damages arising from an act or a failure to act in connection with manual labor performed by a defendant under this section if the act or failure to act was performed pursuant to court order and was not intentional, willfully or wantonly negligent or performed with conscious indifference or reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 85-227, § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 85-263, § 1, 1-7-86; Ord. No. 02-158, § 1, 7-16-02; Ord. No. 11-006, § 13, 1-25-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-227, § 1, adopted Nov. 12, 1985, purported to amend § 23-30 of the Code. Inasmuch as the Code did not contain a § 23-30, said Ord. No. 85-227 was codified as a new § 23-9, at the editor's discretion.  
Sec. 23-10. - Code of Criminal Procedure adopted. 
The City Council hereby adopts the provisions of Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, Code of Criminal Procedure, Chapter 45, as the same may hereafter be, from time to time, amended as the governing rules of procedure in the Municipal Court of City of Pasadena. Further, to the extent provided by Art. 45.002 thereof, the city council hereby adopts the provisions of the entire Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(Ord. No. 02-158, § 2, 7-16-02)  
Sec. 23-11. - Additional rules for collection of fines. 
(a)  The city council hereby authorizes and approves collection of payment by execution against the property of the defendant. To that end, the city hereby adopts the provisions of Texas Revised Civil Procedures, Rules 621 to 656 as the same may be from time to time amended hereafter. 
(b)  The city council hereby specifically authorizes and approves the filing of an abstract of judgment to become a lien against the property of the defendant in the same manner and with the same priority as abstracts of other criminal judgments generally and as provided by Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, Property Code, Chapter 52 as the same may be from time to time amended hereafter. 
(c)  The city council specifically authorizes imprisonment to a defendant as a method of enforcement of the collection of fines; provided however, that such imprisonment may only be effectuated in strict accordance with the substantive law of this state and the procedures provided for in this chapter. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision hereof, the city council hereby adopts the provisions of the common law of this state, as the same may now or hereafter exist for the collection and execution of its judgments. 
(Ord. No. 02-158, § 3, 7-16-02)  
Sec. 23-12. - Civil court costs. 
The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the following fees for services rendered to any person: 
(1)  Bond forfeiture proceedings: 
a.  Filing of original action ..... $30.00 
The fee for "filing of original action" is for all clerical duties in connection with an original bond forfeiture proceedings filed in the municipal court. 
(2)  Services rendered after judgment: 
a.  Abstract of judgment ..... 5.00 
b.  Execution or other writ or process, per page ..... 5.00 
(Ord. No. 03-153, § 2, 7-22-03)  
Sec. 23-13. - Juror reimbursement. 
Each person who reports for jury service in the Pasadena Municipal Court is entitled to reimbursement for expenses in the amount of six dollars ($6.00) for each day of jury service. 
(Ord. No. 11-006, § 14, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Government Code, § 61.001(c).  
Sec. 23-14. - Judges to perform marriages. 
(a)  A municipal court judge may receive, in addition to a salary, all fees or payments for performing marriages. 
(b)  A marriage performed by a municipal judge may be conducted during normal business hours either in chambers or in a courtroom of the municipal court, provided that such marriage does not interfere with the normal workings of the court. 
(c)  A judge may not require the assistance of municipal court personnel to schedule a wedding or to file any papers related thereto, including but not limited to the return of the marriage license. 
(Ord. No. 11-006, § 14, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Family Code, § 2.202(a)(4).  
Sec. 23-15. - Municipal court technology fund. 
(a)  There is hereby created and recreated a municipal court technology fund. 
(b)  A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor in the municipal court shall be required to pay a technology fee of four dollars ($4.00) as a cost of court. 
(c)  A person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed; 
(2)  The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case; 
(d)  A fund designated by this article may be used only to finance the purchase of or to maintain technological enhancements for the municipal court, including: 
(1)  Computer systems; 
(2)  Computer networks; 
(3)  Computer hardware; 
(4)  Computer software; 
(5)  Imaging systems; 
(6)  Electronic kiosks; 
(7)  Electronic ticket writers; and 
(8)  Electronic management systems. 
(Ord. No. 11-006, § 14, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 102.0172.  
Sec. 23-16. - Municipal court building security fund. 
(a)  A defendant convicted of a misdemeanor offense shall pay a three dollar ($3.00) security fee as a cost of court. 
(b)  A person is considered convicted if: 
(1)  A sentence is imposed on the person; 
(2)  The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or 
(3)  The court defers final disposition of the person's case. 
(c)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the fee provided for in subsection (a) hereof and pay it to the city controller. 
(d)  Money deposited in the municipal court security fund may be used only for security personnel, services and items related to the building that houses the operations of the municipal court. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the term "security personnel, services and items" includes: 
(1)  The purchase or repair of X-ray machines and conveying systems; 
(2)  Handheld metal detectors; 
(3)  Walkthrough metal detectors; 
(4)  Identification cards and systems; 
(5)  Electronic locking and surveillance equipment; 
(6)  Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services; 
(7)  Signage; 
(8)  Confiscated weapons inventory and tracking systems; 
(9)  Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices; 
(10)  The purchase of bullet-proof glass; and 
(11)  The continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel. 
The municipal court security fund shall be administered by or under, the direction of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11-006, § 14, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 102.017.  
Sec. 23-17. - Juvenile case manager fee. 
(a)  There is hereby created within the municipal court the position of juvenile case manager who shall be appointed by the judge of the municipal court, subject to the approval of the council. There shall be such assistant juvenile case managers as may be, from time to time, authorized by the council and appointed by the judge of the municipal court, subject to the approval of the council. The juvenile case manager and assistant juvenile case managers shall perform such duties as may be assigned them from time to time, consistent with the requirements of Article 45.056 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(b)  There is hereby created a juvenile case manager fund that may be used only to finance the salary and benefits of any juvenile case manager employed under 45.056 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. This fund must be administered under the direction of the city council. 
(c)  A defendant convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in the municipal court shall be required to pay a juvenile case manager fee of one dollar ($1.00) as a cost of court in addition to any other fine and costs relating to the case. 
(d)  The clerk of the municipal court shall collect the cost required hereby and pay it to the city controller for the uses described herein and none other. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, a defendant is considered convicted if a sentence is imposed on the defendant or if a defendant receives deferred disposition including deferred proceedings under Article 45.052 or 45.053 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court and each associate judge of the municipal court is authorized to waive the fee required herein in the event of financial hardship. (Ordinance 2005-309, 12-27-05) 
(Ord. No. 11-006, § 14, 1-25-11) 
State Law reference— Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat. Ann., Code Crim. Pro., Art. 102.0174; Art. 45.056.  
ARTICLE II. - CITY MARSHALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 82-205, §§ 2, 5, adopted Aug. 31, 1982, amended § 23-18 to read as herein set out and repealed § 23-19, respectively. Former § 23-18 referred to "warrant officers" rather than "city marshals," and derived from Ord. No. 67-1910, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 1967; Ord. No. 72-9, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 25, 1972; and Ord. No. 75-191, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 1975. Former § 23-19, pertaining to service and execution of process, and acknowledgment of noncivil service status, derived from Ord. No. 67-1910, §§ 2, 3, adopted Feb. 7, 1967; Ord. No. 72-9, §§ 1, 3, adopted Jan. 25, 1972; and Ord. No. 80-141, § 1, adopted July 22, 1980. 
Cross reference— Warrant service established in police department, § 30-9.1. 
 
Sec. 23-18. - General provisions. 
(a)  Supervision. The city marshals shall be under the direct supervision of the judge of the municipal court, who shall be in charge of the city marshal division and shall oversee and supervise the city marshals in the execution of their duties. 
(b)  Duties. Each city marshal shall serve and execute warrants of arrest, subpoenas and other legal process issuing out of any municipal court of the city. The city marshals shall also serve subpoenas or other legal process issuing out of the civil service commission, the council, any board, commission, or department requiring legal process for hearings, condemnation hearings, and none other. Each city marshal shall additionally perform such other and further duties as may be assigned by the judge of the municipal court. 
(c)  Qualification; certification. Each city marshal shall meet the qualifications for certification as a peace officer as established by the Texas Commission of Law Enforcement Officer Standards and Education pursuant to Article 4413(29aa), Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, and shall seek and receive such peace officer certification within the time prescribed by Article 4413(29aa), Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated, as a necessary condition for continued employment as a city marshal. 
(d)  As peace officers. Each city marshal shall serve as a peace officer and shall have full police authority in the exercise of his assigned duties. 
(e)  Distinct from police department. No city marshal is a regular member of the police department of the city within the meaning of the state laws governing such department as to civil service, minimum wages, hours of employment or pension. Neither shall any city marshal be a paid law enforcement officer for the purposes of and within the meaning of Article 6228f of Texas Revised Civil Statutes Annotated. 
(f)  Regular police service of process. Nothing herein provided shall prevent or in anyway inhibit any regular police officer of the City of Pasadena from serving or executing any process issuing out of any municipal court which may be placed in his hands to be served or executed. 
(Ord. No. 82-205, § 2, 8-31-82; Ord. No. 89-153, § 1, 9-5-89)  
Sec. 23-19. - Reserved. 
Note— See the editor's note to Art. II.  
Chapter 23½ - OIL AND GAS WELLS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-157, adopted June 20, 1972, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1—5 herein as Ch. 23½, §§ 23½-1—23½-5, was at the discretion of the editors. Secs. 6 and 7 of said ordinance, validity and effective date provisions, were omitted from codification. 
Cross reference— Payment of taxes prerequisite for obtaining license or permit, § 26-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 23½-1. - Purpose of chapter. 
The city council finds that there has been and there is a likelihood of additional drilling and production operations for oil and gas within the corporate limits of the city requiring that operations for the drilling and production of oil and gas within such area be regulated because of the fire hazards created by such operations, as well as the menace of falling derricks, unsanitary conditions, contaminated water supply and all similar and like threats to the lives, property, health, safety and welfare of the public in general, for which the police power of the state delegated to this city is to be and is hereby invoked in aid of the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 1, 6-20-72)  
Sec. 23½-2. - Permit for drilling. 
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person, acting either for himself or as an agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant of any other person, to commence to drill, or to operate any well for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena, or to work upon or assist in any way in the prosecution or operation of any such well, without a permit for the drilling and operation of such well having first been issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Each day during which a person violates any portion of this section shall constitute a separate offense, which said offense shall be punished by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 2, 6-20-72)  
Sec. 23½-3. - Location of oil and gas wells near buildings prohibited. 
No well for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons shall be drilled and no permit shall be issued for any such well to be drilled in any location which is nearer than four hundred (400) feet from any residential or commercial building containing more than six hundred (600) square feet of floor space without the applicant's having first secured the written permission of the owner or owners thereof. 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 3, 6-20-72)  
Sec. 23½-4. - Location of oil and gas wells on public property prohibited. 
No well for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons shall be drilled within any of the streets or alleys, parks, or other public property. 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 4, 6-20-72)  
Sec. 23½-5. - Application for permit to drill an oil or gas well. 
(a)  Any person desiring to drill a well for the production of oil, gas, or other hydrocarbons within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena shall present a written application for permit to drill, in duplicate, to the director of planning and traffic of the City of Pasadena. Such application shall include: 
(1)  A map or plat showing the well location with reference to a tract or tracts described by metes and bounds, or with reference to Lambert Coordinates, and all streets, alleys, parks, public property, and buildings, commercial or residential, having more than six hundred (600) square feet of floor space located within one thousand (1,000) square feet of the proposed well head; and 
(2)  A duly verified statement by the applicant that the proposed well location is not within a public street, alley, park or other property, and that either the proposed well head is not nearer than four hundred (400) feet from any residential or commercial building containing more than six hundred (600) square feet of floor space or that written permission has been obtained from the owner or owners of every such building within four hundred (400) feet of the proposed well location; and 
(3)  Copies of all written permissions obtained, if any; and 
(4)  A cashiers check in the amount of twenty-five and no/100 dollars ($25.00) made payable to the City of Pasadena, which shall be a filing fee, and shall cover the cost of investigating and verifying the statements contained in the application. 
(b)  The director of planning and traffic shall keep one copy of each application and the report of his investigation thereof as part of the permanent records of the city. A permit shall be issued upon a finding by the said director that all material statements in the application are true and correct and that the proposed well will violate no provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 72-157, § 5, 6-20-72)  
Chapter 24 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city to establish, maintain and regulate public parks, Art. I, § 4. 
Cross reference— Duties of planning and zoning commission relative to parks, § 28-41; littering parks, § 14-19; limitation on parking of mobile homes in parks, § 21-2; speed limit in parks, § 36-145; beautification commission, § 2-180; senior citizens' commission, § 2-191 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Department of parks and recreation created. 
There is hereby created and recreated within the municipal government a department of parks and recreation. There are hereby created in the department of parks and recreation the following divisions and subdivisions: 
(1)  Parks —#454 
(2)  Recreation —#490 
(Code 1964, § 19-1; Ord. No. 81-4, § 1, 1-13-81; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-1.1. - Position classifications, salary grades, numbers, career codes. 
There shall exist in the department of recreation and the divisions thereof such position classifications, salary grades, numbers and career codes as are set forth at Exhibit "A", attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes. [2] 
(Ord. No. 81-4, § 1, 1-13-81) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Exhibit "A" referred to in section 24-1.1 is not set out herein, but said exhibit and subsequent amendments thereto are on file and available for inspection in the office of the city secretary. 
 
Sec. 24-2. - Office of director of parks and recreation created; appointment of director. 
The office of director of parks and recreation is hereby created. The director shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation and approval by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 1902; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84) 
Cross reference— Bond for director of parks and recreation, § 2-5.  
Sec. 24-3. - Director to be head of department; general powers and duties. 
(a)  Except as may otherwise be directed by action of the city council, the director of parks and recreation shall have general supervision of all public parks and shall further be charged with the duty of planning and supervising the recreational activities which may be sponsored and supervised by the city. The director shall have such further duties as may be prescribed by the council. 
(b)  The director shall be the head of the department of parks and recreation and all officers and employees assigned thereto whose duties shall be performed subject to the supervision of the director. In addition to the specific powers and duties prescribed by this article, the director shall engage in such other executive functions and perform such other duties as are assigned by the mayor and city council by ordinance to the department. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the director of parks and recreation to direct, control and manage all parks, parkways, recreational facilities [public golf courses], and improvements on park and recreation property belonging to or under the control of the city and such other grounds and facilities as may be placed under his control by the mayor and city council, and to direct the improvement and maintenance of all such properties. 
(d)  The director of parks and recreation shall have the power, subject to the approval of the mayor and city council, to prescribe rules and regulations for the orderly government and use of all parks and recreational parkways and improvements on park and recreation property, and assess deposits, user fees, registration fees, admission fees and rental fees; provided all existing rules and regulations heretofore established in accordance with the law shall be continued in force until changed in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(e)  Subject to the approval of the mayor and city council, the director may make such rules and regulations for the administration of the affairs of the department of parks and recreation he shall see proper, provided such rules are not in conflict with existing laws or ordinances. 
(Code 1964, § 19-3; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-4. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 78-212, § 4, adopted Dec. 26, 1978, repealed § 24-4, pertaining to the office of the park superintendent, derived from Code 1964, § 19-4.  
Sec. 24-5. - City parks closing times. 
(a)  The following city parks shall be closed except as provided in subsection (c) below to the public in the event at sundown and shall remain closed until 6:00 a.m. the following day: Asbury, Bliss Meadows, Bramley, Cascade, Community, Crane, Deepwater, El Jardin, Friendship Gardens, Gardens No. 1, Ghana Playlot, Golden Acres, Johnson, Light Co., Oaks Drive Playlot, Olson, Parkview, Parkgate North, Parklane Playlot, Pasadena Boulevard, Pasadena Highlands, Pine, Queens, Revelon, Rusk, Sherwood, South, Tatar, T.J. Cross, Vermillion, Yellowstone, and Bowling Green. 
(b)  The following city parks shall be closed to the public in the evening at 11:00 p.m. and shall remain closed except as provided in subsection (c) below until 6:00 a.m. the following day: Ben Briar, Burke/Crenshaw, Deepwater Optimist, East Southmore, Fairmont, Gardens No. 2, Hollybay Court, Memorial, Red Bluff, Satsuma, Strawberry, and Sunset. 
(c)  City parks that have gates to be unlocked for entry to the park shall remain closed until 6:30 a.m. rather than 6:00 a.m. as provided above. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 24-5.1. - Being in parks when closed prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in a city park during the time the park is closed to the public. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 24-5.2. - Penalty. 
Any person who violates the provisions of section 24-5.1 above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 24-5.3. - Authority to install signs. 
The director of the department of parks and recreation shall have the authority to place, erect, and maintain signs specifying the times city parks are open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 94-31, § 1, 2-22-94; Ord. No. 98-49, § 1, 3-24-98)  
Sec. 24-6. - Riding or driving animals in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive any horse, mule or livestock of any character, upon, over or across the grounds of any public park, playground or other recreational facility in the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit riders of horses or mules from riding or driving along roadways, driveways or streets through park grounds. 
(Code 1964, § 19-5; Ord. No. 71-139, § 1, 5-25-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-139, § 1, amended Code 1964, § 19-5, codified herein as § 24-6, by deleting provisions applicable to riding or driving vehicles in public parks. 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 24-6.1. - Riding or driving motor vehicles upon public lands. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive a motor vehicle, as herein defined, upon, over or across the grounds of any public park, playground or other recreational facility; or upon any esplanade within the city limits of the City of Pasadena. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit riding or driving any vehicle licensed by the State of Texas along roadways, driveways or streets through park grounds. "Motor vehicles," as used herein, shall mean any vehicle which is, or can be, self-propelled. 
(Ord. No. 71-139, § 2, 5-25-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-139, § 2, amended Code 1964 by adding the provisions codified herein as §§ 24-6.1 and 24-6.2. 
Cross reference— Speed limit for vehicles in parks, § 36-145.  
Sec. 24-6.2. - Penalty for violation of sections 24-6 and 24-6.1. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of sections 24-6 and 24-6.1, above, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 71-139, § 2, 5-25-71; Ord. No. 90-128, § 2, 7-24-90) 
Note— See the editor's note following § 24-6.1.  
Sec. 24-7. - Injuring, defacing, etc., park or recreation property. 
No person shall injure, deface, mar or destroy any park property, or property owned by or used by the recreation department. 
(Code 1964, § 19-6)  
Sec. 24-7.1. - Glass receptacles—Prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into or upon any park or playground, or into or upon any other public ground under the jurisdiction and control of the department of parks and recreation, or have in his or her possession or under his or her care, custody and control while therein or thereupon, any glass receptacle, including, but not limited to, glass bottles, glass jars, drinking glasses and glass containers of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 80-264, § 1, 11-12-80)  
Sec. 24-7.2. - Same—Penalty for violation of section 24-7.1. 
Any person who shall violate the provisions of section 24-7.1 above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 80-264, § 1, 11-12-80; Ord. No. 90-128, § 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 24-7.3. - Same—Authority to install warning signs. 
The director of the department of parks and recreation shall place, erect, and maintain signs prohibiting the conduct proscribed by Section 24-7.1 upon or at the entrance to the park or playground or part thereof affected as may be most appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 80-264, § 1, 11-12-80)  
Sec. 24-8. - Alcoholic beverages prohibited in certain public recreational facilities; penalty. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverages shall be permitted to be sold, possessed, carried onto or consumed on the premises of public parks and recreational facilities or public golf courses with the exception of the Pasadena Fairgrounds and the Pasadena Municipal Golf Course. It is the specific intent of this section that the term "premises" include any and all parking facilities adjacent to said recreational facilities that are owned, operated or controlled by the City of Pasadena. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 76-65, §§ 1, 2, 4-13-76; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84; Ord. No. 90-128, § 2, 7-24-90)  
Secs. 24-9—24-11. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Sections 24-9—24-11 were repealed by § 1 of Ord. No. 84-115, enacted June 19, 1984. Said former sections were derived from Ord. No. 78-212, § 1, enacted Dec. 26, 1978; and pertained to the creation of the parks department; creation of the office of the director, his appointment and term; and appointing the director to be the head of the parks department and describing his general powers and duties.  
Sec. 24-12. - Authority over trees, shrubs, plants. 
The department of parks and recreation and the director of parks and recreation shall be clothed with authority over all trees, shrubs and plants of any kind and character which are now or may hereafter be planted in or along the street medians or other public places of the city, the department and director being vested with full power, authority and jurisdiction over all planting of every kind and character lying outside of the property lines of privately owned property. It is hereby made the duty of such department and director to direct, regulate and encourage the planting, culture and preservation of shade and ornamental trees and plants on the street medians and public places of the city; to direct, regulate and encourage the pruning, spraying, cultivation and maintenance of such trees and plants, and to direct the time and method of pruning and trimming the same; to remove or cause to be removed any tree or plant, or other obstruction which, in their judgment, would interfere with the development of adjoining trees or plants or with the free use of the streets or sidewalks; to advise property owners with respect to the kind of trees to plant or shrubbery desired on the particular street and the method of planting the same; to take all such measures as may be deemed necessary or desirable to control all dangerous insects, pests and plant diseases which may affect trees or shrubbery on the street medians or other public places in the city; to devise plans for the planting of trees on and along the street medians within the city where trees may be desirable; to prescribe the character, kind, size, space and position of all trees so planted upon or along street medians or other public places; to prevent the planting of trees, shrubs or other plants not in their judgment desirable or proper; and to plant or cause to be planted such trees along such street medians or other public places as such department may deem proper. 
The land that may be selected, obtained or acquired by the city for use as parks or parkways shall be used exclusively for park purposes. 
(Ord. No. 78-212, § 1, 12-26-78; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-13. - Fees. 
(a)  Fee schedule. 
Athletics 
Adult Softball (inclusive) ..... $375.00 
Adult Basketball ..... $375.00 
Adult Volleyball ..... $175.00 
Winter Basketball 
Resident ..... $40.00 
Non-resident ..... $45.00 
Summer Basketball 
Resident ..... $45.00 
Non-resident ..... $50.00 
Youth Soccer 
 Resident ..... $45.00 
Non-resident ..... $50.00 
Kipper Mease: 
One (1) field - w/o prep ..... $100.00 
One (2) field - w/o prep ..... $200.00 
One (3) field - w/o prep ..... $300.00 
(Add $50.00 per field with prep) ..... $300.00 
Baseball Softball Field Rental (all fields except Kipper Mease: 
Per Field Per Day ..... $100.00 
Prep and Mark Per Field ..... $50.00 
Per Hour No Lights ..... $15.00 
Per Hour With Lights ..... $20.00 
Baseball/Softball league: 
Key replacement/Key ..... $10.00 
Pal gym rental: 
4 hour rental ..... $100.00 
Instructional Leagues: 
Resident ..... $25.00 
Nonresident ..... $30.00 
Aquatics: 
Swim lessons: 
Resident ..... $35.00 
Nonresident ..... $40.00 
Private swim lessons: 
Resident ..... $70.00 
Nonresident ..... $75.00 
Shallow water aerobics: 
Resident ..... $30.00 
Nonresident ..... $35.00 
Deep water aerobics: 
Resident ..... $30.00 
Non-resident ..... $35.00 
Home school swim: 
Resident ..... $25.00 
Non-resident ..... $30.00 
Daily pool admission Sunset and Red Bluff pools only 
Resident ..... $1.50 
Non-resident ..... $2.00 
Junior lifeguard: 
Resident ..... $40.00 
Nonresident ..... $45.00 
Water safety course 
Resident ..... $15.00 
Nonresident ..... $20.00 
F.A.C.T. (First aid for children today) 
Resident ..... $25.00 
Nonresident ..... $30.00 
Summer Season pass Sunset and Red Bluff pools only 
Resident ..... $35.00 
Resident add on ..... $25.00 
Nonresident ..... $45.00 
Nonresident add on ..... $30.00 
Season passes do not provide free entry to dive in movies or other special events held at the pool. 
Strawberry Pool: 
Daily admission: 
Resident above 48" ..... $10.00 
Nonresident above 48" ..... $12.00 
Resident below 48" ..... $6.00 
Nonresident below 48" ..... $8.00 
Season passes: 
Resident ..... $70.00 
Nonresident ..... $90.00 
Season passes do not provide free entry to Drive in Movies or other special events held at the pools. 
Cabana rental: 
Two-hour rental ..... $45.00 
Per half day—Four hours ..... $75.00 
Per day—Eight hours ..... $140.00 
Entrance fee not included in rental fee. 
Rental rooms: 
Swim Season (May—September): 
Two-hour rental/person ..... $20.00 
Non swim season: 
Full Room, four-hour minimum ..... $250.00 
One-half room, four-hour minimum ..... $150.00 
Deposit ..... $100.00 
Swim Season - $20.00 fee is a per person charge. Maximum of 25 persons, Minimum of 10 persons for party room A or B rental. Maximum of 50 persons for combined room rental. Fee includes use of party room for 2 hours, pool admission, 2 slices of pizza per guest, One 12 oz. collectors cup with 3 refills, and party facilitator. Non swim season rental includes tables and chairs only. 
Lap swim pass: 
Six (6) weeks ..... $30.00 
Three-month ..... $60.00 
Five-month ..... $100.00 
Senior ..... Free 
Rentals: 
Senior Center—Rental: 
Four (4) hours ..... $250.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $200.00 
Rusk Center 
Four (4) hours ..... $150.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $100.00 
Strawberry Center: 
Four (4) hours ..... $150.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $100.00 
Golden Acres: 
Four (4) hours ..... $150.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $100.00 
Peter C. Fogo: 
Four (4) hours ..... $200.00 
Each additional hour ..... $25.00 
Deposit ..... $150.00 
Odell Harrison: 
Four (4) hours ..... $250.00 
Each additional hour ..... $25.00 
Deposit ..... $150.00 
Burke/Crenshaw Gazebo: 
Four (4) hours ..... $50.00 
Each additional hour ..... $10.00 
Deposit ..... $30.00 
Red Bluff Gazebo: 
Four (4) hours ..... $50.00 
Each additional hour ..... $10.00 
Deposit ..... $30.00 
Burke/Crenshaw Pavilion: 
Four (4) hours ..... $275.00 
Eight (8) hours ..... $350.00 
Deposit ..... $150.00 
Tables/Chairs ..... $50.00 
Strawberry Pavilion: 
Four (4) hours ..... $150.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $75.00 
Highlands Pavilion: 
Four (4) hours ..... $50.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $35.00 
Red Bluff Pavilion: 
Four (4) hours ..... $50.00 
Each additional hour ..... $20.00 
Deposit ..... $35.00 
El Jardin electrical pole: 
One-day rental ..... $35.00 
Deposit ..... $35.00 
Non-profit rate - 75% of Fee 
Camp Quest 
Resident ..... $75.00 
Non-Resident ..... $80.00 
Sliding Scale Sibling Discounts: 
First Child ..... $75.00 
Second Child ..... $65.00 
Third Child ..... $55.00 
Multiple week registration: 
Two-week discount ..... $15.00 
Three-week discount ..... $20.00 
Four-week discount ..... $25.00 
Entire summer discount ..... $100.00 
Early bird registration ..... $60.00 
Early bird registration: If parents register their children during early registration dates, as advertised by the parks and recreation department, they will only pay sixty dollars ($60.00) per child for any weeks paid for in advance; thereafter, fees go back to the original price with the applicable discounts. 
Camp Lots o'fun 
Resident ..... $75.00 
Non-Resident ..... $80.00 
Sliding Scale Sibling Discounts: 
First child ..... $75.00 
Second Child ..... $65.00 
Third Child ..... $55.00 
Multiple week registration: 
Two-week discount ..... $15.00 
Three-week discount ..... $20.00 
Four-week discount ..... $25.00 
Entire summer discount ..... $100.00 
Early bird registration ..... $60.00 
Early bird registration: If parents register their children during early registration dates, as advertised by the parks and recreation department, they will only pay sixty dollars ($60.00) per child for any weeks paid for in advance; thereafter, fees go back to the original price with the applicable discounts. 
Multi-purpose center: 
Wheelchair sports camp: 
Resident/Week ..... $60.00 
Non-resident/Week ..... $75.00 
Camp Climb (2 Week Camp): 
Resident/Week ..... $75.00 
Non-resident/Week ..... $85.00 
Camp Achieve (two-week camp): 
Resident/Week ..... $65.00 
Non-resident/Week ..... $75.00 
Camp Strive (two-week camp): 
Resident/Week ..... $60.00 
Non-resident/Week ..... $70.00 
Camp Igloo: 
Resident ..... $40.00 
Non-resident ..... $50.00 
Monthly Dances ..... $1.00 
Bowling ..... $5.00 
Madison Jobe Senior Center: 
Senior Center - Dances: 
Silver Star Senior ..... $2.00 
Non-resident ..... $3.00 
Lunch and a movie ..... $2.00 
Six-week computer class ..... $15.00 
Six-week geneology class ..... $15.00 
Golf course: 
Weekday: 
Walking ..... $15.00 
One-half cart ..... $24.00 
Fee and Single Cart ..... $26.00 
Senior: 
Walking ..... $10.00 
One-half cart ..... $19.00 
Fee and Single Cart ..... $21.00 
Jr.: 
Walking ..... $10.00 
Weekend (Fri-Sun)/Holiday: 
Walking ..... $20.00 
One-half cart ..... $30.00 
Fee and single cart ..... $32.00 
Twilight weekday 
Walking ..... $10.00 
One-half cart ..... $17.00 
Fee and single cart ..... $21.00 
Twilight Weekend (Fri-Sun)/Holiday: 
Walking ..... $12.00 
One-half cart ..... $20.00 
Fee and single cart ..... $24.00 
Private cart use: 
Age 70 and over Monday - Friday before 11:00 a.m. 
Other Carts (Trail Fee) ..... $10.00 
Replay cart fee: 
Nine (9) holes ..... $15.00/$12.00 
Eighteen (18) holes ..... $24.00/$15.00 
(Ord. No. 04-187, §§ 4, 5, 8-31-04; Ord. No. 05-35, §§ 2, 3, 2-15-05; Ord. No. 07-89, § 1(Exh. A), 4-3-07; Ord. No. 13-015, § 1(Exh. A), 2-12-13; Ord. No. 15-070, § 1(Exh. A), 6-2-15)  
Sec. 24-14. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 79-54, §§ 1—13, adopted Oct. 16, 1979, being nonamendatory of the Code, has been codified as Art. I¾, §§ 24-15—24-15.12, at the editor's discretion. 
 
Sec. 24-15. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created and established, within and for the city, the City of Pasadena Parks and Recreation Commission, composed of eleven (11) members appointed by the mayor, whose offices are hereby created and established as an advisory commission to assist and advise the city council on the proper operation of Pasadena's parks and recreational facilities. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 1, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.1. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member of the commission shall be a resident citizen and a qualified voter of the city. Any member who ceases to hold all such qualifications shall, ipso facto upon each cessation, terminate his membership, subject only to written approval by the mayor filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 2, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.2. - Appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  All members of the parks and recreation commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(b)  The chairman, vice-chairman and three (3) of the parks and recreation commissioners who are first so appointed shall be designated to serve for terms of two (2) years; and the remaining commissioners shall be designated to serve for a term of one year, respectively, from the date of their appointment, but thereafter, commissioners shall be appointed as aforesaid for a term of office of two (2) years, unless sooner terminated. 
(c)  All vacancies in membership of the commission for any reason shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired terms as soon as practicable after the position becomes vacant (subject to confirmation by city council). 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 3, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.3. - Members to serve without compensation. 
The members of the parks and recreation commission, in the performance of their official duties, shall serve without compensation for office. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 4, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.4. - Officers designated. 
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The mayor is directed to appoint appropriate ex officio members of the commission. The director of parks and recreation shall serve as the executive officer of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 5, 10-16-79; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-15.5. - Election and terms of officers. 
The chairman and the vice-chairman shall be appointed by the mayor, and the secretary of the commission shall be nominated by the members of the commission in such manner as the commission shall prescribe at its first meeting as a committee of the whole. The secretary shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified and serving members of the commission. The terms of all offices shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's commission membership appointment. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 6, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.6. - Attendance at meetings. 
The commission may establish its own rules as to attendance of its members at meetings and, in furtherance of such, the commission may, by a majority vote, expel any member who, in the opinion of the commission, misses an unreasonable number of meetings. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 7, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.7. - Procedure. 
The commission is hereby empowered to establish its own parliamentary procedure, provided that such shall not be in conflict with the City Charter or other provisions of law, or the following: A quorum shall consist of a majority of the entire membership of the commission, and any issue to be voted on shall be resolved by those members present. The chairman shall be entitled to vote upon any issue, but shall have no veto power. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 8, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.8. - Authority to advise the mayor. 
Said parks and recreation commission is hereby authorized to work with the mayor and make recommendations to the mayor about any matter that it deems beneficial to the administration; provided, that such functions shall not contravene the City Charter or any other law and such shall be considered advisory only. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 9, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.9. - General powers and duties. 
In relation to the functions of the parks and recreational programs within the City of Pasadena, the commission shall be authorized to, for final approval to the mayor and city council: 
(a)  Advise and make recommendations for the use of said parks and recreational programs and facilities of the City of Pasadena to enhance the quality of the recreational environment of the city. 
(b)  Advise and recommend format of all lease agreements and other agreements between users of the recreational facilities and the City of Pasadena, including a survey of fees recommended for the use thereof. 
(c)  Recommend rules and regulations for the use and enjoyment of the recreational facilities of the city and to decide appeals from the decisions of the director of parks and recreation on rule violation or discipline. 
(d)  Make and, from time to time, amend and repeal bylaws, subject to approval of the city council. 
(e)  Advise and make recommendations regarding the need for additional parks and facilities. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 10, 10-16-79; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-15.10. - Obligation of city. 
The parks and recreation commission shall have no power to obligate the city in any manner whatsoever; its finances shall be administered in the same manner as any department of the city government. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 11, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.11. - Coordinator. 
An official of the city designated by the mayor shall serve as coordinator for the commission and shall prepare materials for distribution and conduct such other business of the commission as may be assigned. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 12, 10-16-79)  
Sec. 24-15.12. - Finances; rights of commission. 
The city council declares its purpose and intention (but does not in any way obligate itself or attempt to obligate any future city council) to, from time to time, appropriate and cause to be paid over to the commission (or upon commission's recommendation) such sums as the council may deem proper and appropriate to aid in defraying the expenses of operation, maintenance and development. 
By virtue of this article, there shall not be vested in the commission or in the members of the commission any right except it be subject to termination by the city by repeal or amendment of this article or other appropriate action of its governing body. 
(Ord. No. 79-54, § 13, 10-16-79)  
Secs. 24-16, 24-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PARK FIRE RINGS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13. 
 
Sec. 24-18. - Established. 
The parks and recreation director is hereby authorized to establish fireburning facilities in city parks including barbecue pits and fire rings. 
(Ord. No. 1803, § 1, 4-26-66; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-19. - Use permit—Required. 
A permit from the parks and recreation director shall be required for the use of a park fire ring, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use such fire ring without a permit. Such permit must be obtained from the director at his office at Strawberry Park at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to the use of such fire ring. 
(Ord. No. 67-1947, § 1, 5-23-67; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-20. - Same—Issuance or denial. 
The parks and recreation director shall determine whether an applicant for a permit for the use of the park fire ring is qualified to receive such permit, and the director shall not issue a permit if in his judgment an applicant is not so qualified. No such permit shall be issued unless it is first established that an employee of the parks and recreation department will be present at or in the vicinity of the fire ring during its proposed use, and able to supervise such use. 
(Ord. No. 67-1947, § 1, 5-23-67; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-21. - Same—Revocation. 
Any permit issued pursuant to section 24-20 may be revoked without notice, if the parks and recreation director, or his agents or employees, shall determine that a fire permitted by such permit is being flared in an unsafe manner, or if adverse weather conditions prevail at the time the fire is permitted, or if the permittee fails to follow accepted or prescribed safety precautions at the flaring of the fire. 
(Ord. No. 67-1947, § 1, 5-23-67)  
Sec. 24-22. - Use regulations. 
The fire marshal shall and is hereby directed to publish regulations regarding the building of fires in the park fire ring. Copies of such regulations shall be furnished to the parks and recreation director to be distributed to applicants for permits to use such fire ring. In establishing such regulations, the fire marshal shall include, but not be limited to, the following conditions for the use of the park fire ring: 
(1)  Only responsible persons shall be allowed in the fire ring at any time and the director, his agents or employees, at his or their discretion, may require the reduction of the number of persons in the fire ring at any time. 
(2)  At least one (1) five-gallon container of water must be inside the fire ring at all times. 
(3)  Any extra wood or fuel supply furnished by parties using the ring must be kept outside of the fire ring. 
(4)  Fire materials shall not exceed one (1) foot, eight (8) inches, in height or three (3) feet in diameter. 
(5)  No type of lighting fluid shall be sprayed on the fire before, during or after the fire has been built. 
(6)  A person approved by the director, his agent or employee, must guard a permitted fire at all times. 
(7)  No pressurized type of can or container shall be placed near or in the fire. 
(8)  No person shall wear dangling articles of clothing or other materials while working at the fire. 
(9)  The fire must be completely extinguished before the permittee leaves the site. Extinguishment with water and the spreading of coals is permissible. The director or his agent or employee shall, in all instances, be the final judge as to the proper extinguishment of any fire in the fire ring. 
(10)  The fire ring area must be cleared of litter and debris prior to the permittee's leaving. 
(11)  One (1) responsible adult shall be present for every eight (8) minors at all times during use of the fire ring. 
(12)  All fires must be extinguished by 9:00 p.m. and the same shall be checked by the director, his agents or employees, at that time. No fires may be lit in the park area before 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 67-1947, 5-23-67; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-23. - Suspension of use privileges. 
In addition to the general penalty provided by section 1-7 of this Code, the building of a fire in a park without a permit from the parks and recreation director, or in violation of safety rules promulgated by the fire marshal, may result in a suspension, for one year of the privilege of the group or individual involved to use the park fire ring, at the discretion of the fire marshal or the parks and recreation director. 
(Ord. No. 67-1947, § 3, 5-23-67; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Secs. 24-24—24-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - MUNICIPAL FAIRGROUNDS AND CIVIC/CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 15, 2011, amended article IV in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article IV, §§ 24-31—24-43, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 88-147, §§ 2, 3, 8-16-88; Ord. No. 94-1, § 7, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 94-7, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 94-164, §§ 2—4, 8-30-94; Ord. No. 98-52, §§ 1—5, 3-31-98; Ord. No. 00-22, § 1, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 00-24, § 1, 2-29-00; Ord. No. 04-187, §§ 2, 3, 8-31-04; Ord. No. 07-89, §§ 2—4, 4-3-07. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 24-31. - Name of the facility. 
That tract of land containing 105.817 acres of land, more or less, fronting on Red Bluff and Fairmont Parkway in the City of Pasadena, heretofore commonly known as the "Rodeo Grounds" is hereby officially designated "The Municipal Fairgrounds and Civic/Convention Center Complex", hereafter called the "facility". 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
Sec. 24-32. - Definitions and general authority of the director of the convention center and municipal fairgrounds relative to signing of agreement. 
Definitions: 
Additional time. Any time before or after scheduled event time; also defined in Section 2.02 of the Occupancy Agreement. 
Agreement means the Occupancy Agreement. 
Arena Complex. The Ross Kelley Rodeo Arena and south parking lot area that enters and exits from Red Bluff Road. 
Barbeque Pavilion or Cowboy Pavilion. Covered and fenced area at the south of the property with a concrete floor and lighting. 
City. City of Pasadena, Texas. 
Catering fee. The fee that is payable to the Pasadena Convention Center. 
Concert/festival. Event may include concert, various tents and stages with entertainment, food vendors, commercial booths, arts and crafts booths, carnival attractions, and/or cook-offs. 
Confetti. Natural flower petals, silk or synthetic flower petals, rice, birdseed, Silly String, small packaged items, small sparkly items, small paper cutouts, small mylar cutouts, any small cutout or torn up particles of any substance that is usually thrown or used for table decorations, or for festive occasions. 
Director. The Director of the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds, General Manager, or any person designated by the Director. 
Excessive clean-up. Excessive clean-up is any service beyond normal, routine janitorial services. Examples include but are not limited to: Large amounts of trash and boxes left on floors (anything larger than what can be swept into a commercial dustpan); cleaning ground-in substances or food off tables or chairs; numerous spilled beverages; large amounts of trash left in bleachers; numerous instances of spilled substances that must be wiped or cleaned with cleaning solutions; large amounts of cans or bottles; pallets; crates; stains to any carpeting or other floor surfacing; tape residue left on any surface; balloons left floating on the ceiling; cleaning up confetti; any damage that requires extraordinary care; clean up and disposal of any grease, oil, chemicals, or bodily fluids; clean up of any graffiti or paint; clean up of mischievous acts; clean up of any coating or residue left in booth; and clean up of hazardous substances or bio-hazards. 
Event. A performance, meeting, exhibit, show, or any other occurrence sponsored or promoted by the occupant, which is described in Section 2.01 of the Occupancy Agreement. 
Event day. Consecutive twenty-four-hour period, 12:00 a.m.—11:59 p.m. 
FFA Pavilion. The covered pavilion and structure with a sand floor that is attached to the Pasadena Livestock Show and Rodeo Association's offices and is used for the Future Farmer's of America (aka FFA) livestock show area. 
Facility. The location identified as the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds which encompasses all 100+ acres and any and all buildings, offices, barns, arenas, fences, structures, fixtures, pavilions, and equipment located on said premises. Addresses to include 7902 Fairmont Parkway, 7600 Red Bluff Road, 7601 Red Bluff Road, and 7603 Red Bluff Road, located in Pasadena, Texas 77507. 
Force majeure shall include but not be limited to: Acts of God, acts of the public enemy, war, blockades, insurrections, riots, epidemics, landslides, lightning, earthquakes, fires, storms, floods, washouts, tornadoes, hurricanes, arrests, and restraints of governments and people, explosions, power outages, and any other inability of either party, whether similar to those enumerated or otherwise that is not within the control of the party claiming such inability and which such party could not have avoided by the exercise of due diligence and care. 
Midway. the paved road that runs from the back of the Pasadena Convention Center to the Ross Kelley Rodeo Arena. 
Occupant. Approved applicant who has entered into an Occupancy Agreement with the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds and has submitted required deposit(s) and rental fees; provided, however, the term shall not include any person whose Occupancy Agreement has been terminated or canceled. 
PCC. Abbreviation for the Pasadena Convention Center. 
PLS&R. Abbreviation for the Pasadena Livestock Show and Rodeo Association. 
Period of occupancy. That period of time specified in Section 2.02 of the Occupancy Agreement. 
Premises. The location identified as "premises" in Section 2.01 of the Occupancy Agreement as it pertains to the occupant or the entire premises known as the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds. 
Rental fee. The fee paid by the occupant for the use of the facility as noted in Section 3.01 of the Occupancy Agreement. 
Reservation application. Form completed by the potential occupant to include, but not be limited to contact information, event details, and requesting specific dates. 
Reservation request. Event date requested by the potential occupant. 
Security deposit. A deposit to cover any miscellaneous fees (tables, chairs, etc.) and/or damages incurred due to the event. 
Special provisions. Any necessary additions regarding provisions which are peculiar to an event. 
Strawberry festival offices. Also known as the San Jacinto Day Foundation Offices. 
Authority of the director. The Director of the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds or his designee is hereby authorized and empowered to pass upon applications for the rental of the facilities, including but not limited to, the convention center parking lot, the rodeo arena, the stockpens, the closed exhibit hall, the open exhibit hall, the cook-off area, the midway, the recreational vehicle areas, the barbecue pavilion and private park, and the general premises of the facility, and to determine the rate of rental to be charged to applicants in accordance with the schedule of rentals provided for in this article. In the event of any ambiguous definitions, terms, or conflicts within this article, the director is hereby authorized to interpret the ordinance in the best interest of the city. 
The director or his designee is hereby authorized to sign written agreements on behalf of the city with persons renting the facilities embraced in this article, in such form including such terms, conditions and stipulations as written and approved by the city legal department in accordance with this article. The director has the authority to adjust rental rates according to industry standards. The director may or may not refuse to rent portions of the facility if it could result in loss of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11; Ord. No. 15-168, § 1, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 24-32.1. - Occupancy Agreements; general provisions. 
The Occupancy Agreement shall be executed after occupant has received and filed with the director or his designee a reservation application. No oral agreement for the use of the facilities shall be valid. All set-up information, in and out times, actual event times, and electrical requirements shall be submitted at Occupancy Agreement execution. Due to staffing and scheduling requirements, these times are of the essence and must be strictly adhered to by the Occupant. Any changes after this time are subject to late fees or change order fees. All electrical changes made less than two weeks before the event are subject to increased rates for electrical services or equipment. 
Nonprofit groups as defined in section 24-35.1 of this article may pay fifty (50) per cent of the standard rental rates for the space rented. Exceptions are electrical rates which are to be charged as standard rates. Rental equipment and any other fees that may apply are to be charged at the fifty (50) per cent rate. 
The statement of policies shall agree with this ordinance and the Occupancy Agreement approved herein. If the policy conflicts with any of the terms of this article, then only that portion that conflicts ceases to be operable and the remainder of the policy is in full effect and enforceable. 
The City of Pasadena shall be entitled to all remedies available at law and in equity and maximum allowable interest with penalties for failure to comply with the requirements of this article as contained herein. 
Fee Schedule: 
(1)  Pasadena Convention Center: The basic rental rates of the facility include air conditioning, heating, lighting, water, reasonable janitorial services and the bleacher seating system. In the event of excessive janitorial services, the director or his designee reserves the right to deduct additional cleaning charges from the security deposit. 
Rental Rates: 	
Entire facility 	$2,500.00 per event day 
Mini Hall (A, B, C, or D)* 	$400.00 per event day 
E Hall* 	$950.00 per event day 
A & B or C & D* 	$750.00 per event day 
A, B, & E or C, D, & E* 	$1,500.00 per event day 
Room 102 (968 sq. ft.)* 	$150.00 per event day 
Room 103 (648 sq. ft.)* 	$100.00 per event day 
Combination of Rooms 102 & 103 (1,616 sq. ft.)* 	$200.00 per event day 
Room 107 (783 sq. ft.)* 	$125.00 per event day 
 
(2)  Fairgrounds and fairground facilities: 
Rental Rates: 	
Entire fairgrounds and fairground facilities 	$3,500.00 per event day 
Ross Kelley Rodeo Arena 	$1,000.00 per event day 
Campbell Hall 	$750.00 per event day 
FFA Pavilion 	$300.00 per event day 
Barbeque Pavilion 	$100.00 per event day 
Midway 	$500.00 per event day 
 
(3)  Electrical: Single standard 110 volt 20 amp receptacle: 
Available at the Pasadena Convention Center, Campbell Hall and FFA Pavilion 
1 day 	$30.00 
2 day 	$40.00 
3 day 	$50.00 
 
Single four-wire 120/250 volt 30 amp receptacle or single five-wire 120/208 volt 3-phase wye 30 amp receptacle: 
Available at the Pasadena Convention Center 
1 day 	$50.00 
2 day 	$60.00 
3 day 	$70.00 
 
(4)  Move-in and move-out. Move-in and move-out rates shall be half of the daily rental rate. 
Example: $2,000.00 rent: $1,000.00 move-in or move-out per 12-hour consecutive time period. 
Air conditioning or heating will be provided on event days only. If air conditioning or heating is required by the occupant on a move-in or move-out day, the occupant must pay the event day rate. 
(5)  Miscellaneous equipment and services: 
Tables 	$6.00 each per event 
Chairs 	$1.00 each per event (formed plastic) 
	$3.00 each per event (banquet) 
Stage (4' × 8' sections) 	$10.00 each per event (includes backdrop and skirting) 
(Staging available in Pasadena Convention Center and 
Campbell Hall only) 
Spotlights 	$35.00 each per event or performance 
(Spotlights available in Pasadena Convention 
Center only) 
Copy charges 	$0.20 each 
Catering fee 	15% or $1,000.00 
Concessions fee 	30% or $1,000.00 
RV spaces 	$20.00 per space per day 
(Spaces available for persons associated with the events held at the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds only) 
Forklift 	$100.00 per hour 
Scissorlift 	$100.00 per hour 
Forklift and scissorlift must be reserved two weeks ahead of event and must be operated by city employees. Without prior reservation, rate is $200.00 per hour with a two-hour minimum based on availability of staff to operate equipment. 
Portable sound system 	$100.00 per event 
Dress kit for 9' × 12' projection screen 	$50.00 per event 
DVD player 	$25.00 per event 
TV, 42? LCD 	$50.00 per event 
Electrical cords/power strips 	$100.00 each per event 
Kitchen (Pasadena Convention Center) 	$200.00 per day 
Marquee ads 	
 $25.00 for logo/photo/graphic 	
 $30.00 per screen for additional screens (first screen is complementary and runs 2 weeks prior to event through midnight on event date) 
 $200.00 per week for extension of advertising beyond the complementary 2 weeks 
Projectors: Small 	$50.00 per event 
 Large 	$300.00 per event 
Screens: 7' × 8' 	$50.00 per event 
 9' × 12' 	$100.00 per event 
Parking 	Specific rates to be determined by the director 
 
(6)  Holiday rates: Holiday rates will be in effect for events booked on city holidays. Holiday rentals are at the discretion of the director and availability of staff. There will be a fifty (50) per cent mark-up on the regular rental rate when an event is booked on a holiday. Holiday rates are applicable to both profit and nonprofit organizations. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
Sec. 24-33. - Refusal to rent or cancellation of agreement. 
The director reserves the right to refuse to rent any facilities embraced in this article, or to cancel any Occupancy Agreement so made and such refusal or cancellation will be not be considered default on the part of the city, whenever in its opinion the agreement is not in the best interest of the city. The director is authorized to make a determination regarding the refusal or cancellation in the case of a force majeure, anticipation of a force majeure, damages arising from a force majeure, or any other incident or emergency that may be of concern to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
Sec. 24-34. - Security deposit of occupant. 
A security deposit in any sum not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the exact amount to be fixed by the director or his designee in each instance of the rental of the facilities in this article shall be furnished by any and all persons leasing the facility, or a part thereof, conditioned upon the return of the facility, or part thereof, to the city in as good condition, reasonable wear and tear excepted, as the same was in when possession was delivered to the occupant; and provided further, the city shall be entitled to deduct from the occupant's deposit any amount necessary to cover damages to the city's buildings or facilities, the cost of necessary clean-up, and any other outstanding obligations. The occupant shall remain liable to the city for any balance not covered by said deposit. The security deposit must be paid no later than thirty (30) business days prior to the event. Events that schedule multiple events throughout the year may have the option of keeping a security deposit on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11; Ord. No. 15-168, § 2, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 24-35. - Reservation of facility, booking procedure, payment, and fees. 
The complex, or any part thereof, subject to separate rental, may be reserved for any unscheduled date(s) upon the payment of a reservation deposit. Any applicant may reserve a tentative date no more than two (2) years in advance, for the use of the facility or any portion thereof subject to separate rental, provided that the applicant submits a deposit in the amount of twenty-five (25) per cent of the rental rate along with the application. One hundred twenty (120) days prior to the rental date, the Occupancy Agreement will be sent to the applicant. The signed Occupancy Agreement and twenty-five (25) per cent of the total rental rate shall be returned to the city within fifteen (15) business days of the Occupancy Agreement origination date or the date(s) will be canceled. The balance of the rental rate must be paid thirty (30) calendar days before the day of the move-in or the event day. The director or his designee may require special fees for the balance of other special rental charges in advance or may invoice the occupant after the final day of the event. In the event of cancellation by the occupant, all monies paid by the occupant as a deposit on a rental shall become the property of the City of Pasadena and shall not be refundable. Exceptions may be made on a case-by-case basis upon proof of extreme hardships or circumstances and at the discretion of the director. All rental fees shall be paid in lawful monies of the United States by cash, company check, personal check, cashier's check, credit card charge, or U.S. Money Order. All payment of federal, state, county or city taxes and licenses in connection with any attraction shall be the responsibility of the occupant. 
No refunds will be made to an occupant if it becomes necessary for a occupant to cancel the Occupancy Agreement for the date in question, or if the occupant fails to utilize all of the space rented. 
A second applicant may challenge such tentative date by depositing fifty (50) per cent of the rental rate and executing a tentative Occupancy Agreement if the first applicant does not have fifty (50) per cent of the rental rate on deposit and a signed Occupancy Agreement. The director or his designee shall give the first applicant two (2) days to verbally commit to using the date being challenged and fifteen (15) business days to return an executed Occupancy Agreement along with the balance of fifty (50) per cent of the rental rate. After such notice, and if the first applicant does not comply, the date shall be open for rental to the second applicant. 
The mayor, by written direction to the Director of the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds, may, at his discretion, waive all or part of any fees regarding the usage of the facilities if the event is sponsored or co-sponsored by the city and it is in the best interest of the city. 
The director may make changes to fees based on industry standards, if it is in the best interest of the city, and if it is to accommodate and/or generate more business and revenues for the city. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
Sec. 24-35.1. - Nonprofit organization requirements and sponsorship policy. 
(a)  Any entity requesting consideration as a nonprofit organization shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Shall be an established nonprofit organization or corporation approved by and registered with the State of Texas or any other state within the United States of America; and 
(2)  Shall provide a needed service to the community and/or donate monies for scholarships to city programs and local schools; and 
(3)  Shall be required to follow all other policies and procedures related to the leasing of convention center and municipal fairgrounds facilities. 
(b)  Organizations that qualify as nonprofit, by meeting all of the above stated requirements, may apply for the following concessions when renting with the understanding that customers paying standard rates may be given priority for use of city facilities: 
(1)  Payment of fifty (50) per cent of the city standard rental fee. 
(2)  Table, chair, and stage setup and rental may be waived at the discretion of the director. 
(3)  Non-profit organizations shall pay standard electrical charges for booths. 
(4)  All catering charges shall be paid to the city's caterer. Catering charges must be negotiated with caterer under contract with the city. Outside caterers are prohibited unless approved by the director. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages sales shall be provided by the city's contracted caterer. 
(6)  All contracted catering references apply to the convention center only. Catered meals and alcoholic beverages may be provided by outside caterers if events are held in facilities other than the convention center. Nonprofit organizations will pay fifty (50) per cent of all established fees relating to catered events in facilities other than the convention center. 
(c)  A function sponsored by the City of Pasadena may have all fees waived. 
(1)  Organizations seeking a sponsorship agreement for an event shall provide a letter of request clearly stating the event's purpose and any benefits the city and/or community may expect to receive as a result of the sponsorship. 
(2)  The mayor and/or his designee may make findings and if approved enter into written sponsorship agreements which fulfill a public purpose as determined by the city council; such purposes may include but not be limited to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Pasadena, economic development and education which directly benefit the city and/or community. 
(3)  The mayor and/or his designee shall confirm in writing that the promised benefit has been delivered to the city and/or community. 
(d)  The nonprofit organization shall also meet all security requirements. The City of Pasadena Police Department shall have first right of refusal for any and all security duties that may be required. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11; Ord. No. 15-168, § 3, 12-15-15)  
Sec. 24-35.2. - Temporary wiring and other technical requirements for events. 
(a)  Application of section. The provisions of this section shall apply to all use of electrical current for the purpose of illuminating, animating, activating or displaying in connection with temporary expositions, exhibits, shows, conventions, meetings or assemblies in the facilities embraced in this article. Temporary shall be deemed to indicate a use not to exceed ten (10) calendar days. The use of temporary wiring shall be limited to locations which are determined to be suitable and safe for the intended occupancy and use. 
(b)  Licensed electricians to do work. It shall be unlawful for any person other than a duly licensed master electrician, or a duly licensed journeyman electrician working under the direct supervision of the City of Pasadena Electrical Division, and subject to inspection and approval by the same division, to make any electrical installation of any appliance, fixtures, signs or equipment in any booth, temporary exhibits or the facilities' electrical systems. No installations or connections to any city-owned devices shall be made without prior consent of the City of Pasadena Electrical Division and/or City of Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds Department. 
(c)  Technical requirements. 
(1)  All exposed noncurrent-carrying metal parts of the electrical installation shall be effectively grounded. 
(2)  Flexible cord or cable shall be approved for extra hard usage. No individual conductor shall be permitted to be installed unless installed in an approved raceway. 
(3)  No conductor shall be fused or protected at a rating greater than its amp capacity. 
(4)  All branch circuits shall be protected by fuses or circuit breakers. 
(5)  All fuses or circuit breakers shall be installed in approved enclosure or cabinets. 
(6)  There shall be no exposed live metal parts. 
(7)  All electrical equipment or appliances connected to the building electrical system or extensions thereto in booths or displays shall comply with the National Electrical Standards adopted by the Building Code of the City of Pasadena. 
(8)  All cords, whether flexible or otherwise, shall be of a three-wire grounded-type cord of not less than No. 14 gauge wire. 
(9)  No extension cord shall extend more than one hundred (100) feet from its point of attachment to power supply. Any cord which must exceed this distance shall, upon approval by the city, not be less than a No. 12 gauge wire and also a three-wire grounded-type cord, s.o., s.j.o., or equivalent. 
(10)  No two-wire extension cords are permitted. Two-wire lamp cords or zip cord shall be permitted only if the cord is attached to a factory-wired light fixture, and said fixture carries an Underwriter's Laboratory seal of approval. 
(11)  Any moon walk, air inflatable type attractions similar to moon walks, water blow-up inflatable that children or the public will use must be plugged into a GFI receptacle that is supplied by the occupant, event organization or promoter of the event. 
(12)  Any event using water hoses must have back flow preventors supplied by occupant or event promoter attached to their hoses before they can be connected to the city's water faucets. 
(13)  For any cook-off type events and/or events using multiple electrical hook-ups on the grounds, occupant must hire and pay for a City of Pasadena electrician to oversee and service the event. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
DIVISION 2. - MUNICIPAL FAIRGROUNDS 
 
Sec. 24-36. - Concession rights. 
The City of Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds shall retain all concession and parking rights. Parking rates are to be determined by the director. 
Catering fees for any event in the fairgrounds are fifteen (15) per cent of the caterer's final bill, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Concessions fees for any event in the fairgrounds are thirty (30) per cent of the concessionaire's total sales, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
DIVISION 3. - CIVIC/CONVENTION CENTER 
 
Sec. 24-37. - Catering and concessions. 
The Director of the Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds has the authorization to supervise, control, and otherwise administer and obtain all necessary licenses pertaining to the leasing and use of the convention center and municipal fairgrounds regarding the sale, service, and delivery of catering and concessions including, but not limited to, food, refreshments, alcoholic beverages, novelties, souvenirs, reading materials, clothing, etc. The sale or dispensing of any item or bringing in food for personal consumption by a promoter or vendor or any other person attending events at the Convention Center, must first have the written approval of the director or his designee. A copy of the signed contract between caterer and client must be submitted to the director or his designee prior to catering an event in the Convention Center. The catering and concession company must meet the requirements of the facilities and sign a catering and concession agreement with the facilities. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
Sec. 24-38. - Rental. 
The basic rental rates of the facilities will include normal heat and/or cooling, normal lighting and water, normal janitorial cleaning services and the bleacher seating system. Changes made in the initial set-up may require payment of an additional charge. Changeovers (from one set-up to another) made within a single day will require payment of an additional set-up charge for any room. This includes set-up charges of tables, chairs, risers, stage, head tables, etc. (the rate will be determined by the director or his designee or the rate schedule for specific charges). 
Occupant must furnish drawings, location and dimensions of all exhibit booths and equipment indicating utility requirements (electrical) at the time of execution of the Occupancy Agreement and these requirements must be approved by the director or his designee and the City of Pasadena's Fire Marshal. Any changes made to the set-up after the initial plan is submitted may be subject to additional charges. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11)  
DIVISION 4. - GENERAL POLICIES 
 
Sec. 24-39. - Policies applicable to the facilities. 
(a)  Broadcast or telecast. Occupant or event coordinator has the responsibility to inform the director when a telecast or broadcast will be conducted at the complex at least four weeks prior to the event that will be broadcast. The director shall negotiate the cost for the right to broadcast these events. The director has the right to determine whether or not the telecast or broadcast will be conducted at the facility. 
(b)  Public address announcements. The Convention Center staff will not make public address calls for the general public attending events, but will make announcements in reference to the general welfare to the public attending events. 
(c)  Nonsmoking facility. The Pasadena Convention Center, Campbell hall, and the Ross Kelley Rodeo Arena are designated as nonsmoking facilities. 
(d)  Crowd control and security personnel. It shall be the responsibility of the director to determine the number of crowd control and/or security personnel for the occupant or event coordinator. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant or event coordinator to pay for crowd control and security personnel. Security shall be required at any event where alcoholic beverages are sold or served. 
(e)  Alterations of leased premises. If alterations of the facilities are required, said alterations must first be approved by the director or his designee. 
(f)  Abandoned equipment or articles. The facility shall not be held responsible for articles left on premises. The facility shall assume no responsibility for liability for any losses whatsoever or any losses associated with any articles left on the premises after the event. Said articles shall be considered abandoned and shall be disposed of immediately upon end of move-out. 
(g)  Copyright infringement. The occupant or event coordinator must accept all responsibility for and absolve the facility, its staff, and the City of Pasadena from any and all liability or expense arising out of any composition by members of the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers (ASCAP), or any other copyright owner, which shall be played or sung in connection with any use of the facilities, whether amplified, televised, or otherwise not in the form of a mechanical recording, or a personal rendition, unless the sponsor of the program has first paid any fee required and the occupant or event coordinator shall provide satisfactory evidence of such payment to the director or his designee prior to such program. The occupant or event coordinator shall covenant and agree to indemnify and hold harmless the facility's staff and the City of Pasadena from all liability or cost whatsoever for infringements or other violations under the copyright laws. 
(h)  Solicitations. No collections or donations shall be allowed at the facility without the approval of the director or his designee. 
(i)  Reletting and subleasing. The City of Pasadena reserves the right to relet any portion of the facility which becomes vacant during the lease of any other contract. If the city relets because of occupant's or event coordinator's fraud, no refund will be due occupant or event coordinator. No occupant or event coordinator shall assign or sublet any part or portion of said lease. 
(j)  Authorized refunds of occupant or event coordinator's payments. Refund of advanced rental deposits may be authorized where: 
(1)  The scheduled performance or event is canceled under any terms of the regulations governing the management of the facilities. 
(2)  The performance or event is canceled at the request of the director or his designee. 
(k)  Permits and licenses. It is the responsibility of the occupant or event coordinator to obtain the necessary permits or licenses, prior to the occupant's or event coordinator's occupancy of the facilities. 
(l)  Holidays. Holidays will be defined as the official days that are recognized as holidays by the City of Pasadena and not necessarily the actual date of the holiday. Holiday rates shall apply if the facilities are leased during any holiday. Holiday rates will be left to the discretion of the director or his designee based on availability of staff, overtime pay, and other elements. 
(m)  Liability for occupant, event coordinator, or event organization; property. Neither the facility, the City of Pasadena nor its employees shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury on properties of any kind that are shipped or otherwise delivered to or stored on the premises. Properties shall not be received until occupant, event coordinator, or event organization has made prior arrangements for receiving, handling, and storage of such material with the director or his designee. Such request must be made in written form and received no later than two (2) weeks prior to the event. 
(n)  Box office rates and ticket procedures. Tickets may be sold by advance ticket agencies only by written permission from the director. The facility's staff shall not sell tickets unless they are directed to do so by the director or his designee as authorized by the mayor in writing. 
(o)  Advertising events. All advertising of said attractions must state total admission prices. The occupant shall not announce events scheduled at the facility until Occupancy Agreements have been prepared and executed by the facility's director or his designee. Advertising rates for the LED sign will be established by the director or his designee. 
(p)  Basic services. The facility's basic rental includes the established utilities which are electric light, heat and/or air conditioning and water necessary for the preparation of the attraction. However, failure to furnish any of the foregoing utilities resulting from circumstances beyond the control of the facility shall not be considered a breach of contract. A special rate shall be established for extraordinary utility usage. 
(q)  Compliance. Occupant or event coordinator shall comply with all city, state, county, and federal laws, with regulations pertaining to facilities. Violations by the occupant, event coordinator or its agents or employees may result in the cancellation of the Occupancy Agreement and/or discontinuation of the use of the facility. 
(r)  Objectionable conduct. Any person, performer, or person attending events at the facility whose conduct becomes objectionable, disorderly, or disruptive shall be subject to ejection from the premises. The occupant or event coordinator shall hold the City of Pasadena and its employees harmless from any claim for such action and will not be entitled to any refund for tickets of admission paid. 
(s)  Machinery, flammable liquids, and electricity. No person shall use any engine, motor, or other type of machinery within the facilities, or use any gas, flammable liquid, chemical, or gun powder without the approval of the director or his designee. No butane bottles of any size will be allowed or displayed with the buildings for any event for any purpose. No reloading equipment shall be used for any event for any purpose. Reloading equipment may be displayed but must be free of any and all gun powder residue. 
No gas or internal combustion vehicle shall be allowed inside the building unless the battery cables are disconnected and wrapped with black vinyl tape, gas tanks are at no more than one-quarter tank full and the tank caps are taped closed. All units must then be inspected by the director or his designee for compliance. 
No open-flamed candles or other type of open-flamed devices shall be permitted without the written approval of the director or his designee. 
The director may require the written approval of the City of Pasadena's Fire Marshal at any event. All of the items in this section are subject to the inspection and approval of the City of Pasadena's Fire Marshal. If the fire marshal refuses to approve it, it will not be allowed in the facility. 
(t)  Obstruction of doors, passageways, corridors, or lobbies. No portion of the sidewalks, entries, plaza (front), walkway, passageways, door aisles, vestibules, or other ways of access to the public utilities of the premises shall be permitted to be obstructed nor shall any window, ventilators, or lighting fixture be obstructed. 
(u)  Equipment usage. No person may use or transport any equipment, furniture, or other article which is the property of the facility without the approval of the director or his designee. As used in this section, the word "equipment" is to include all items of inventoried equipment which are movable or portable. 
(v)  Signs, posters, and literature. The hanging of pictures, banners, or other items from molding or elsewhere must have the approval of the director or his designee and must be installed by authorized personnel. The occupant or event coordinator shall not distribute or circulate or permit to be circulated any advertising matter or programs at the entrance to any part of the premises that does not pertain completely to the immediate attraction. Such material must have the approval of the director or his designee. At no time shall any such advertising matter be distributed or circulated on parking facilities or walkways adjacent to the facilities. 
No tape, no adhesives of any type, no adhesive labels, no staples, no tacks, no nails, or other items that could cause damage to surfaces shall be used on the facility's floors, tables, chairs, equipment, walls, brick, or limestone without express prior approval in writing of the director or his designee. 
In order to abide by the sign ordinance effect within the City of Pasadena, no sign of any type shall be placed on the facility's property outside the building without the written approval from the director or his designee. 
(w)  Nondiscrimination. No person, group, or association shall be excluded from the use of the facilities because of handicap, race, color, creed, or national origin and no rules or regulations may be promulgated by the occupant or event coordinator of the facilities which will discriminate against any person, group, or association or exclude them from use of the facilities or participation in the facility activities because of handicap, race, color, creed, or national origin. 
(x)  Animals. No animals or pets are allowed within the facilities except as a service animal or part of a regularly scheduled event, stage performance, act, rodeo, farm show, or circus. At no time will any animal other than a service animal be allowed in a designated food area. In order to promote the use of the facility for dog, cat, bird, horse, or other animal shows, kennel permits are not necessary to obtain for exhibitors, event coordinators, or promoters whose show lasts less than three (3) days unless animals are being sold during the show. 
(y)  Right of entry. The Pasadena Convention Center staff and other City of Pasadena personnel reserve the right to enter any facility at any given time including during an event. 
(z)  Parking. The City of Pasadena shall maintain and control parking on the facility's property. At all times parking for the facility's events shall have priority over parking for any other purpose. The Pasadena Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds retains all parking rights. Rates are to be determined by the director or his designee. 
(aa)  Force majeure. In the event that a force majeure renders the facility unsafe or unsuitable for occupancy for an event (as determined by the director or his designee), money deposited to secure the reservation and rental shall be returned to the occupant in full upon the determination of the director or his designee of the damages sustained and how long repairs will take to complete, however long that may take to assess or determine. The Convention Center shall be allowed a reasonable time to assess and determine the extent of the damages and to notice the occupant without any penalty to the Convention Center. It will not be considered a breach of contract to cancel any events to repair damages or in the event the force majeure, weather, or incident renders the facility unsafe for staff or for participants. Failure to furnish any of the foregoing facilities or utilities resulting from circumstances beyond the control of the facilities shall not be considered a breach of contract. A special rate, to be determined by the director or his designee, may be established for extraordinary circumstances under these conditions. 
(bb)  Protestors. Protestors are prohibited from protesting inside the gated grounds since the premises are leased for private events by individuals or other entities. The occupant leases the rights to peaceful enjoyment of the premises for the purposes intended by their Occupancy Agreement during the term of their lease. No political signs are to be posted on the grounds except in individual booths or within the confines of rented spaces by the political entity. 
(cc)  Lobby booths. No vendor or display booths will be allowed in the lobby area due to traffic congestion and public safety. This area should only be used for registration tables for the event. 
(dd)  Areas not included in the rental of the facilities. The concession stands in the Convention Center and the Ross Kelley Rodeo Arena are exclusively for the concessionaire's use and are not included as part of the Occupancy Agreement. The administrative office and the warehouse located in the Convention Center are exclusively for the Pasadena Convention Center staff's use and are not included as part of the Occupancy Agreement. The Pasadena Livestock Show and Rodeo office and the San Jacinto Day Foundation Office located at the Pasadena Municipal Fairgrounds are also not included as part of the Occupancy Agreement. 
(ee)  Mosquito spraying. If extra mosquito spraying is needed for any event whatsoever (including the Pasadena Livestock Show and Rodeo or the Strawberry Festival), the occupant or event coordinator must notify the Convention Center at least two (2) weeks in advance and pay two (2) weeks in advance for the spraying. The Convention Center has a normal spraying schedule four (4) times a year and anything beyond that will be considered extra spraying. Fogging of the drains will cost additionally as well. All spraying must be done by a licensed professional contracted by the City of Pasadena for public safety. Therefore, no entity utilizing the grounds may "do it themselves" or hire their own company. 
(ff)  Excessive clean-up. Excessive clean-up is any service beyond normal, routine janitorial services. Examples include but are not limited to: Large amounts of trash and boxes left on the floors (anything larger than what can be swept into a commercial dustpan; cleaning ground-in substances or food off tables or chairs; numerous spilled beverages; large amounts of trash left in the bleachers; numerous instances of spilled substances that must be wiped or cleaned with cleaning solutions; large amounts of cans or bottles; pallets; crates; stains to any carpeting or other floor surfacing; tape residue left on any surface; balloons left floating on the ceiling; cleaning up confetti; any damage that requires extraordinary care; clean-up and disposal of any grease, oil, chemicals, or bodily fluids; clean-up of any graffiti or paint; clean-up of mischievous acts; clean-up of any coating or residue left in booth; and clean-up of hazardous substances. 
(gg)  Confetti, sparklers, or bubbles. No confetti of any kind will be allowed in the buildings. The throwing or pitching of any substances such as natural flower petals, silk or synthetic flower petals, rice, birdseed, Silly String, or small packaged items is prohibited inside or outside the facility or elsewhere on the facility's property. The use of sparklers or bubbles is prohibited inside, outside, or anywhere on the facility's property. A reduction of the security deposit will be charged if occupant fails to comply with this policy. 
(hh)  Straw bedding or hay or straw used as filler. No straw bedding or hay or straw used as filler will be allowed in any stalls or on any of the premises anywhere including the fairgrounds and cook-off areas. A damages fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) will be assessed for any violation of this policy. For animal safety purposes, only new shavings will be allowed in any stall. 
(ii)  Occupancy Agreement changes. After the Occupancy Agreement has been created for the occupant, any changes requested by the occupant will result in a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) charge for changing the Occupancy Agreement. 
(jj)  Additional set-up fees. If the occupant requests changes to the agreed set-up less than two (2) weeks prior to the event, there will be an additional charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per table and one dollar ($1.00) per chair unless otherwise determined by the director or his designee. 
(kk)  Rental fees. Any rental fees not listed herein for equipment or signage or equipment that may be added at a future date may be set by the director or his designee based on the standard rental rates in the industry. 
(ll)  Metal wheels. Absolutely no metal wheels are allowed on the flooring of the Convention Center. 
(mm)  Tents, staging, lighting, or any other equipment. Tents, staging, lighting, or any other equipment on the grounds must be free-standing or set up with water barrels and must be approved by the director or his designee. 
(nn)  EMS requirements. For larger events such as concerts, festivals, rodeos, or events with livestock, the occupant or event coordinator is required to provide sufficient EMS and provide the Pasadena Convention Center staff with the company, contact name, and phone number of the EMS services provider no later than two (2) weeks prior to the event. 
(oo)  Lighting. For events held on the fairgrounds, additional lighting is required after dark. 
(pp)  Helicopters. Permission for helicopter landings on the fairgrounds must be requested in writing from the director of the facility at least six (6) weeks prior to the event. It is the responsibility of the occupant or event organization to comply with all laws, licensing, and safety associated with this activity. A safety plan, insurance, and contact information for the company, pilot, and the requesting organization must also be included with the request. 
(qq)  Political signage. Signage that is political in nature is prohibited from placement on the Convention Center grounds, the fairgrounds, or city property. Exceptions to this policy are placement inside individual booths or inside the rented space for a political fundraiser for that individual politician. 
(rr)  On-duty officers. All certified peace officers on duty shall be in uniform and shall remain on duty until the facility and parking lots are vacated. 
(ss)  Clean-up of outside areas. The occupant, event organizer, and/or event organization shall have full financial responsibility to canvass the building exterior and return to the condition in which it was originally presented. 
(tt)  Deliveries. Deliveries associated with the function are to be scheduled within the hours rented. Otherwise, unless a representative for the function is present to sign for deliveries, the Convention Center staff will not accept said deliveries and the packages will be returned to the shipping company's warehouse and delivery will have to be rescheduled by the recipient. 
(uu)  Ejection from the property. Any person at the Convention Center whose conduct is disorderly or disruptive in any of the following respects may be ejected from the premises by the city's designated representative or any certified peace officer: Intoxication; use of abusive, indecent, profane, or vulgar language; making offensive gestures or displays; abusing or threatening another person in an offensive manner; making unreasonably loud noises; fighting with another person; vandalism; and deliberate acts that damage the Convention Center and/or facility equipment. The occupant, event coordinator, or event organization for the function at which any such ejection occurs shall hold harmless, indemnify, and defend the city, its officers, agents, and employees against any claim related to such ejection. 
(vv)  Presence for the duration of the event. The individual who reserves the Convention Center and Municipal Fairgrounds and executes the Occupancy Agreement is required to be present at the scheduled function for the duration of that function including set-up, dismantle, and clean-up activities or appoint a duly authorized representative who is authorized to act on his/her behalf. 
(ww)  Meeting room space. Rooms 102, 103, and 107 are designated as meeting rooms and are not to be used for booth or exhibitor space unless authorized in writing by the director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 11-042, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-11; Ord. No. 15-168, §§ 4, 5, 12-15-15)  
Secs. 24-40—24-44. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PASADENA HISTORICAL MUSEUM 
 
Sec. 24-45. - Pasadena Historical Museum Board—Jurisdiction and control of museum. 
The control and jurisdiction of the Pasadena Historical Museum and the buildings in Memorial Park and the responsibility and authority for the operation and maintenance thereof, are, subject to all of the terms of this article, vested in the Pasadena Historical Museum Board hereinafter created and established. 
(Ord. No. 73-288, § 1, 11-20-73; Ord. No. 84-115, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Sec. 24-46. - Same—Creation; members, number, terms of office, removal; quorum; rules of order. 
There is hereby created and established a Pasadena Historical Museum Board (hereinafter referred to simply as the "board") which shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor subject to confirmation by the city council. The members of the board shall not, by virtue of their membership, be employees of or officers or agents of the city, and shall receive no compensation from the city for their services on such board. Such board shall not, except to the limited extent hereinafter expressly stated, be an agent or instrumentality of the city or authorized to in any way obligate or bind the city. 
Each member of the board shall be a qualified voter and a resident of the City of Pasadena, Texas. Further, the members shall possess the following qualifications: 
(1)  Position 1 will be filled with a member of the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(2)  Position 2 will be filled with a member of the Pasadena Independent School District Board. 
(3)  Position 3 will be filled with a member of the Chamber of Commerce of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(4)  Positions 4 and 5 will be filled by two (2) members of the Pasadena Historical Society; said two (2) members to be elected by the membership of the said Pasadena Historical Society, and the names of those two elected submitted to the mayor with a request for appointment to said positions. 
(5)  Position 6 will be filled with a member of the Early Settlers who has been elected by the membership of the Early Settlers. After such person is so elected his name shall be submitted to the mayor with a request for appointment to said position. 
(6)  Position 7 will be filled with a member of the parks and recreation department of the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(7)  Position 8 will be filled with a member of organized labor who is a member of a local union which has members who act as bargaining agent pursuant to a labor contract with the management of an area industry. 
(8)  Position 9 will be filled with a member of a minority group. A minority group shall be deemed to be any group or class of people who are not white Anglo-Saxons. 
Of the nine (9) members first appointed four (4) shall be appointed for a term to expire on December thirty-first of the second year and the other five (5) for a term to expire on December thirty-first of the third year. Before the expiration of one month after such expiration of the terms of office of members of such board, successors shall be so appointed, subject to such confirmation, to serve terms expiring two (2) years after the expiration of such previous term. Vacancies occurring from death, resignation or removal shall be similarly filled by appointment and confirmation for the remaining unexpired term of the member deceased, resigned or removed. The board shall elect its own chairman and such other officers as it desires and shall adopt its own rules of procedure and organization except that one-half of its members at any time shall constitute a quorum. 
(Ord. No. 73-288, § 1, 11-20-73)  
Sec. 24-47. - Appropriations to maintain. 
The city council declares its purpose and intention (but does not in any way obligate itself or attempt to obligate any future city council) to from time to time appropriate and cause to be paid over to the board (or upon the board's recommendation, to the Pasadena Historical Society hereinafter referred to) such sums as the council may deem proper and appropriate to aid in defraying the expenses of operation, maintenance and development of such museum and the maintenance and improvement of the building in which it is housed. 
(Ord. No. 73-288, § 1, 11-20-73)  
Sec. 24-48. - Assuming control by nonprofit organization, terms and considerations; rules governing museum operation. 
Subject to the responsibility therefor to the city and its city council remaining always in such board, such board is hereby authorized upon an agreement which must be in writing and filed with and approved by the city council to agree with "Pasadena Historical Society", a private nonprofit organization of Harris County, Texas, for such society to take over the actual possession, control, maintenance and operation of such museum and of such building, upon such terms and considerations as such board deems proper, provided that the following terms shall be read into said contract: 
(1)  Open to public, rules to be adopted. Such building and museum shall always be and remain a public building and museum, open to the public generally, without discrimination between persons or groups affiliated or associated with such society and persons or groups not so affiliated or associated. Reasonable rules shall be adopted (subject to amendment of or addition thereto by the city council if it finds that the public interest and welfare require such amendment or addition) governing all matters incident to the operation of the museum, including the times when the museum shall be open to the public generally and the times when it, or such building or parts thereof, may be reserved for exclusive or semi-exclusive use by study groups or other groups interested in the matters which are within the scope of the activities of such museum; but no rule shall be established by which study groups or other interested groups not affiliated in any way with such society shall be at any greater expense, burden or inconvenience incident to their use of the museum or its facilities than the burden, expense or inconvenience directly borne by the society and its such affiliated groups incident to its or their like or similar use thereof; and 
(2)  Termination of operation agreement. Such contract or agreement shall be subject to termination as provided therein; whereupon all right of the society to any appropriation or contribution theretofore so made to it by the city but not yet paid over to it shall cease, as shall also all and every its rights of occupancy, control or management of the museum, except that it shall have a reasonable time after such termination within which to remove from the building such exhibits, specimens, furniture and furnishings, and other personal property, not the property of the city, as it may have placed therein; and 
(3)  Condition of premises, liability for injury. The society shall for itself, its employees and its invitees and guests accept the premises in the state and condition they were in on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, and agree that the city shall not be liable to it or to any of them, the aforesaid, for any injury whether to person or to property occurring in or upon such premises; and the society shall indemnify and agree to indemnity and save harmless the city from any liability, suit, claim or damage on account of any such injury; and 
(4)  Insuring by city. The city may carry upon the building and/or on the personal property therein which belongs to the city such insurance as the city from time to time sees fit; and 
(5)  Repairing, improving, right of entry therefor. The city may from time to time make such repairs of or additions and betterments of the building as it sees fit, but shall be the sole judge of whether to do so or not. The mayor and city council or all persons by any of them thereto designated, shall at all reasonable times have access to the museum not only to observe the manner in which it is being operated and maintained, but for the purpose of inspecting the building and of having done and constructed such repairs, additions, or betterments thereof and thereto as the city may from time to time deem proper. 
(6)  City not to be bound. The society shall not in the name of or on the credit of the city employ any person or purchase any materials, supplies or other thing whatsoever; and shall never obligate or bind or undertake to obligate or bind the city in any respect whatsoever; but the operation by the society of the museum shall be upon its sole credit and responsibility entirely. 
(Ord. No. 73-288, § 1, 11-20-73)  
Sec. 24-49. - Rights of board and society may be terminated. 
By virtue of this article there shall not be vested in the society or in the board or in the members of the board any right except it be subject to termination by the city by repeal or amendment of this article or other appropriate action of its governing body. 
(Ord. No. 73-288, § 1, 11-20-73)  
Chapter 25 - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND ITINERANT VENDORS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 89-91, § 1, adopted June 13, 1989, repealed Ch. 25 in its entirety. Said Ch. 25 pertained to peddlers, solicitors and itinerant vendors and derived from Code 1964, §§ 20-1—20-6, 20-15—20-23 and Ord. No. 83-50, § 2, adopted Feb. 8, 1983. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 89-91 enacted a new Ch. 25 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Seafood dealers, § 15-111 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 25-1. - Definitions. 
[The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:] 
(1)  Itinerant vendor. The term "itinerant vendor" shall mean all persons, as well as their agents and employees, who engage in the temporary or transient business in the city of selling, or offering for sale, any goods or merchandise, or exhibiting the same for sale, or exhibiting the same for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business or conducting such exhibits thereof, display, exhibit, sell or offer for sale such goods or merchandise upon or from a truck or other vehicle, or who hire, rent, lease or occupy any room or space in any building, structure, other enclosure, vacant lot or any other property whatever in the city in, through or from which any goods or merchandise may be sold, offered for sale, exhibited for sale or exhibited for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, or who shall sell or offer for sale any goods or merchandise while upon the property of another, without the express written consent of the owner or occupant thereof. The term "itinerant vendor" shall not include or be construed to include anyone upon whom the provisions of this chapter would impose a direct and unlawful burden on interstate commerce. 
(2)  Goods or merchandise. The phrase "goods or merchandise" shall mean any personal property of any nature whatsoever including but not limited to tickets for admission to athletic, sporting or entertainment events or shows. 
(3)  Public street or highway. The phrase "public street or highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
(4)  Temporary. The word "temporary" shall mean any such business transacted or conducted in the city for which definite arrangements have not been made for the hire, rental or lease of premises for at least one month in or upon which such business is to be operated or conducted. 
(5)  Transient. The word "transient" shall mean any such business as may be operated or conducted by persons who reside away from this city, or who have fixed places of business in places other than this city, or who have their headquarters in places other than this city, or who move stocks of goods, or merchandise or samples thereof into this city with the purpose or intention of removing them or the unsold portion thereof away from the city before the expiration of one month, or who sell and offer for sale such goods or merchandise while upon the property of another, without the prior written consent of the owner or occupant thereof, or conduct such business away from their fixed places of business, if any, or who have no such fixed places of business. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-2. - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Ordinary commercial travelers who sell or exhibit for sale goods or merchandise to parties engaged in the business of buying and selling and dealing in goods or merchandise. 
(2)  Sales of goods or merchandise donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose. 
(3)  Vendors of milk, pastries, bread, and newspapers who make such sales on existing routes or from fixed places. 
(4)  Persons who are exempt from the application of this chapter pursuant to federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Secs. 25-3—25-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 25-11. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any itinerant vendor to sell, offer for sale, exhibit for sale, or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, any goods or merchandise in the city without first obtaining a license so to do in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-12. - Application. 
Every itinerant vendor shall make application to the building official for the license required by this article, which application shall be filed at least ten (10) days prior to the date of his contemplated sale or exhibit to be held in the city. Such application shall be in the form of an affidavit stating the full name and address of the itinerant vendor, the location of his principal office and place of business, the names and addresses of its officers, if it is a corporation, and the partnership name and the names and addresses of all partners, if such itinerant vendor is a firm. The application must be accompanied by: 
(1)  A statement showing the kind and character of the goods or merchandise to be sold, offered for sale or exhibited. 
(2)  A copy of the charter, if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of the state. 
(3)  A copy of its license to do business in Texas, if the itinerant vendor is a corporation incorporated under the laws of some state other than Texas. 
(4)  The local address, if any, of the applicant. 
(5)  The name and address of the person, firm or corporation, if any, that the applicant represents or for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(6)  Whether the applicant, upon any sale or order, shall demand or receive or accept payment or deposit of money in advance of final delivery. 
(7)  The period of time which the applicant wishes to solicit or sell in the city and a description of the proposed location of the business. 
(8)  If a motor vehicle is to be used in the vending business, a description of the vehicle together with the motor vehicle registration number and the license number. 
(9)  A sales tax permit issued by the state of Texas. 
(10)  Written permission from the property owner duly notarized by the property owner. Such forms shall be supplied by the building official. Written permission forms shall not be required for door-to-door sales. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 25-13. - Proof of identity. 
At the time of the application provided for in section 25-12, the applicant shall submit to the building official for inspection written proof of his identity, which may be in the form of an automobile operator's license or an identification letter or card issued to the applicant by the person for whom or through whom orders are to be solicited or cleared. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 25-14. - Bond required of applicant. 
(a)  The application for a license under this article shall be accompanied by a bond in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) signed by the applicant and signed, as surety, by some surety company authorized to do business in the state conditioned for the final delivery of goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs or magazines in accordance with the terms of any order obtained prior to delivery and also conditioned to indemnify any and all purchasers or customers for any and all defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the article sold, by the principal of such bond, at the time of delivery, and that may be discovered by such purchaser or customer within thirty (30) days after delivery, which bond shall be made payable to the mayor and his successors in office for the use and benefit of all persons that may make any purchase or give any order to the principal thereon, or to an agent or employee of the principal. 
(b)  In case the applicant is engaging in any activity mentioned in section 25-11, through one or more agents or employees, such applicant shall be required to enter into only one bond in the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) as above required, which bond shall be made to cover the activities of all his agents or employees. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-15. - Fee. 
(a)  The fee for an itinerant vendor's license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). When any person engages in any activity mentioned in section 25-11 through one or more agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to such $50.00 fee, pay a license fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each agent or employee so engaged. The fees provided for herein shall be used for the purpose of defraying expenses incident to the issuing of such licenses. No such fee shall be prorated. 
(b)  None of the license fees provided for by this section shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce. In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the mayor for an adjustment of the fee so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable, or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at, or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the mayor may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The mayor shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine where the fee fixed by this section is unfair, unreasonable or discriminatory as to the applicant's business and shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is fair, reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or, if the fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the fee so fixed. In fixing the fee to be charged, the mayor shall have the power to base the fee upon any method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the fee amount assessed does not exceed the fees as prescribed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-16. - Licenses and identification cards. 
(a)  The building official shall issue to any itinerant vendor a license authorizing such itinerant vendor to sell, exhibit for sale, offer for sale or exhibit for the purpose of taking orders for the sale thereof, in the city, his goods or merchandise after such itinerant vendor has fully complied with all provisions of this article and paid the prescribed fee. Such license shall be carried with the itinerant vendor while he/she is engaged in the business of selling. 
(b)  A license issued under this article shall be prominently displayed in a conspicuous place on the premises where the sale or exhibit is being conducted and shall remain so displayed as long as any goods or merchandise are being so sold or exhibited. This subsection does not apply to door-to-door sales. 
(c)  In addition to the license the building official of the city shall issue an identification card to each itinerant vendor and employee or agent thereof. The identification card shall be carried with the itinerant vendor and each agent or employee of such vendor while he/she is engaged in the business of selling. If the identification card becomes damaged or obscured the itinerant vendor shall return it to the city and receive another card. 
(d)  Licenses and identification cards shall be used only by the person to whom they were issued and may not be transferred to any other person. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 25-17. - Term. 
Any license issued under this article shall be valid as long as the sale or exhibit is continuously held in the city, but in no event shall it be valid for more than ninety (90) days from the date of its issuance. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-18. - Selling, soliciting, etc., prohibited between certain hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity mentioned in section 25-11, whether he is licensed so to do or not, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-19. - Going upon posted residence without invitation. 
The practice of going in and upon private residences in the city, whereon a sign bearing the words "No Peddlers Allowed" is displayed, by an itinerant vendor and peddlers and persons selling or taking orders for goods, wares, merchandise, services, photographs, magazines or subscriptions to magazines, not having been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of such private residence, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise, or disposing of, or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-20. - Not to issue to certain persons. 
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall not be eligible to receive a license under this article for a period of one (1) year from the date of such conviction. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-21. - To be carried on person. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any activity mentioned in section 25-11 unless he is carrying on his person, at all times while so engaged, a valid license and identification card issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-22. - Stationary business location restricted. 
No itinerant vendor shall conduct a stationary business within twenty-five (25) feet of a public street or highway. 
(Ord.No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-23. - Suspension or revocation of license. 
(a)  Any license issued under this article may be suspended or revoked for any of the following reasons: 
(1)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the application for the license; 
(2)  Fraud or misrepresentation in the course of conducting the business of vending; 
(3)  Conducting the business of vending contrary to the conditions of the license; or 
(4)  Conducting the business of vending in such a manner as to create a public nuisance or constitute a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. 
(b)  Upon suspension or revocation, the building official shall deliver written notice to the license holder stating the action taken and the reasons supporting such action. The written notice shall be delivered to the license holder's place of business or mailed to the license holder's last known address. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, §2, 6-13-89; Ord. No. 03-144, § 1, 7-8-03)  
Sec. 25-24. - Appeals. 
Persons who are denied licenses or whose licenses have been suspended or revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the mayor. The appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the notice of denial, suspension or revocation. The mayor shall hear and determine the appeal and the decision of the mayor shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-25. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any police officer of the City of Pasadena in addition to being enforced by other applicable departments and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-26. - Penalty. 
Any persons convicted of a violation of this article shall be fined in a sum not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 25-27. - Construction of chapter. 
This entire chapter is and shall be deemed an exercise of the police power of the state and of the city for the public safety, comfort, convenience and protection of the city and its citizens, and all of the provisions hereof shall be construed for the accomplishment of that purpose. 
(Ord. No. 89-91, § 2, 6-13-89)  
Chapter 27 - PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Permit for gas pipeline extensions in or parallel to streets, § 32-59 et seq.; street rental charge for gas mains, pipes, etc., § 32-75 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 27-1. - Definitions. 
All terms used in this chapter shall be taken in their ordinary signification except the following, which shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Commodity. The term "commodity" shall mean any substance capable of being transmitted through a pipeline which is, or may become, flammable, toxic or otherwise hazardous to human, animal or plant health or life. 
Pipeline. The term "pipeline" shall mean a line of pipe with pumps, valves and control devices for conveying a commodity or commodities. 
Shut-off valve. A "shut-off valve" is any device installed in a pipeline and used to stop the conveyance of a commodity or commodities through a pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-2. - Registration of pipelines. 
(a)  The owner of every pipeline now located across or along and under the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares or public places within the city, and the owner of any pipeline constructed or replaced under a franchise hereinafter granted under the terms of this chapter, shall prepare and file with the building official three (3) official, scaled, city street maps, as currently revised by the city engineer, upon which the owner shall fully delineate the area within the city's corporate limits traversed by the existing or proposed pipeline, with the route, distances and shut-off valve locations clearly and indelibly drawn thereon, together with the name and mailing address of the owner and the telephone number of at least one (1) office or person available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis who can furnish, or obtain immediately, information as to the pressure at the point or points of input nearest to the city and the common name of the commodity carried by the pipeline of such owner. Immediately upon receipt of such maps, the building official shall transmit one (1) copy to the director of public works and one (1) copy to the fire department, and shall retain one (1) copy in his files. The building official shall issue a receipt for each registration filed. Any change in the twenty-four (24) hour contact information must be promptly reported to the fire department. 
(b)  Since the Houston Natural Gas Corporation and Pennzoil United, Inc., successor to the United Gas Corporation, are franchised utilities of the city and have, at least since the year 1945, regularly applied to and advised the city of their extensions, changes and relocations of pipelines, such utilities shall not be required to file the maps and attachments referred to in subsection (a) above for any pipeline construction, extension, change or relocation since the year 1945 and prior to April 7, 1970; provided, however, such utilities shall file such maps and attachments for all gas trunk pipelines extant within the city's corporate limits prior to the year 1945 and still operated in the original routes. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-3. - Pipeline signs. 
Every pipeline, new or existing, within the corporate limits of the city shall bear, at all times, in plain, indelible lettering, signs denoting the ownership of the pipeline, permanently affixed in the pipeline right-of-way. No person, except the owner or his duly authorized agent, shall tamper with or remove any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70) 
Cross reference— Signs generally, Ch. 31.  
Sec. 27-4. - Unauthorized operation of or tampering with shut-off valves. 
No person shall turn off or on, or otherwise operate or tamper with any pipeline shut-off valve within the city's corporate limits, unless such person is an employee of the owner or operator of the pipeline or a duly authorized agent of such owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-5. - Excavating over, changing grade of, etc., pipelines. 
No person, other than the owner of the pipeline or his duly authorized agent, shall excavate over or change the grade of, or operate on or construct anything on or across the right-of-way in any pipeline without first notifying the director of public works and the owner of the pipeline and giving them reasonable opportunity to have an observer present during such activity. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-6. - Exemptions from chapter. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 27-2(b), this chapter shall not apply to or affect any corporation now or hereafter providing natural gas service to the inhabitants of the city pursuant to a franchise granted to such corporation under the authority of the city's Charter as a gas distribution utility. 
(b)  Deleted. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 00-42, § 1, 3-28-00)  
Sec. 27-7. - Violations of chapter. 
Any violation of any section, subsection, or part of this chapter shall be deemed a misdemeanor and each violation during all or any portion of any day shall be a separate offense and a misdemeanor. Upon final conviction, every person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or other entity guilty of such violation shall be fined an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for each violation during all or any portion of any day. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 99-104, § 1, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 00-42, § 2, 3-28-00)  
Secs. 27-8—27-17. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FRANCHISE FOR USE OF PUBLIC PLACES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference— Franchises, Art. XI. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 27-18. - Required. 
The right to control and use of the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares and public places being invested in the city council by Article XI of the city's Charter, no person shall lay any pipeline, nor shall an existing pipeline be entirely replaced, across or along and under the public streets, highways, sidewalks, parks, public squares, or public places within the city, unless and until a franchise has been obtained for such pipeline under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-19. - To be granted by ordinance; ordinance enactment procedure. 
A franchise to lay or replace and operate a pipeline shall only be granted, renewed and extended by ordinance not in conflict with the city's Charter, which ordinance shall be read and passed at two (2) regular meetings of the council and shall not be finally acted upon until thirty (30) days after the first reading. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, Art. XI, § 3.  
Sec. 27-20. - Term. 
The ordinance granting a franchise under this article shall specify the term of the grant, provided that no franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty-five (25) years. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 81-128, § 1, 8-4-81) 
Charter reference— Similar provisions, Art. XI, § 2.  
Sec. 27-21. - Classifications. 
Every franchise granted under the provisions of this article shall be classified as either a gathering line franchise or a trunk line franchise. A gathering line franchise shall be for the laying or replacement of a pipeline or pipelines as an incident to the development and operation of oil and/or gas fields, including what are commonly referred to as gathering lines, and discharge lines, together with salt water lines, fresh water lines and lines carrying oil, water or gas produced in such fields to locations in such fields for operational, gathering or drilling purposes. All other pipelines, regardless of the commodity or commodities carried, shall be covered by a franchise classified as a trunk line franchise. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-22. - Indemnification provisions. 
The ordinance granting any franchise under this article, whether for a trunk pipeline or for gathering lines, shall require the grantee to have the city harmless from liability for injury or damage to any person or persons or property caused by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of any part or all of such pipeline within the right-of-way of any street of the city, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence, and shall require the grantee to pay to the city all damages caused to the city or any of its agencies by the construction, maintenance, operation, repair or removal of such pipeline or any part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-23. - Duty of grantee to give notice of street excavations and to keep street open. 
The person to whom a franchise is granted under this article shall notify the director of public works before commencing any excavation in any portion of any street, and shall not wholly close any street, but shall at all times maintain a route of travel along and within the roadway area, which shall include any sidewalk area; provided, however, in the event of an emergency, it being evident that immediate action is necessary for protection of the public and to minimize property damage and loss of investment, such grantee may, at his own responsibility and risk, make necessary emergency repairs, notifying the director of public works and the mayor or the city council of this action as soon as practical. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70) 
Cross reference— Street openings generally, § 32-31.  
Sec. 27-24. - Grantee's obligation to refill excavations and repair streets. 
(a)  The ordinance granting any franchise under this article, whether for a trunk pipeline or for gathering lines, shall require the grantee to refill, including the repaving of any cut in any pavement, all excavations made by him within the right-of-way of any street, whether existing at the time such ordinance is passed or thereafter dedicated or otherwise coming into existence, in the construction, operating, maintaining or removing of such pipeline or any part thereof, and if, after once refilling such excavation, the earth within the excavated area settles so as to leave a depression, the grantee shall be required to make further necessary fills from time to time as ordered by the director of public works or by the city council. The grantee will be required, by such ordinance, to repair all portions of any street across or along and under which his line is laid and place the same in as good a state of repair and condition as they were in at the time the construction, repair or removal was commenced, such repairs to be to the satisfaction of the city council. Such ordinance shall further require that all such work of repairing or refilling shall be done under plans and specifications approved by the director of public works and subject to his approval of the completed work, and any excavation in or along and under any such street shall be replaced with materials of the same kind as those removed unless the director of public works shall have approved some other type of fill or material. 
(b)  The ordinance granting such franchise shall further provide that, in the event the grantee fails to commence or thereafter to diligently prosecute any repair, refilling or other work required to be done by him within a reasonable time after being notified to do so by the director of public works, the city may cause such work to be done at the expense of the grantee and may recover all such expense from the grantee, together with all costs and reasonable attorney's fees. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Secs. 27-25—27-29. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GATHERING LINE FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 27-30. - Scope generally. 
A single gathering line franchise will be granted under this article to a person desiring to lay or replace and maintain and operate pipelines as a facility incident to the development and operation of oil and gas fields wholly or partly within the city limits, or in close proximity to the city limits, including, but without limitation, lines for: 
(1)  The gathering of oil, gas and other minerals from wells, tanks or field pumping stations; 
(2)  The gathering and disposal of salt water; 
(3)  The transportation of water for drilling and other purposes; 
(4)  The transportation of gas within the fields for operational, gathering or drilling purposes; and 
(5)  The transportation of oil, gas and other minerals from a point in such fields to connection with a trunk pipeline. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-31. - Fee and license. 
The ordinance granting a gathering line franchise and license shall provide for the payment by the grantee to the City of Pasadena of an initial franchise fee and an initial license fee in the amount of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) and for the payment of subsequent fees thereafter in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year per pipeline and all amounts as may subsequently be set by this chapter or otherwise set by the City of Pasadena. After payment of the initial fee, all subsequent fees shall be due and payable on December 31 of each subsequent year for the term of the license. Advance payment of the license fee for more than one (1) year shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-40; Ord. No. 81-128, § 2, 8-4-81; Ord. No. 94-102, § 1, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 99-104, § 2, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 08-125, § 1, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 08-307, § 1, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 27-31.1. - Transfer fee. 
A gathering line franchise that is transferred from a franchisee to another entity shall be subject to a franchise fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per pipeline payable by the transferee. After the payment of this transfer fee, the fees for subsequent years shall be payable by the transferee under the same conditions and terms as set forth in section 27-31. 
(Ord. No. 94-102, § 2, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 08-125, § 2, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 08-307, § 2, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 27-31.2. - Failure to pay fees. 
Failure to pay any fees required by this article shall result in the possible revocation of the franchise or license. All fees are payable within thirty (30) days. Thereafter, interest will accrue at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum until paid. In addition thereto in such event company agrees to pay to city administrative fees of ten (10) per cent per month and costs of collection including reasonable attorney fees. This is inclusive of any other available remedy. 
(Ord. No. 99-104, § 3, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 08-125, § 3, 5-20-08)  
Sec. 27-32. - Grantee's right to run lines across, along and under streets. 
(a)  A gathering line franchise shall authorize the grantee to run any of the lines referred to in section 27-30 across or along and under any street, but only upon the approval of the director or public works as to the point or points at which the pipeline will cross or run along and under any such street, the depth of the line under the street and the means and manner of construction, and the issuance of a specific permit therefor by the director of public works, upon application made to him before any line is so laid. Before granting any such permit, the director of public works shall require the grantee to file with him maps and drawings of the area involved to constitute a permanent record in the office of the director of public works of the location of the line so permitted to be carried under city streets. 
(b)  Each gathering line franchise shall provide for the payment by the grantee of ten dollars ($10.00) upon the granting, by the director of public works, of the specific permit for the crossing of or running along and under one or more streets by each or any particular line, as provided for in subsection (a) of this section. Such permit fee shall be in addition to the fee prescribed by section 27-31. 
(Ord. No. 70-46, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-33. - Minimum depth of lines under streets. 
At every point or points where a pipeline is to cross or run along and under a street, as authorized by this division, the pipeline must be buried to a depth of at least six (6) feet, measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-34. - Provision for relocation or lowering of line for street improvements or water or sewer construction. 
A gathering line franchise granted under this article shall provide that any line crossing or laid within and along and under any street or street right-of-way in existence at the time the line is laid will, at any time thereafter, be relocated or lowered at such point of crossing, by the grantee at his cost, if found necessary by the director of public works incident to any future street improvement or water, sanitary sewer or storm sewer construction. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Secs. 27-35—27-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - TRUNK LINE FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 27-40. - Application. 
Any person desiring to construct any trunk pipeline across or along and under any street within the limits of the city shall first submit to the director of public works and to the director of city planning a plan accurately showing the proposed location, course and alignment of the proposed pipeline. Such plan shall be accompanied by a written application for the passage of an ordinance granting the franchise, which application shall show (unless the same are sufficiently shown on the plan) the time, manner, means and methods of the proposed construction, the particular commodity proposed to be transported through such line and the maximum pressure and maximum temperature under which the same may be pumped or otherwise caused or permitted to flow through any and all of the particular portions of the line. Such plan, which shall consist not only of the plan but also of a suitable alignment map as drawn for the applicant for his own records, shall accurately show the location of all existing streets and all proposed streets designated on the master plan for the city or on the official map of the city, across or along and under which the pipeline is intended to be laid. Two (2) copies thereof and of the application shall be presented to the director of city planning and two (2) copies thereof and of the application shall be presented to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-41. - Recommendation of directors of public works and planning as to granting or denying. 
The director of public works and the director of planning shall report to the city council upon their examination of an application and plans filed pursuant to this division (including such changes in the plans as the applicant may have made upon their suggestion) with their recommendations as to the granting or denying of the application. They shall, in their report and recommendation, state whether the depth or depths at which the pipeline is proposed to be laid through undeveloped or unplatted areas is, to the extent economically feasible, consistent with the probable future development of such areas and with the probable location of and opening of future streets and the probable laying of water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines incident to such probable future development. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-42. - Fee. 
Every ordinance granting a franchise or license for the carrying of trunk pipelines under any city streets shall provide that the grantee shall pay to the city an initial franchise or license fee in the amount of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per pipeline and for the payment of subsequent fees thereafter in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year per pipeline and all amounts as may subsequently be set by amendment to this section or otherwise set by the city. After payment of the initial fee, all subsequent fees shall be due and payable on December 31 of each subsequent year for the term of the franchise or license. Advance payment of the franchise or license fee for more than one (1) [year] shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 81-128, § 3, 8-4-81; Ord. No. 94-102, § 3, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 99-104, § 4, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 08-125, § 4, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 08-307, § 3, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 27-42.1. - Transfer fee. 
A trunk line franchise that is transferred from a franchisee to another entity shall be subject to a franchise fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per pipeline payable by the transferee. After the payment of this transfer fee, the fee for subsequent years shall by payable by the transferee under the same conditions and terms as set forth in section 27-42. 
(Ord. No. 94-102, § 4, 6-21-94; Ord. No. 08-125, § 5, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 08-307, § 4, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 27-42.2. - License fee. 
The ordinance granting a gathering line license shall provide for the payment by the grantee to the City of Pasadena of an initial license fee in the amount of three thousand five hundred dollars ($3,500.00) per pipeline and for the payment of subsequent fees thereafter in the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per year per pipeline and all amounts as may subsequently be set by this chapter or otherwise set by the City of Pasadena. After payment of the initial fee, all subsequent fees shall be due and payable on December 31st of each subsequent year for the term of the license. Advance payment of the license fee for more than one (1) year shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 99-104, § 5, 6-15-99; Ord. No. 08-125, § 6, 5-20-08; Ord. No. 08-307, § 5, 12-16-08)  
Sec. 27-43. - Designation of locations for line to cross or run along and under streets. 
The ordinance granting a trunk line franchise under this article shall state the streets across or along and under which the pipeline is to be laid and shall state, with particularity, the point or points at which the pipeline will cross or run along and under any such street. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Sec. 27-44. - Minimum depth of line. 
No trunk line franchise shall be granted under this article, unless so much of the entire pipeline as is proposed to be laid through or under any undeveloped or unplatted area within the limits of the city is to be buried and laid to a depth of at least four (4) feet, measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground; provided that, at any point or points where such line is to cross or run along and under an existing street, or any proposed street which has been designated on the master plan for the city or the official city map, such line must be buried to a depth of at least six (6) feet, measured between the top of the line and the natural surface of the ground. If, at any particular point or points, the director or public works recommends that a greater or lesser depth be required, if known and reasonable facts presented show that the recommendation is prudent and reasonable, such franchise will not be granted except upon agreement by the grantee to comply with such required depth. 
(Ord. No. 70-59, § 1, 4-7-70)  
Chapter 28 - PLANNING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 21; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; basic subdivision ordinance, App. A; townhouse subdivisions, App. B. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Department created. 
There is hereby created the department of planning, an executive department of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1707, § 1, 9-21-65)  
Secs. 28-2—28-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DIRECTOR OF PLANNING 
 
Sec. 28-17. - Position created; appointment and term. 
There is hereby established, in the office of city planning, the position of director of city planning. The director shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed and approved by the city council. The director may serve for a term of one (1) year or until his successor is appointed and qualified. Incumbency may be ended in less than one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 1707, § 2, 9-21-65)  
Sec. 28-18. - General powers and duties. 
The director of planning shall superintend the office of city planning and all employees assigned thereto. He shall coordinate the development of the plan or plans, map or maps, for all city planning over multiples of years. He shall also plan and recommend for the coordination of future municipal development with the planning and development of other governmental agencies, particularly as to vehicular traffic flow, street, highway and utility connections, and water procurement, storage and distribution. Studies and research for the maintenance and revision, as conditions indicate, of the city's plans and maps for multiple-years development shall be a continuing duty of the planning director and he shall have the right to submit all or any part of his studies and research, with or without recommendations, to the planning and zoning commission, in addition to work he may be directed to perform by such commission. 
(Ord. No. 1707, §§ 4-1, 4-2, 9-21-65) 
Cross reference— Duty of director of planning to assist building commission, § 9-33.  
Sec. 28-19. - To serve as executive officer of planning and zoning commission. 
The director of planning shall serve as the executive officer of the planning and zoning commission. 
(Ord. No. 1707, § 4-2, 9-21-65)  
Secs. 28-20—28-29. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Planning and zoning commission action on mobile home park plats, § 21-80 et seq.; plats approved by planning and zoning commission to conform to driveway regulations, § 32-33. 
 
Sec. 28-30. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term "commission" shall mean the City of Pasadena Planning and Zoning Commission created by section 28-31. The term "subcommission" shall mean the subdivision plat subcommission of the planning and zoning commission, as provided for in section 28-43.  
Sec. 28-31. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created and established, within and for the city the City of Pasadena Planning and Zoning Commission, composed of nine (9) members, whose offices are hereby created and established. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 1, 7-6-65; Ord. No. 68-54, § 1, 4-9-68)  
Sec. 28-32. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member of the commission shall be a resident citizen, a freeholder of land situated within the incorporated limits of the city, and a qualified voter of the city. Any member who ceases to hold all such qualifications shall, ipso facto upon such cessation, terminate his membership, subject only to written approval by the mayor filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 2, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-33. - Appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  All members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Each member shall serve for a term of one (1) year from the date of his appointment, unless sooner terminated. 
(b)  All vacancies in membership of the commission shall be filled as soon as practicable after the occurrence of such vacancies by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The term of a member appointed and confirmed to fill a vacancy shall be one (1) year from the date of his appointment, unless sooner terminated. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 2, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-34. - Members to serve without compensation. 
The members of the commission, in the performance of their official duties, shall serve without compensation for office. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 2, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-35. - Officers designated. 
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The director of planning shall serve as the executive officer of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 3, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-36. - Election and terms of officers. 
The chairman, the vice-chairman and the secretary of the commission shall be nominated by the members of the commission in such manner as the commission shall prescribe at its first meeting as a committee of the whole, and each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified and serving members of the commission. The terms of all elected officeships shall be concurrent and limited within the term of the officer's commission membership appointment. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 3, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-37. - General powers and duties of officers. 
The general powers and duties of the officers of the planning commission shall be as follows: 
(a)  Chairman: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the commission. 
(2)  Call special meetings of the commission in accordance with the bylaws and rules of procedure. 
(3)  Sign official documents of the commission. 
(4)  See that all actions of the commission are properly taken. 
(5)  Appoint other commissioners to committees or subcommittees. 
(6)  Be responsible for the general direction of the commission under the supervision of the mayor. 
(7)  May be a member of all committees and subcommittees. 
(b)  Vice-chairman: 
(1)  Exercise or perform all the duties and be subject to all the responsibilities of the chairman during the absence, disability or disqualification of the chairman. 
(c)  Secretary: 
(1)  Sign official documents of the commission. 
(2)  Exercise or perform all the duties and be subject to all the responsibilities of the chairman during the absence, disability or disqualification of the chairman and vice-chairman. 
(d)  Planning director and staff. The commission may delegate to the planning director and staff of the planning department the responsibilities as follows: 
(1)  Transcribe, edit and prepare in final format minutes of all meetings of the commission. 
(2)  Act as custodian of commission records and officially approved minutes of all meetings of the commission keeping same in an appropriate minute book. 
(3)  Give or serve all notices as required by law or by the bylaws. 
(4)  Prepare the agenda for all meetings of the commission. 
(5)  Prepare all correspondence and superintend all work ordered by the commission as related to official actions of the commission and respond to such correspondence, as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 3, 7-6-65; Ord. No. 84-61, § 1, 3-27-84)  
Sec. 28-38. - Monthly meetings required; termination of membership for failure to attend meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings. Any member having three (3) consecutive absences from regular monthly meetings without excuse approved by a majority of the commission qualified and serving, one of such majority to be the chairman, if then qualified and serving, after due notice, personally, by phone or mail, or by notice in the minutes of a prior regular meeting, shall have his membership ipso facto terminated, subject only to the mayor's approval. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 4, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-39. - Procedure. 
The procedure of the commission, except as prescribed in this article, shall be fixed by rules and regulations of the city council and by rules, regulations and bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 4, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-40. - Quorum. 
Fifty-one (51) per cent of the qualified and serving members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. A consensus vote by a minimum of five (5) members of the commission shall constitute an official act of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 3, 7-6-65; Ord. No. 83-379, § 1, 12-13-83)  
Sec. 28-41. - General powers and duties of commission. 
The commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty: 
(1)  To prepare maps and plans of the whole or any portion of the city and of any land outside the city which, in the opinion of the commission, bears a relation to the planning of the city, and to change, add to or extend such maps and plans as it deems advisable. Such maps and plans shall show and describe recommended land use sectors, the location and extent of streets, parkways, highways, concourse walks, elevated ways, subways, alleys, public ways, tunnels, bridges, viaducts, overpasses, underpasses, parks, playfields, playgrounds, and other public grounds, improvements, eleemosynary institutions, including public buildings and utilities and utility easements, public and private. The removal, relocation, widening, narrowing, shortening, extension, vacation, abandonment or change of use of any of the aforementioned structures, works, improvements, facilities or places shall likewise be shown and described. 
(2)  The commission may adopt the plan as a whole by a single resolution, or may by successive resolutions adopt successive parts of the plan, such parts corresponding to major geographical sectors of the city and to adjacent related lands or to functional divisions of the subject matter of the plan, and may adopt any amendment or extension thereof or addition thereto. Each resolution shall refer expressly to the maps and descriptive and other matter intended by the commission to form the whole or part of the plan and the adoption of the resolution shall be recorded on the map and the annexed descriptive and other matter by the signatures of the chairman and secretary of the commission. An attested copy of the plan or sufficiently identifying part thereof shall be certified by the city council for approval or disapproval. In the event there is one or more dissenting votes cast in the commission ballot for adoption of the plan, the member or members casting such dissenting votes shall be entitled to submit their objections or alternative plans directly to the city council prior to or at the time of the city council's consideration of the plan certified as adopted by the commission. Such objections and alternative plans, if any, may be submitted individually or jointly by the members dissenting. 
(3)  To accomplish research, studies and plans for city improvement and beautification over multiples of years. 
(4)  To act with and assist city officers and departments and other governmental agencies in formulating and executing proper plans of municipal development. 
(5)  To recommend all types of vehicular traffic flow planning and controls. 
(6)  To investigate, consider and report, with recommendations for action as hereinafter provided, to the city council upon the layout or platting of new subdivisions of the city or of property adjacent to or near the city, and upon changes, alterations and vacations of plats, and to perform all duties imposed upon city planning commissions by the statutes of the State of Texas. 
(7)  To act with and assist other city departments, the Pasadena Chamber of Commerce and the tourist and industrial attraction and promotion agencies of the County of Harris and the State of Texas in creating facilities and opportunities for the location of new business and industry and the improved accommodation of existing business and industry within the city. 
(8)  To submit to the mayor requests for funds, budgeted or unbudgeted, with approval of the city controller and the city council, for the working operations of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 4, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-42. - Public hearing prerequisite to adoption of plan. 
Before the adoption of the plan referred to in section 28-41, or any part thereof, or any amendment, extension or addition thereto, the commission shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be held within the city at a time and place to be designated in a notice published in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time stated in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 4, 7-6-65)  
Sec. 28-43. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-379, § 2, adopted Dec. 13, 1983, repealed § 28-43. Said section was relative to a subdivision plat committee and derived from Ord. No. 1686, § 5, adopted July 6, 1965.  
Sec. 28-44. - Rules, regulations and bylaws for government of commission and subcommission. 
(a)  The city council may prescribe rules and regulations for the government of the commission and the subcommission or may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations promulgated by the commission or by the subcommission. The commission and subcommission may adopt bylaws for their respective government. 
(b)  All rules and regulations promulgated by the commission or the subcommission and bylaws adopted by the commission or subcommission shall become effective only after approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1686, § 6, 7-6-65)  
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNING DEVELOPMENT FEES 
 
Sec. 28-45. - General. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish the fee amounts for administrative fees, which are designed to defray the costs incurred by the city for administering this chapter and/or plan and plat review. 
(2)  Amendment. The fees established herein may be revised from time to time. 
(3)  Procedure. No application for plan or plat review shall be accepted until the applicant has paid all fees as set forth herein. Fees paid shall be non-refundable. 
(Ord. No. 18-102, § 5, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 28-46. - Planning development fee schedule. 
(1)  Fee schedule shall read as shown on Exhibit "A" below. 
Exhibit A - Planning Development Fee Schedule 
Pre-application Conference 	$150.00 
Preliminary plat/replat 	$500.00 + $5.00 per lot 
Final plat/replat 	$500.00 + $5.00 per lot 
Vacating plat 	$500.00 
Amending plat 	$300.00 
Extension of plat approval 	$150.00 
Multi-family (apartments) site plan review 	$500.00 + $5.00 per unit 
Manufactured home park 	$500.00 + $5.00 per lot 
Variance 	$400.00 per variance 
Alternative landscape plan 	$200.00 
Abandonment 	$1,000.00 
Annexation 	$1,000.00 
 
(Ord. No. 18-102, § 5, Exh. A, 8-21-18)  
Chapter 29 - PLUMBING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), adopted January 17, 2017, amended chapter 29 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former chapter 29 pertained to similar subject matter. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
Cross reference— Sanitary facilities at theaters, § 5-26; toilet facilities at dance halls, § 5-111; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; buildings containing defective gas plumbing declared to be fire hazards, § 13-118(2); heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; swimming pools, Ch. 33; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference— Requirement that cities prescribe rules and regulations relating to plumbing, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243-101, § 15. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 29-1. - Purpose. 
This Code is an ordinance providing minimum requirements and standards for the practical safeguarding of persons and property from the hazards arising from the installation of plumbing systems and the use of plumbing products. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-2. - Scope. 
The provisions of this Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration to, use, or maintenance of plumbing systems within this jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-3. - Adoption of codes and state laws. 
The City of Pasadena Mayor and City Council, with the recommendation of the City of Pasadena Plumbing Board, does hereby adopt the 2015 edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code and including and all relative elements of Chapter 29 of the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances, State of Texas laws or any other governing bodies/organizations pertaining to plumbing, irrigation and storm drainage. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-4—29-25. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLUMBING BOARD 
 
Sec. 29-26. - Plumbing board created. 
There is hereby created a plumbing board consisting of nine (9) members, appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-27. - Members of plumbing board. 
• Position one (1) shall be filled by a professional engineer registered by the State of Texas, who shall be actively engaged in the design of plumbing systems. 
• Position two (2) shall be filled by a duly licensed journeyman plumber. 
• Position three (3) and four (4) shall be filled by a duly licensed master plumber actively engaged in the plumbing business in the city. 
• Position five (5) shall be filled by a representative in the employ of a local gas utility company. 
• Position six (6) shall be filled by the chief plumbing inspector of the city. 
• Position seven (7) shall be filled by a member at large to be appointed by the mayor. 
• Position eight (8) and nine (9) shall be filled by alternates who are duly licensed plumbers. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-28. - Appointments, terms, removal. 
Board member appointments shall be made on or before January 2nd of each year and take effect on that date. All appointments shall be from the effective date of appointment until January 2nd of the next year, but each member of the board shall serve until his successor has been appointed and qualified. Any appointed member of the board may be removed from office in accordance with article III, section 7 of the City of Pasadena Home Rule Charter. The existing board members are retained in service until such time as the established process would modify those appointments. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-29. - Quorum. 
Four (4) members of the plumbing board present at any meeting shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of all business of the board, and a majority vote of the members present shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-30. - Officers, procedure, order of business. 
The officers of the board shall consist of a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary. The chairman, vice-chairman, and the secretary shall be nominated by the members of the board each year in its first meeting after January 2nd. Each officer shall be elected by a majority vote of the then qualified and serving members of the board. Employees of the city shall not serve as officers of the board. The terms of all elective officers shall be concurrent and limited within the terms of the officer's board membership. The meeting procedure and order of business shall be as prescribed by the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-31. - General powers and duties. 
(a)  The plumbing board shall be responsible for making interpretations of this plumbing code including the approval of equipment, material installation techniques, and granting special permission for the condition, material and installations not covered herein. 
(b)  The plumbing board shall submit to the mayor, city council and the building official, written suggestions and recommendations for the improvement of the city plumbing code. 
(c)  The plumbing board will review appeals requested on behalf of contractors, homeowners and citizens of the City of Pasadena and advise the permit department or mayor and council, as to specific rulings and/or opinions. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-32. - Reports. 
The plumbing board shall prepare a written report to the mayor and building official indicating herein the official actions of the board. Said report is to be submitted during January of each year or as may be requested with regard to specific appeals before the board. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-33. - Investigations. 
The inspector shall make such investigations regarding plumbing work as deemed necessary or as requested by the mayor, chief plumbing inspector, building official, or fire marshal of the city, and prepare a written report to requestor and correction requirements to owner or occupant. Inspectors shall have "right of entry" during reasonable hours for investigating the previous mentioned items in this Code and complaints as may be properly reported to the city. By adoption, this allows the city to recover an hourly amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) an hour for staff fees associated to any individual or company found at fault or responsible by determination of the board. This is separate and independent of fines that may result from the investigation. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-34. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any person, firm, corporation or organization dissatisfied with a decision of a plumbing inspector shall have the right to appeal such decision. The appeal shall be in writing for review to the plumbing board within two (2) working days after such decision. Thereupon, the plumbing board within fifteen (15) working days, shall hear and determine said appeal. The board shall have the right to affirm, modify or reverse the action of the plumbing inspector, provided, that until such time as the inspector's action is reversed or modified, such action shall in all things be effective. The decision of the plumbing board shall be subject to review by the city council as provided for in item (b) below. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or organization that questions a decision of the plumbing board shall have the right to appeal. Such appeal shall be made in writing to the city secretary within ten (10) days after the decision of the board. After receipt of such appeal, the city council shall set the date for a hearing, and the city secretary shall notify the appellant and the chairman of the plumbing board. The plumbing board, as well as the appellant, shall have the right to be heard. The city council shall affirm, modify or reverse the action and/or decision of the plumbing board. The action of the city council shall be final. If no appeal is requested within the time and manner herein provided, the ruling of the plumbing board shall be final. The action of the plumbing board shall in all things be effective until reversed or modified by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-35—29-40. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 29-41. - Definitions. 
No terms in this plumbing code are deemed as gender specific: 
Adopted plumbing code. A plumbing code, including a fuel gas code adopted by the board or a political subdivision, including any city, town, village, municipality, public water system, municipal utility district. 
Appliance connection. An appliance connection procedure using only a code approved appliance connector that does not require cutting into or altering the existing plumbing system. 
Building official. The Officer of the City of Pasadena charged with the administration and enforcement of the Building Department Codes of the City of Pasadena or his duly authorized representative. 
City Code. City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
Certificate of insurance. A form submitted to the City of Pasadena certifying that the responsible master plumber has minimum insurance coverage. 
City of Pasadena (AHJ). Authority having jurisdiction. 
Gravity grease interceptor. An interceptor installed as defined under the current adopted plumbing code. 
Hydro-mechanical grease interceptor. An interceptor installed as defined under the current plumbing code. 
Maintenance man/woman. A permanent employee as opposed to an independent contractor, who performs plumbing maintenance work, repairs and replacement of existing potable water piping existing sanitary waste and vent piping existing plumbing fixtures and existing water heaters. A maintenance man/woman shall not cut into or replace any gas line, install any gas fired water heater. He/She shall also register with the City of Pasadena as a maintenance man/woman before performing any plumbing work. 
Plumbing company. A person as defined, who engages in plumbing business. 
Responsible master plumber. A person, as defined who allows their master plumbing licensed to be used by "only" one (1) plumbing company to obtain required permits that responsible person is responsible for all plumbing work permitted. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-42—29-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMIT FEES 
 
Sec. 29-51. - Fees. 
All policies and fees are as per adopted Ordinance Number 2006-322 and previous adopted not modified fees. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-52—29-60. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - SPECIFIC POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 29-61. - Specific policies and procedures. 
All policies and fees are as per adopted Ordinance Number 2006-322 and previous adopted not modified fees. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-62—29-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
Sec. 29-71. - Enforcement. 
All policies and fees are as per adopted Ordinance Number 2006-322 and previous adopted not modified fees. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-72—29-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - ADDITIONAL PASADENA AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 29-81. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  All premises intended for human habitation, occupancy or use shall be provided with a supply of potable water that is not connected to an unsafe water supply or subject to the hazards of backflow, back-siphon or back pressure. 
(b)  Each dwelling unit shall have not less than one (1) water closet, one (1) bathtub or shower, one (1) lavatory and one (1) kitchen style sink with a hot water supply of at least one hundred twenty (120) degrees. All other buildings or human occupancy or use shall have at least one (1) water closet and one (1) lavatory with hot water for sanitation. 
(c)  Sewage or other waste from a plumbing system, which may be deleterious of flammable to the surface, subsurface or sewer system shall be rendered through subjection to a form of treatment approved by the administrative authority and that meets the standards and ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-82. - Sanitary and storm drainage. 
(a)  The low heel connection on a low-heel ninety (90) shall be used for vent only. The side-outlet on a side-outlet tee shall be used for drainage only, both fittings shall be installed in the vertical position. 
(b)  Building drains and sanitary sewer lines shall be sized by total of fixtures and length of pipe. Drains shall be laid on a bed of bank sand. 
(c)  Tunnel work done underneath the slab of a building shall have clear pictures of all connections, runs of pipe, hangers and cleanouts and shall be left at the jobsite for the inspection. Each photograph shall include the address of the jobsite by either being written legibly on the piping or by signage being clearly visible in the photograph. Backfill materials and methods shall be approved in writing by a licensed engineer and posted with pictures and shall also be left at the jobsite at the time of final inspection. 
(d)  Storm drainage work shall be permitted on a plumbing commercial site work application by a registered plumbing contractor. 
(e)  Storm drains shall be backfilled with a minimum of six (6) inches of stabilized sand over the line. 
(f)  Backwash drains from swimming pools, wading pools, or hot tubs shall drain indirect through a minimum one and one-half-inch pipe into a four-inch-p-trap connected to the sanitary sewer line with an approved air gap. EXCEPTION: P-trap not required if a cartridge filter is utilized on pool equipment. 
(g)  Two-way cleanouts shall be two (2) wyes or combinations arranged to allow complete cleaning in all directions or an city approved double cleanout with two vertical risers. Such clean-outs are required to be installed outdoors at the conjunction of the building drain and building sewer where each sanitary sewer or grease waste main exits a building. 
(h)  Dishwasher drain shall be installed with an air/gap fitting or by running the drain line and securing it to the top of the cabinet then connecting to the disposal or y-tailpiece. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-83. - Water heaters. 
(a)  Discharge lines from water heater relief valves may extend to the floor with a ninety (90) degree fitting turned toward the back of the water heater with the approval of the authority having jurisdiction. All others shall extend to the outside of the building or other safe location with prior approval. Mop sinks are not an approved receptor for water heater relief valve drain termination. 
(b)  The replacement of any water heater shall include bringing the vent pipe, gas valve, gas flex, water connections, temperature and pressure relief discharge line, pans and stand (if required) into compliance. All new water heaters installed shall be installed under the current adopted energy code. 
(c)  Sources of domestic hot water for all premises other than one or two family dwellings shall be set at a minimum of 140 degrees Fahrenheit and the temperature regulated to approved ranges downstream before the first opening in the hot water system by a means that meets the standards set forth by ASSE 1016/1069/1070 or CSA B125.1/B125.3. 
(d)  Water supply to eye washes, safety showers or other similar fixtures for emergency use shall have hot and cold water piped to such fixtures and regulated by a approved means that maintains such water supply temperature between 60—100 degrees F (16—38 C). Such piping systems shall be arranged/designed/installed with mixing valves, circulating pumps or any other means necessary to avoid stagnation and avoidance of dead ends in the water piping system supplied to these types of fixtures. 
(e)  Each address shall have its own independent means of supplying hot water and located in a manner to ensure that water heating equipment is readily accessible to the occupants. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-84. - Water supply and distribution. 
(a)  All backflow devices shall be secured with two-inch unistrut for sizes two-inch and under, sizes three (3) inches and greater shall have stands/bases that are constructed and designed to adequately support the weight of the installed backflow device and both risers insulated. Certification reports are to be supplied to the inspector at such time of the final plumbing inspection for any backflow preventers installed or tested. 
(b)  All water piping three (3) feet or less from an outside wall, (3) feet or less from a roof deck, less than twelve (12) inches below ground or exposed to the outside air shall be insulated with an approved insulation listed for such use. Additionally, pipe insulation must follow the requirements set forth by the current adopted plumbing code and the current edition of the International Energy Conservation Code. 
(c)  Each domestic water supply to a building or any structure that is not classified as a one or two family dwelling shall have a premises isolation backflow means consisting of a reduced pressure zone backflow assembly that is equal or larger than the building supply main piping, such device must be installed immediately after each domestic water meter. Additionally devices such as thermal expansion tanks are required to be properly installed to eliminate the dangers of thermal expansion. Other placement locations may be permitted due to special circumstances only by first obtaining permission of the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-85. - Grease and hair traps/interceptors and sample wells. 
(a)  Commercial laundry equipment and commercial and industrial buildings that discharge grease, fatty materials and/or lint, shall install an approved interceptor with a sample well. Before the issuance of any permit for such work, two sets of plans showing location, related piping riser diagram and manufacturer specification sheet for the specific model interceptor to be installed must be submitted for review and approved by the plumbing and health departments. 
(b)  Oil and sand separators-interceptors. All repair garages, auto dealer service areas and businesses which have oily, flammable or both types of waste as a result of manufacturing, storage, maintenance, repair or testing processes shall have one hundred (100) per cent recovery and meet one of the criteria set forth by the administration having jurisdiction. Prior to the opening of or permitting of any such business or work, a set of engineered plans showing the layout of the drainage system, the manufacturers specifications and the manufacturer's installation instructions for the separator shall be submitted to the health and plumbing departments for plan review. All separators shall be installed per manufacturer instructions and inspected. 
(c)  Design of separators/interceptors. Separators, interceptors shall be rated and labeled and designed for the load they are designed for. 
(d)  Sample wells when required. Sample wells will be required at food preparation facilities, food processing plants, auto repair shops, lubrication centers for autos, film processing establishments, beauty salons, strip centers, hospitals, chemical companies, chemical handlers, chemical suppliers, chemical manufacturers, any facility that requires a grease trap or separator or anywhere the authority having jurisdiction has deemed necessary. If a building has more than one (1) sewer tap then each line shall have a sample well. 
(e)  Sample well installation. Sample wells shall be installed as close as possible to the building it serves. If the sewer line is six (6) feet (one thousand eight hundred thirty (1,830) mm) or less, then the sample well shall have a diameter of fifteen (15) inches (three hundred eighty-one (381) mm) deeper than six (6) feet the sample well shall have a diameter of twenty-four (24) inches (six hundred ten (610) mm). 
(f)  Hair traps. An approved listed hair trap shall be installed on drains for shampoo bowls and any other similar fixtures for human or non-human use, such as but not limited to sinks, tubs or showers for the purposes of washing animals. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-86. - Fuel piping. 
(a)  All day care centers, nurseries and schools for children or adults shall have their gas lines tested yearly and permitted and inspected by City of Pasadena permit office. 
(b)  All gas inspections (GTO) called in before 12:00 p.m. will be inspected that same day. 
(c)  Where it is found necessary to have more than one gas meter at an address then the address of the plumbing permit for new gas work must be amended from the existing address to facilitate the release of said secondary meter. Upon plumbing final inspection, permanent/weather resistant signage shall be placed at each gas meter indicating there is a second fuel source at the property. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-87—29-90. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - APPLICATION FOR PLUMBING PERMITS 
 
Sec. 29-91. - Persons who may also obtain permits. 
Permits may be issued to the following: 
(1)  Any registered fire sprinkler contractor licensed by the state under Act Article 8751 V.A.T.S. as amended for the installation of fire suppression systems. 
(2)  Any registered irrigator licensed under chapter 33 or 34 of the water code for the installation of irrigation, yard drainage and backflow preventer installation and testing. 
(3)  Any homeowner who is homesteaded and performs the work. Exception: Gas piping work and gas turn on permits will only be issued to registered plumbing contractors. 
(4)  Any maintenance person or maintenance engineer, who is registered with the city and has minimum insurance coverage. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Sec. 29-92. - Permits not required. 
No plumbing permit is required for minor repairs such as the maintenance, repair, replacing of plumbing fixtures where no change in "rough-in" is involved. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Secs. 29-93—29-100. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - MATERIALS 
 
Sec. 29-101. - Materials. 
Type "M" copper shall not be allowed inside a building intended for human occupancy in water distribution systems. 
SDR 35 pipe under eight (8) inches, foam or cellular core pipe not allowed in any type of drain, waste or vent system. 
Irrigation piping shall be schedule forty PVC minimum on all main and lateral lines. Piping must be buried twelve (12) inches deep minimum to the top of piping and shall not be installed on any easements or rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 17-009, § 1(Exh. A), 1-17-17)  
Chapter 30 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Emergency ambulance service operated by police department, § 4-16 et seq.; interfering with police officers, § 20-14; police vehicles defined as "authorized emergency vehicles" and exempt from certain traffic regulations, §§ 36-1, 36-13. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Establishment and composition of department. 
A police department for the city is hereby established, to be composed of a chief of police and such other police officers as prescribed by civil service rules and regulations. 
(Code 1964, § 23-1)  
Sec. 30-2. - Appointment of chief. 
The chief of police shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 23-2)  
Sec. 30-3. - General powers and duties of chief and policemen. 
(a)  The chief of police shall, in person or by a designated police officer, attend upon the municipal court while in session, and shall promptly and faithfully execute all writs and process issued from the court. He shall have like power with the sheriff of the county to execute warrants; he shall be active in quelling riots, disorder and disturbance of the peace within the city limits and shall take into custody all persons so offending against the peace of the city and shall have authority to take suitable and sufficient bail for the appearance before the municipal court of any person charged with an offense against the ordinances of the city. It shall be his duty to arrest all violators of the public peace, and all who obstruct or interfere with him in the execution of the duties of his office or who shall be guilty of any disorderly conduct or any disturbance whatever. To prevent a breach of the peace or preserve quiet and good order, he shall have authority to close any theatre, ballroom or other place or building of public resort. In the prevention and suppression of crime and arrest of offenders, he shall have, possess and execute like power, authority and jurisdiction as the sheriff. He shall perform such other duties and possess such other power and authority as the city council may require and confer, not inconsistent with the Constitution and laws of this state. 
(b)  Each and every member of the police force shall have like powers with the chief of police, except that they shall perform their duties under the direction of and in cooperation with the chief of police. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the members of his force to enforce all ordinances of the city and such laws of the state as the violation of which are misdemeanors hearable in the municipal court or courts of like jurisdiction. 
(Code 1964, § 23-3) 
Cross reference— Service and execution of municipal court process by court warrant officers, § 23-21.  
Sec. 30-4. - Supervision and direction of police officers. 
It shall be the duty of the chief of police to supervise and direct the police officers of his department in the conduct of their offices and performance of their duties as such, and each police officer is specially charged with the duty of following the instructions of and cooperating with the chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 23-4)  
Sec. 30-5. - Authority of chief to assign special duties. 
From time to time, as may be found advisable, the chief of police may designate particular members of the police force to perform specific duties in addition to their general duties as police officers, and to designate a particular officer or officers to attend the municipal court and to serve warrants issued by the judge of the court. 
(Code 1964, § 23-5)  
Sec. 30-5.1. - Chief of police to promulgate motorcycle standards; use of personal motorcycles by police; reimbursement. 
(a)  Officers of the Pasadena Police Department are authorized to use their personal motorcycles in the course and scope of employment with the Pasadena Police Department of the City of Pasadena; provided, however, such vehicles shall meet minimum specifications for police motorcycles promulgated by the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall be and is hereby authorized to promulgate specifications for police motorcycles used in the course of police work with the City of Pasadena. Such regulations shall include, but are not limited to, specifications as to engine size, cooling, valve arrangement, tire size, wheel base, starter, color, and whether the motorcycle shall be equipped with saddlebags, police motorcycle equipment (red lights, electric siren, speedometer calibrated for police service, and the like). Such regulations shall be posted in the muster room and filed with the city secretary for ten (10) days before taking effect. 
(c)  A police officer who works full-time on motorcycle duty and who uses his own motorcycle in the performance of his duties pursuant to this section shall be paid a monthly motorcycle allowance of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month. A police officer receiving allowances pursuant to this section shall provide all maintenance, oil, gas, tires, red lights, electric sirens, calibrated speedometer for police service, and every other expense, except a police radio, which will be furnished by the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  In no event shall the number of police officers receiving monthly allowances pursuant to this section exceed ten (10). 
(Ord. No. 80-34, §§ 1—4, 3-4-80) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-34, §§ 1—4, enacted March 4, 1980, did not expressly amend this Code; therefore, codification as § 30-3.1 has been at the discretion of the editor.  
Sec. 30-6. - Duty of chief to counsel with mayor. 
The chief of police shall, from time to time, counsel with the mayor. 
(Code 1964, § 23-6)  
Sec. 30-7. - Cooperation with sheriffs, constables, etc. 
The chief of police and other police officers shall cooperate with the sheriffs, constables and other police officers of the state in apprehending and arresting persons charged with crime in other jurisdictions and found within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 23-7)  
Sec. 30-8. - Duty of chief with respect to warrants and writs. 
The chief of police shall cause all warrants and writs of capias for fines issued by the municipal court to be served promptly after same are placed in his hands, when the person or persons for whom they are issued can be located, and returns thereof made to the judge within seven (7) days from the receipt thereof by the chief of police, showing how same have been executed, and if not executed, the reason therefor. 
(Code 1964, § 23-8)  
Sec. 30-9. - Execution of warrants of arrest. 
Warrants of arrest are hereby authorized for all persons against whom complaints have been filed and the chief of police, his deputies, or any policeman is hereby authorized to execute same. 
(Code 1964, § 23-9)  
Sec. 30-9.1. - Warrant service established. 
(a)  The city council finds and determines that there exists a large backlog of arrest warrants issued out of the municipal court of the City of Pasadena. Pursuant to such finding it is in best interests of justice and the citizens of Pasadena that a system be established to serve said warrants. There is hereby established a warrant service to be maintained and operated by the police department of the City of Pasadena as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The operation of such warrant service shall be under the control and supervision of the chief of police of the City of Pasadena, Texas, or such person or persons within the police department appointed by the said chief of police to supervise the operation of such warrant service. 
(c)  The chief of police of the City of Pasadena, Texas, shall with the exception of his authorized representative delegated to supervise such warrant service, employ off-duty police officers to serve said warrants; provided, however, that no such off-duty police officer employed for this purpose shall ever be paid in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) per warrant served and, provided further that no such off-duty police officer so employed shall ever be entitled to additional employee benefits under article 1269m, V.A.C.S. or under any other ordinance of the City of Pasadena, Texas, by reason of such off-duty employment. 
(d)  The chief of police or his delegated representative shall provide for the orderly maintenance of records and information relative to the costs to the City of Pasadena of the operation of said warrant service. 
(e)  Off-duty police officers shall be paid a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each warrant actually executed by him. 
(Ord. No. 71-310, §§ 1—5, 10-26-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-310 did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 30-9.1 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Cross reference— City marshals, § 23-18.  
Sec. 30-10. - Arrests without warrant. 
(a)  A police officer of the city may arrest an offender, without a warrant, for any offense committed in his presence or within his view. 
(b)  A police officer of the city may arrest, without warrant, when a felony or breach of the peace has been committed in the presence or within the view of a magistrate, and such magistrate verbally orders the arrest of the offender. 
(c)  A police officer of the city may arrest, without warrant, persons found in suspicious places and under circumstances which reasonably show that such persons have been guilty of some felony or breach of the peace, or threaten to or are about to commit some offense against the laws of the city or state. 
(d)  Where it is shown by satisfactory proof to a police officer of the city, upon the representation of a credible person that a felony has been committed, and that the offender is about to escape, so that there is no time to procure a warrant, such police officer may, without warrant, pursue and arrest the accused. 
(Code 1964, § 23-10) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. arts. 14.01—14.04.  
Sec. 30-11. - Police docket. 
The chief of police shall keep or cause to be kept under his direction a police docket upon which shall be entered the name of each person arrested, with or without warrant, time of arrest, nature of charge, when released and whether upon appearance bond or by order of the judge of the municipal court, and such other information as may be pertinent, including the amount of any fine and costs collected. Such docket shall be open to the inspection of the judge of the municipal court and the mayor at all times, and also open for inspection of the public during hours when the City Hall is open for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1964, § 23-12)  
Sec. 30-12. - Authority of chief to accept bonds and release prisoners. 
The chief of police shall have authority to accept appearance bonds from any person charged with violating a law or ordinance of the city and to release such person under such bond at any time prior to trial of such person. After trial of such person, he shall be released only after payment of any fine or costs assessed, or upon order of the judge of the municipal court, or upon appealing from the municipal court, in which appeal bond has been presented to and approved by the judge. 
(Code 1964, § 23-11)  
Sec. 30-13. - Regulations of chief governing computation of time to be served by and working of prisoners. 
(a)  The chief of police shall and is hereby authorized to promulgate regulations governing the computation of time to be served by any person who has been convicted in the municipal court for the violation of any law of the state or any ordinance of the city and who has been committed to the city jail in default of the payment of the fine or costs adjudged against him. In the promulgation of such regulations, the chief of police may and is hereby authorized to provide that any person who has been committed to the city jail as herein provided, may be allowed to labor in the furtherance of public works for a sufficient number of days to liquidate such fine and costs. 
(b)  The chief of police shall publish the regulations promulgated under this section in the official newspaper of the city, but in no way shall such regulations conflict with the laws of the state, the ordinances of the city or the orders of the municipal court of the city. 
(Ord. No. 67-1986, §§ 1—3, 8-1-67)  
Sec. 30-14. - Chief to determine whether or not prisoner allowed to work. 
The chief of police shall be the sole judge as to whether or not any prisoner who has asked to be allowed to work pursuant to regulations promulgated under section 30-13 shall be allowed to do so. 
(Ord. No. 67-1986, § 4, 8-1-67)  
Sec. 30-15. - Supervision of working prisoners; maximum work hours. 
Any prisoner who is allowed to labor pursuant to regulations of the chief of police shall be worked under the supervision and control of the chief of police or some person detailed by the chief for that purpose; provided that such prisoner shall not be required to work or allowed to work more than eight (8) full hours during any one twenty-four (24) hour period. 
(Ord. No. 67-1986, § 5, 8-1-67)  
Sec. 30-16. - Minimum credit to be given prisoner for work. 
Every prisoner who is allowed to labor by the chief of police shall receive a credit of no less than one (1) day jail-time, in addition to that which he has served, for each day he is allowed to work. 
(Ord. No. 67-1986, § 6, 8-1-67)  
Sec. 30-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-187, § 1, adopted July 5, 1983, repealed § 30-17, relative to conditions for reimbursement, which section derived from Ord. No. 78-32, § 1, adopted March 7, 1978.  
Secs. 30-18—30-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN FOR CLASSIFIED SERVICE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Municipal court warrant officers not under civil service, § 23-20. 
State Law reference— Civil service for city policemen, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1269m; classification of policemen generally, art. 1269m, § 8. 
 
Sec. 30-27. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Allocate means the act of assigning each position to its proper class. 
Class means a position or group of positions that involves similar duties and responsibilities and requires similar qualifications and which is properly designated by one title indicative of the nature of the work. 
Classification plan means and consists of the following: 
(1)  A grouping into classes of positions which are of approximately equal difficulty and responsibility. 
(2)  Class titles, descriptive of the work of the class, which will identify each class. 
(3)  Written class specifications for each class of positions containing a description of the nature of work and/or the relative responsibility of the positions in the class, illustrative examples of work performed in the class, requirements in terms of knowledge, skills and abilities necessary for performance of the work and a statement of experience and training desirable for recruitment into the class. 
Classified service shall include members of the police department of the city, as defined under "policeman" below; provided that the chief or head of the police department shall not be included within the classified service. 
Commission means the policemen's civil service commission of the city. 
Director means the director of policemen's civil service designated by the civil service commission to act in the capacity of secretary to the commission and director of civil service. [3] 
Policeman means one who engages in the actual enforcement of laws and the maintenance of public order. 
Position means a group of current duties and responsibilities, assigned or delegated by competent authority, requiring the services of an employee. 
Vacancy means a position, duly created, which is not occupied and for the filling of which a valid requisition has been received by the director. 
(Code 1964, § 23-21) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Director of personnel designated as available officer for designation as civil service director, § 2-42. 
 
Sec. 30-28. - Adopted. 
The city council hereby establishes and adopts the following classification plan as the official classification plan of all positions in the classified service of the city. The classified employees of the city police department are hereby divided into nine (9) classes to be known as Grade 1, Grade 2, Grade 3, Grade 4, Grade 5, Grade 6, Grade 7, Grade 8 and Grade 9. The following positions in the police department, which are hereby created, shall be classified as follows: 
(1)  Grade 1: Vacant. 
(2)  Grade 2: Patrolman; motorcycle patrolman. 
(3)  Grade 3: Radio dispatcher; desk sergeant. 
(4)  Grade 4: Sergeant; detective sergeant. 
(5)  Grade 5: Lieutenant; detective lieutenant. 
(6)  Grade 6: Captain; detective captain; superintendent of identification and records. 
(7)  Grade 7: Inspector of police. 
(8)  Grade 8: Assistant chief of police. 
(9)  Grade 9: Deputy chief of police. 
(Code 1964, § 23-22; Ord. No. 1660, 12-22-64; Ord. No. 1842, § 1, 8-9-66)  
Sec. 30-29. - Class specifications—Generally. 
The specifications for the classes in the classified plan, being the official statement of the duties, responsibilities and requirements of each such class, shall be as adopted from time to time by the city council and nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be deemed to affect the validity of any ordinance adopting or approving such specifications.  
Sec. 30-30. - Same—Maintenance; contents. 
The director shall cause to be maintained in the office of the commission, in looseleaf or other suitable form, accurate, complete and up-to-date specifications for every class of positions in the classified service. These specifications shall include: 
(1)  The title of the class. 
(2)  A statement of the duties performed and the responsibilities exercised by each class of positions. 
(3)  Examples of tasks performed by employees holding positions within the class. 
(4)  The minimum and desirable qualifications required of an incumbent for the satisfactory performance of such duties and tasks and the exercise of such responsibilities. 
(Code 1964, § 23-24)  
Sec. 30-31. - Same—Interpretation. 
The specifications for the various classes of positions are hereby declared to have the following force and effect: 
(1)  The specifications are descriptive only and are not restrictive. They are intended to indicate the kinds of positions that should be allocated to the respective classes as determined by their duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements. The use of a particular expression or restriction as to duties, qualification requirements or other attributes shall not be held to exclude others not mentioned, if such others are similar as to kind and quality. 
(2)  In determining the class to which any position shall be allocated the specification for each class shall be considered as a whole. Consideration is to be given to the general duties, the specific tasks, the responsibilities, the special and desirable qualifications and the relationships to other classes as affording a picture of the positions that the class is intended to include. 
(3)  Titles, as far as possible, are intended to be suggestive of the kind of work performed by the incumbent of the position and indicative of the rank. 
(4)  The duties statement shall be construed as a general description of the kind of work performed by the incumbent of a position that is properly allocated to the class and not as describing or limiting what the duties of any position shall be. 
(5)  The examples of work shall be construed as typical tasks only, illustrative of the duties as outlined by the general statement. These examples are not intended to be complete or exclusive and the fact that the actual tasks performed by the incumbent of a position do not appear thereon shall not be taken to mean that the position is necessarily excluded from the class, provided that the tasks constituting the main work or employment are duly covered by the general statement of the duties. Any one example of a typical task taken without relation to the general statement of duties and all other parts of the specifications shall not be construed as determining whether a position should be allocated to the class. 
(6)  The statement of special and desirable qualifications constitutes a part of the description of the kind of employment by expressing the minimum and desired qualifications expected of any new appointee if he is to perform the work properly, and is to be so construed and not as imposing in itself any new additional requirements for the filling of positions. Even though they may not be mentioned in the qualifications statement, such qualifications as should be properly required in common of all incumbents of all positions, such as good physical health, freedom from defects, citizenship, honesty, sobriety, and industry are to be considered as part of the qualification requirements. 
(Code 1964, § 23-25)  
Sec. 30-32. - Number of positions to be shown by annual budget. 
The number of positions in each class of the classified plan shall be shown by the annual budget of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 23-26; Ord. No. 1660, 12-22-64)  
Sec. 30-33. - Allocation of positions to classes. 
The director shall allocate each position in the classified service to its appropriate class in the classification plan. Such allocation shall be based on the duties and responsibilities of the present incumbents of such positions and shall be entered on the official roster cards maintained by the commission. The title of the class shall forthwith become the title of such individual positions and shall be used in payrolls submitted to the proper disbursing officer, and in requests to the commission for the certification of eligibles, in reports made to the commission as provided by the rules and regulations of the commission and in any other official records and communication of the commission and of all budget and financial officers. 
(Code 1964, § 23-27)  
Sec. 30-34. - Designation of new classes; combining, dividing, altering or abolishing classes. 
(a)  The city commission reserves to itself the sole right to designate new classes of positions, or combine, divide, alter or abolish existing classes, subject only to the provisions of the Civil Service Law and this article. 
(b)  Whenever a new position should be established or the duties of an existing position are so changed that, in effect, the old position as described in the class specification for the class to which it was originally allocated no longer exists and in its place there is created a position which should be allocated to a different class, the director, in consultation with the department heads, shall report this fact to the commission and send in, on the commission's prescribed form, a full statement of the circumstances and a description of the duties as changed or as set up. Upon the recommendation of the commission, after a full investigation of the actual and proposed duties, responsibilities and qualification requirements, the city council may allocate or reallocate the position to its appropriate class in accordance with the classification plan then in effect. If necessary, a new class shall be established to provide for the new position. The commission shall likewise, from time to time of its own motion, make investigations of any or all positions in the classified service and shall, in accordance with this article, make recommendations to the city council for the allocation of positions whenever the facts are such as to warrant such action. 
(Code 1964, § 23-28)  
Sec. 30-35. - Appeals from allocations. 
If an employee believes that his position has been improperly allocated, he may protest by presenting his reason therefor upon such forms or documents as the director may prescribe. The claim shall be investigated by the director and the commission and then referred to the city council for its decision, which shall be final. 
(Code 1964, § 23-29)  
Sec. 30-36. - Status of incumbents when positions reallocated. 
If a position at any time is reallocated to a different class to correct an error in the original allocation, the incumbent shall continue in the position without tests or other proofs of fitness. If a position is reallocated to another class on account of changed duties and responsibilities, the incumbent may, upon written recommendation of the department head, the passing of a noncompetitive examination given by the director, and approval of the commission, continue in the position. This shall not obtain in the event an employee is actually transferred to another position involving substantially different or higher qualifications, but only in those cases where new duties and responsibilities have been added or absorbed by the incumbent in addition to his regularly assigned work. 
(Code 1964, § 23-30)  
Sec. 30-37. - Investigations of plan. 
The director shall, at least once every two (2) years, investigate and report to the commission and to the city council upon the appropriateness of the class titles assigned to each position in the classified service. Such investigation, either by the director or by any member of the commission so designated, shall further determine whether any employees in one class are performing duties regularly assigned to positions in another unrelated class. 
(Code 1964, § 23-31)  
Sec. 30-38. - Compensation. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance prescribing the compensation or pay 
of any member of the classified service and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Secs. 30-39—30-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - UNCLAIMED PROPERTY IN POSSESSION OF POLICE DEPARTMENT[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Disposition of property forfeited under controlled substances act, § 20-9.2; junked vehicles, § 20-71 et seq.; authority of municipal court judge to order return of property being held by police department for evidence, § 23-6. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 1990, amended Art. III, Div. 1, to read as herein set out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Art. III, Div. 1, §§ 30-49—30-58, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 68-38, §§ 1, 5, 7—9, adopted March 26, 1968 and Ord. No. 83-65, § 1, adopted March 1, 1983. 
 
Sec. 30-49. - Delivery to director of purchases for sale; when. 
All unclaimed or abandoned personal property of every kind, except whiskey, wine, and beer, seized by Pasadena police which is not held as evidence to be used in any pending case and has not been ordered destroyed or returned to the person entitled to possession of the same by magistrate, which shall remain unclaimed for a period of thirty (30) days shall be delivered to the director of purchases of the City of Pasadena for disposition in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 94-96, § 1, 5-31-94)  
Sec. 30-50. - Notice to last known owner of intent to sell. 
The director or purchases of the City of Pasadena shall mail a notice to the last known address of the owner of such property by certified mail. Such notice shall describe the property being held, give the name and address of the officer holding such property, and shall state that if the owner does not claim such property within six (6) months from the date of the notice, such property will be sold and the proceeds of such sale, after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and the cost of the sale, placed in the treasury of the City of Pasadena. 
If the owner of such property is unknown or if the address of the owner is unknown, then the director of purchases of the City of Pasadena shall cause to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Pasadena a notice containing a description of the properties held, the name of the owner if known, the name and address of the director of purchases holding such property, and a statement that if the owner does not claim such property within six (6) months from the date of publication such property will be sold and the proceeds of such sale, after deducting the reasonable expense of keeping such property and the cost of the sale, placed in the treasury of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-51. - Authorization to sell personal property. 
The city is hereby authorized to sell at a public auction, through the agency of its director of purchases, personal property which has been in the possession of the purchasing department for a period of at least six (6) months, which property has remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by its rightful owner. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-52. - Establishment of sale date. 
The director of purchases shall establish a proposed date for the sale at public auction of property under this article whenever, in the director's opinion, a sufficient amount of such property has accumulated to justify such sale. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-53. - Notice of sale to be published; insufficient bids. 
The sale of any property hereunder shall be preceded by notice published once at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of such sale in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Pasadena, stating the description of the property, the name of the owner if known, and the date and place that such sale will occur. If the director of purchases shall consider any bid as insufficient, the director need not sell such property but may decline such bid and reoffer such property for sale. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-54. - Right of real owner to file claims; allowance and denial by city council. 
The real owner of any property sold shall have the right to file a claim to the proceeds of such sale with the city council of the City of Pasadena. If the claim is allowed by the city council, the controller shall pay the owner such funds as were paid into the treasury of the City of Pasadena as proceeds of the sale. If the claim is denied by city council, or if city council fails to act upon the claim within ninety (90) days, the claimant may seek remedies as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-55. - Disposition of funds. 
All monies derived from any auction provided for in this article shall be applied first to the storage charge accrued against the property sold and secondly to the general revenues of the city; provided, however, that all such monies shall be deposited by the city controller in a special escrow account established for the purpose and held for a period of two (2) years prior to being transferred to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Sec. 30-56. - Suitability of property to be sold; authority to determine disposition. 
For the purposes of this article, and except as otherwise specifically provided, the director of purchases is hereby authorized to decide upon the fitness or suitability of property to be sold at public auction or to be used by city departments, or to be destroyed, or to be donated to a charitable organization, such organization to be of the Salvation Army type. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 94-96, § 2, 5-31-94)  
Sec. 30-57. - Use of property by city departments. 
If the provisions of this article have been met and the property scheduled for sale, the property may be transferred by the director of purchasing to any city department for official use of that department. The department shall return the property to the director of purchases for sale when the department has completed its use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90; Ord. No. 94-96, § 3, 5-31-94)  
Sec. 30-58. - Liability of city. 
The City of Pasadena shall not in any instance be liable to any person for damages as compensation for any property retained for official use or sold at public auction under this article. 
(Ord. No. 90-7, § 1, 1-16-90)  
Secs. 30-59—30-63. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - DISPOSITION OF SPECIFIC PROPERTY 
 
Sec. 30-64. - Motor vehicles and auto accessories and tires. 
(a)  All motor vehicles and auto accessories and tires, which have been in the possession of the police department for a period of at least ninety (90) days, and remain unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owners, and which are not being held by the department as evidence for any trial or pending case filed of record, and which have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, may be retained by the city for official use only or may be sold at public auction as set out in division 1 of this article. 
(b)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of all motor vehicles and auto accessories and tires that have been returned to their rightful owners and of those items retained by the city for official use only. 
(c)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of those motor vehicles not returned or sold, or being officially used, and a copy of such list shall be mailed to local junk dealers (or advertised) requesting bids for same and stating a three (3) day period to submit a bid for such vehicles. The highest bidder shall be notified to bring the amount of his bid, in cash or a cashier's check, to the police department, and the bidder shall remove such vehicles, at his expense, within twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 68-38, § 2, 3-26-68)  
Sec. 30-65. - Firearms. 
(a)  All firearms which have been in the possession of the police department for a period of at least one (1) year and remaining unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owners, and which are not being held by the department as evidence for any trial or pending case filed of record, and which have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be retained by the police department for its official use and placed in the police arsenal. If such firearms are nonusable, they shall be sold by public auction under the provisions of division 1 of this article or disposed of in accord with subsection (b) below. 
(b)  Those firearms not retained for official use or sold at public auction shall be transported to an established firm that melts steel and shall be destroyed by melting same. The chief of police shall supervise such destruction, or he may direct the superintendent of the identification and records division of the police department to do so. 
(c)  A list of all firearms that are retained by the police department shall be made by the chief of police, such list to consist of a physical description of the firearms, including the serial number, brand name, and the like. A copy of such list shall be sent to the mayor and to the superintendent of identification and records division of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 68-38, § 3, 3-26-68)  
Sec. 30-66. - Bicycles and tricycles. 
(a)  All bicycles and tricycles which have been in the possession of the police department for a period of at least ninety (90) days, and which have remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owners, and which are not being held by the department as evidence for a trial or pending case filed of record, and which have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be sold at public auction as set out in division 1 of this article. 
(b)  Those bicycles and tricycles not sold at public auction nor returned to their rightful owners, and still in the possession of the police department on the first day of December of any year, may be donated to any organization, at the discretion of the chief of police, and such organization shall repair same and donate same to needy children. 
(c)  A list shall be prepared by the police department of bicycles and tricycles that are donated for charity, and a copy shall be delivered to the city secretary and the city council and a copy of same shall be retained by the police department in its record division. 
(Ord. No. 68-38, § 4, 3-26-68) 
Cross reference— Bicycles generally, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 30-67. - Alcoholic beverages. 
Alcoholic beverages in any type of containers, which have been in the possession of the police department for at least thirty (30) days, and which have remained unclaimed, abandoned or unidentified by their rightful owners, and which are not being held by the department as evidence for trial or trials and pending cases filed of record, and which have not been ordered returned to the person entitled to possession thereof by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall be destroyed under the supervision of the chief of police and he shall certify such destruction to the mayor within ten (10) days of such destruction. 
(Ord. No. 68-38, § 6, 3-26-68) 
Cross reference— Alcoholic beverages generally, Ch. 3.  
Secs. 30-68—30-70. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 30-71. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to encourage alarm users and alarm companies to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of alarm systems and reduce or eliminate false alarms. 
(b)  This article governs alarm systems intended to summon law enforcement response, and requires registration, establishes fees, provides for penalties for violations, establishes a system of administration, and sets conditions for suspension of police response or revocation of registration. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-72. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the content requires a different definition: 
Alarm protective service means any service whereby the person providing such service installs, services, repairs, maintains, sells, replaces, or responds to an alarm system or which causes any of the activities to take place. For the purposes of this chapter, alarm protective services shall not include any persons engaged solely in the sale of alarm systems designed to cause an audible and/or visual signal to be emitted only in or on the premises in which the system is installed. 
Alarm site means a single premises or location (one street address) served by an alarm system or systems that are under the control of one owner. 
Alarm system means any assembly of equipment, device or devices arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. The term alarm system shall include the terms automatic holdup alarm system, burglar alarm system, holdup alarm system, and manual holdup alarm system as those terms are hereinafter defined. For the purpose of this chapter an alarm system shall not include: 
(1)  Fire alarm systems and other alarm systems that monitor temperature, humidity, or any other condition not directly related to the detection of an unauthorized intrusion into a premises or an attempted robbery at a premises. 
(2)  An alarm system installed on a motor vehicle. 
(3)  An alarm system designed to alert only the inhabitants of a premises that does not have a local alarm. 
Alarm system user means the owner, agent or person in control of the property on which an alarm system or systems is maintained within the corporate limits of the city. 
Automatic dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a pre-recorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect. 
Automatic holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the action of a robber. 
Burglar alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into an area protected by the alarm system. 
Chief means the Chief of Police of the City of Pasadena, Texas or representative designated by such chief. 
Duress alarm means the deliberate activation of a silent alarm by entering at a keypad a code that is different from the normal arm/disarm code, or by a separate deliberate act at another device. 
False alarm means any activation of an alarm system through mechanical or electronic failure, malfunction, improper installation, negligence of the owner, agent or person in control of the property or any other such activation which is not a result of an emergency or threat of emergency for which the alarm system was designed to give notice and for which the responding police officer arrives within thirty (30) minutes after receipt of the alarm notification and finds no evidence of any criminal activity. For the purpose of this chapter a false alarm shall not include: Any activation of an alarm system to which the response by the police department is cancelled by the alarm protective service prior to arrival of responding police officer at the property on which the alarm system causing the response is located. 
Holdup alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery. 
Manual holdup alarm system means an alarm system in which the signal transmission is initiated by the direct action of the persons attacked or by an observer of the attack. 
Monitoring means the process by which an alarm company receives signals from an alarm system and relays an alarm notification to the city. 
Panic alarm means an audible or silent alarm generated by the deliberate activation of a panic device. 
Permit means a certificate of authorization issued by the police department to the owner, agent, or person in control of the property which authorizes the operation of an alarm system of systems at an alarm site. 
Permit holder means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity to whom an alarm system permit is issued. 
Person means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, organization or other entity. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-73. - Permit application; issuance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, cause to be operated, or permit the operation of an alarm system or systems at an alarm site unless a valid permit has been issued by the police department for such system. This requirement shall not be applicable to an alarm protective service unless the alarm protective service is the owner, agent, or person in control of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect. An alarm system user shall be in violation of this chapter if he permits the operation of such system without a proper permit. 
(b)  An alarm system user or his agent shall obtain an annual permit for each alarm site. 
(c)  Application for a permit or renewal for the operation of an alarm system or systems at an alarm site shall be made with the police department by the owner, agent, or person having control over the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated. Application shall be made in writing on a form designated by the city. On such application form, the applicant shall set forth: 
(1)  The name, address, and two (2) telephone numbers of the owner, agent, or person in control of the property to be protected; 
(2)  The street address of the property on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(3)  A brief description of the type of property to be protected (i.e. commercial, residential, or industrial, etc.); 
(4)  Any business name or title used for the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed and operated; 
(5)  Name, address, and telephone number of the monitoring company and alarm installation company that will install and service the alarm system. 
(6)  Names and telephone numbers of one or more persons who are able to and have agreed to receive notification at any time from the police department in order to deactivate the alarm system if it becomes necessary; 
(7)  Any other pertinent information required by the police department which is necessary for the enforcement of the charter. 
(d)  The police department shall issue a permit to the individual, corporation or other legal entity in control of the property to be protected upon submission in person or by mail of a completed application and payment of the appropriate fee, unless any statement made in the application is incomplete or false. Incomplete or false application information will result in rejection of the application. 
(e)  The police department shall treat all information on the application as confidential. 
(f)  Any permit issued pursuant of this chapter shall be applicable only to the permit holder and is not transferable. 
(g)  Each permit issued to an alarm system user shall be valid for a one-year period unless one of the following occurs earlier: 
(1)  Control of protected property is transferred from the permit holder; 
(2)  Permit holder voluntarily discontinues services provided by a particular alarm protective service, and/or disconnects alarm system; 
(3)  Revocation of the permit by the police department pursuant to section 30-78. 
(h)  The annual fee for a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be: 
(1)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a residential alarm site; 
(2)  Fifteen dollars ($15.00) for a residential unit of an apartment complex; and 
(3)  Thirty dollars ($30.00) for a commercial alarm site including an apartment complex. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-74. - Permit duration and renewal. 
(1)  A permit expires one year from the date of issuance and must be renewed annually by submitting an updated application and a permit renewal fee in accordance with section 30-73 of this chapter. Before terminating a permit for nonrenewal, the chief shall provide thirty (30) days prior written notice to the permit holder of the need to renew the permit and file an updated permit application. 
(2)  The chief may refuse to renew a permit for an alarm system that has had eight (8) or more false alarms during the calendar year (January 1 through December 31). 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 06-315, § 1, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 30-75. - Proper alarm system operation and maintenance. 
(a)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall: 
(1)  Maintain premises containing an alarm system in a manner that ensures proper operation of the alarm system; 
(2)  Maintain the alarm system in a manner that will minimize false alarm notifications; 
(3)  Respond or cause a representative to respond within a reasonable period of time when notified by the city to repair or inactivate a malfunctioning alarm system, to provide access to the premises, or to provide security for the premises; and 
(4)  Not intentionally activate an alarm for any reason other than an occurrence of an event that the alarm system was intended to report. 
(b)  A person in control of a local alarm shall adjust the mechanism or cause the mechanism to be adjusted so that an alarm signal, after being activated, will sound for no longer than: 
(1)  Thirty (30) minutes for an alarm system installed before October 1, 1995, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b)(2)b. of this section; and 
(2)  Ten (10) minutes for an alarm system: 
a.  Installed on or after October 1, 1995; or 
b.  Installed before October 1, 1995, but to which any improvement is made on or after October 1, 1995. 
(c)  The police department shall refuse police response to any alarm notification from an alarm site that does not have a valid permit, unless the alarm notification was a duress alarm, a hold up alarm, a panic alarm or reported to a 9-1-1 emergency telephone number or to the police department by a person other than an alarm company. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-76. - Monitoring procedures. 
Any alarm company engaged in the business of monitoring alarm systems in the city shall: 
(1)  Report alarm signals only by using telephone numbers designated by the chief; 
(2)  Before requesting police response to an alarm signal, attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress, hold up, or panic alarm activation; 
a.  For the purposes of this section verify means an attempt by the monitoring company, or its representatives to contact the alarm site and/or alarm user by telephone and/or other electronic means, whether or not actual contact with a person is made, to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch, in an attempt to avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch request. For the purpose of this article, telephone verification shall require, as a minimum, that a second call be made to a different number if the first attempt fails to reach an alarm user who can properly identify themselves to determine whether an alarm signal is valid before requesting law enforcement dispatch. 
(3)  When reporting an alarm notification to the city, provide the alarm permit number and address of the alarm site from which the alarm notification originated; and 
(4)  Communicate alarm notifications to the city in a manner and form determined by the chief. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-77. - Penalty fee for city responses to excessive false alarms. 
(a)  For each false alarm the city will assess a penalty fee as follows: 
(1)  Fifty dollars ($50.00) if the location has had more than three (3) but fewer than six (6) other false alarms in the calendar year (January 1 through December 31); 
(2)  Seventy-five dollars ($75.00), if the location has had more than five (5) but fewer than eight (8) other false alarms in the calendar year (January 1 through December 31); or 
(3)  One hundred dollars ($100.00), if the location has had eight (8) or more other false alarms in the calendar year (January 1 through December 31). 
(b)  Upon new alarm installation the alarm company will not call the police department dispatch for response for the first seven (7) days after installation. The monitoring company shall not make an alarm dispatch request of a law enforcement agency in response to a burglar alarm signal, excluding panic, duress and holdup signals, during the first seven (7) days following an alarm system installation. The police chief may grant an alarm user's request for an exemption from this waiting period based upon a determination that special circumstances substantiate the need for the exemption. 
(c)  A permit holder will not be assessed a penalty fee for a response to notification of the activation of an alarm system if the permit holder shows to the police chief or his designated representative that the activation was not a false alarm and any response by the police department to such notification of an alarm system will not be included in determining the penalty fee set out above. For the purposes of determining the penalty fee set out above, the burden shall be on the permit holder to prove that the activation of the alarm system was not a false alarm. 
(d)  The police officer responding to a false alarm shall place a notice in a visible location on a window of the location for which the false alarm was reported advising of the responding officer's name and time and date of the response to the false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 06-315, § 1, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 30-78. - Revocation of permits. 
(a)  The chief of police may revoke an alarm system permit if he determines that: 
(1)  There is a false statement of a material matter on the application for a permit; 
(2)  The permit holder has violated this chapter or any of its provisions; or 
(3)  The permit holder has failed to make timely payment of a penalty fee assessed under section 30-77 within thirty (30) days of mailed notification to permit holder. 
(4)  The permit holder has had eight (8) or more false alarms during the calendar year (January 1 through December 31). 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an alarm system during the period in which his alarm permit is revoked. 
(c)  A permit holder or person in control of an alarm system shall attempt to resolve the revocation or denial of a permit with the chief or his designated representative before filing an appeal as described in section 30-79. 
(d)  The fee for reinstatement of any permit after revocation shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This fee, however, shall not apply to any reinstatement made pursuant to an appeal under section 30-79. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 06-216, § 1, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 06-315, § 1, 12-19-06)  
Sec. 30-79. - Appeal from penalty fee; denial or revocation of a permit. 
(a)  Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision to assess a penalty fee by the chief of police or his designated representative as provided for in section 30-77, may appeal the decision to a Judge of the Pasadena Municipal Court by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal within ten (10) days after the chief of police or his designated representative renders the decision. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the city secretary stays an action of the chief of police in assessing a penalty fee until a judge makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police or his designated representative is final. 
(b)  If the chief of police refuses to issue or revokes a permit, he shall send to the applicant or permit holder by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his action and a statement of the right to an appeal. The applicant or permit holder may appeal the decision of the chief of police to a Judge of the Pasadena Municipal Court by filing with the city secretary a written request for a hearing, setting forth the reasons for the appeal, within ten (10) days after receipt or the notice from the chief of police. The filing of a request for an appeal hearing with the board stays an action of the chief of police in revoking a permit until the board makes a final decision. If a request for an appeal hearing is not made within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police is final. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05; Ord. No. 06-216, § 2, 9-12-06)  
Sec. 30-80. - Standards for alarm protective services and alarm system operation. 
(a)  The chief of police may set reasonable standards and procedures to be followed by any alarm protective service when giving notice to the police department or activation of an alarm system. Such standards and procedures shall be set out in writing and made available to any alarm system business requesting same. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to operate or cause to be operated any automatic dialing device which when activated uses a telephone device or attachment to automatically select a telephone line leading into the communication center of the police department and then transmits any prerecorded message or signal. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-81. - Violations; penalty; corporations, partnerships and associations. 
(a)  An alarm company, an alarm permit holder, or a person in control of an alarm system commits an offense if he violates any provision of this article by either commission of an act that is forbidden or omission of a duty or responsibility imposed upon him by this article. 
(b)  A person who violates a provision of this article is guilty of a separate offense for each day or portion of a day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not less than: 
(1)  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the first conviction; and 
(2)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second and each subsequent conviction. 
(c)  In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct of individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership, or other association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership, or other association, and within the scope of employment. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-82. - Alarm system operating instructions. 
A person in control of an alarm system shall maintain at each alarm site a complete set of written operating instructions for each alarm system. Special codes, combination, or passwords must not be included in these instructions. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Sec. 30-83. - System performance reviews. 
If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation to suppress false alarms, the chief may require a conference to review the circumstances of each false alarm with the alarm permit holder and the alarm company under contract with the alarm permit holder. A person may be issued a citation for failing to attend a system performance review after receiving notice of the conference from the chief. 
(Ord. No. 05-252, § 1, 10-18-05)  
Chapter 31 - STANDARD SIGN CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 95-229, § 1, adopted Jan. 7, 1995, repealed former Ch. 31, §§ 31-1—31-15, in its entirety. Former Ch. 31 provided for the standard sign code and derived from Ord. No. 88-9, § 2, adopted Jan. 26, 1988; Ord. No. 90-134, §§ 2, 3, adopted July 31, 1990; Ord. No. 91-25, §§ 1—6, adopted Feb. 19, 1991; and Ord. No. 93-57, § 1, adopted April 20, 1993. Section 2 of Ord. No. 95-229 enacted new provisions relative to similar subject matter set out herein as §§ 31-1—31-18. 
Subsequently, Ord. No. 00-51, § 1, adopted April 11, 2000, enacted a new § 31-19, pertaining to subdivision entrance and neighborhood signage, which was never published herein because Ord. No. 00-145, which amended the chapter in its entirety, was adopted before § 31-19 could be published. While Ord. No. 00-145 did not specifically amend § 31-19, it is assumed that § 31-19 is included in the complete amendment of the chapter. 
Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, adopted September 26, 2000, amended Ch. 31, §§ 31-1—31-18, in its entirety. The former provisions pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 95-229, § 2, 1-7-95; Ord. No. 96-134, § 1, 8-27-96; Ord. No. 97-100, §§ 1—5, 7, 8—15, 6-3-97; Ord. No. 97-118, §§ 1—4, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 97-146, §§ 1—3, 8-12-97; Ord. No. 97-213, §§ 1—11, 11-25-97; Ord. No. 98-37, §§ 1, 2, 4—8, 9, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 98-91, §§ 1—4, 6-16-98; Ord. No. 98-149, §§ 1, 2, 9-8-98. 
Cross reference— Building and building regulations, Ch. 9; application of electrical code to signs, § 12-21; sign required on premises of drive-in restaurant, § 20-60; pipeline signs obstructing or encroaching upon streets and alleys, § 32-3; street banners, § 32-44 et seq. 
 
Sec. 31-1. - Purpose. 
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate signs and to authorize the use of signs that are compatible with their surroundings, that are legible under the circumstances in which they are seen, that are effective in indexing the environment, and that are conducive to promoting traffic safety and the convenience and enjoyment of public travel by preventing visual distractions, protecting pedestrians, attracting visitors to the city, preserving and enhancing property values, promoting first-class business and commercial districts, and eliminating fire hazards. 
It is also the intention and purpose of this chapter to promote short- and long-term civic beauty and order by establishing standards and regulations for sign design, location, size, type, compatibility, and aesthetics. By doing so it is hoped this chapter will help to create streetscapes that are functional and attractive to both residents and visitors of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-2. - Scope. 
The intent is to regulate within the corporate and extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Pasadena, Texas, the design and placement of all signs, commercial and governmental identification/communication devices, and structures that are built specifically to identify, inform, and direct patrons to a particular merchant, store, establishment, or service. It is not the intent of this chapter to regulate the content of public speech. 
The regulations of this chapter are intended to apply to both on-premises and off-premises signs, but do not apply to handheld placards and other similar devices traditionally used for public protest and the exercise of free speech. Any noncommercial message may be substituted for any commercial message permitted under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-2.1. - Superiority clause. 
If any subdivision or individual tract of land contains restrictions or covenants relating to signs or any person or persons enter into a legally binding agreement which provides for the regulating of signs in a particular development and for more restrictive than these regulations, the more restrictive requirements shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-2.2. - Enforcement. 
Any sign not expressly allowed by this chapter is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-3. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
(1)  Advertising shall mean to seek the attraction or direct the attention of the public to any goods, services, or merchandise whatsoever or a location that provides goods, services, or merchandise. 
(2)  Alterations or repair to an advertising display shall mean repairs or improvements to a display, sign, or sign structure not exceeding fifty (50) per cent replacement value. 
(3)  Banner shall mean any water-resistant fabric or material on which there appears a display, typically supported at both ends. 
(4)  Business shall mean the erection or use of any property, building, or structure, permanent or temporary, for the primary purpose of conducting in said building or structure or on said property a legitimate commercial enterprise in compliance with all ordinances and regulations of the City of Pasadena governing such activity; business purpose shall not include any property, building, or structure erected or used for the primary purpose of securing a permit or erecting a sign. 
(5)  City shall mean the City of Pasadena, Texas. 
(6)  Display shall mean the message of any sign whether it be in words, symbols, or objects. 
(7)  Embellishment shall mean structural or decorative elements of a sign incorporating representations of the significant architectural features of the associated building or development. Embellishment shall not include letters, numerals, figures, emblems, logos, or other features conveying a commercial advertising message. 
(8)  Face shall mean the total display area and border of a sign. 
(9)  Federal primary system shall mean the interstate and freeway primary system and the non-freeway primary system. 
(10)  Intersection shall mean the intersection of streets, driveways, alleys, or any two (2) surfaces intended for motor vehicles. 
(11)  Interstate and freeway primary system shall mean the portion of the national system of interstate and defense highways located within Texas which now or hereafter may be officially designated the "interstate system" by the Texas Highway and Public Transportation Commission and approved pursuant to Title 3, United States Code Section 131, as amended. 
(12)  Nameplate shall mean a nonelectrical sign identifying only the name and occupation or profession of the occupant or occupants of premises on which the sign is located and not exceeding six (6) inches by eighteen (18) inches. 
(13)  Non-freeway primary system shall mean that portion of the connective main highway located within Texas which now or hereafter may be officially designated the "primary system" by the Texas Highway and Public Transportation Commission and approved pursuant to Title 23, United States Code Section 131, as amended. 
(14)  Owner shall mean the person who owns or leases the on-premises sign, the owner of the off-premises sign, or the owner of the real property on which the sign, whether it be on-premises or off-premises, is located. 
(15)  Person shall mean an individual, company, corporation, partnership, association, or any other entity. 
(16)  Primarily residential area shall mean the right-of-way (and adjoining property area) between two (2) intersecting public streets in which a majority of the total front footage is used for residential purposes. 
(17)  Public street shall mean the entire width between property lines of any road, street, way, alley, bridge, or other similar thoroughfare not privately owned or controlled when any part thereof is open to the public for vehicular traffic, is the responsibility of the city or other similar public agency to maintain, and is over which the city has legislative jurisdiction under its police power. 
(18)  Relocate shall mean the removal of a sign and any supporting structure from one (1) location and placing it or its replacement at a new location, even if the relocation is to a place on the same lot or parcel of property. 
(19)  Residential purposes shall mean property devoted to use as a single-family or multifamily residence. Residential purposes shall include, but not be limited to, property used for houses, duplexes, condominiums, town houses, town homes, patio homes, and apartments. Property used for hotels, motels, and boarding houses shall not be considered as used for residential purposes. Property devoted to both residential and nonresidential use shall be considered as used for residential purposes. 
(20)  Right-of-way shall mean the property fronting or immediately adjacent to and on either side of a public street or a nonpublic street which the public authority has the authority to use for the road or street. 
(21)  Sight triangle shall mean the triangle formed at an intersection by intersecting curb lines and a non-curb line joining the curb lines. The triangle is formed by a motorist's view of oncoming traffic when exiting a private drive or at the intersection of two (2) (or more) public streets. The motorist's eye is assumed to be at a point fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the roadway. Traffic must be visible for a distance of ten (10) times the speed limit on either side of the vehicle parallel to the intersecting roadway. No sign shall be placed in or above the triangular area created by the motorist's view described by this subsection (see Illustrations 2-1 and 3-1). 
(22)  Sight distance is the minimum visibility distance parallel to the curb lines that must be preserved. This distance is ten (10) times the speed limit in miles per hour of the intersecting public roadway. 
(23)  Sign shall mean an outdoor structure, sign, display, light, device, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, or other thing that is designed, intended, or used to advertise or inform. Each separate message shall be considered a sign. 
(24)  Sign administrator shall mean the sign administrator as defined herein and those representatives that he/she may designate. 
(25)  Sign appeals committee shall mean the committee as defined herein and appointed as established herein. 
(26)  Sign company shall mean the person who engages in the business of leasing, constructing, or maintaining signs or sign structures. 
(27)  Sign location shall mean the exact spot the sign is located which spot cannot vary even as little as one (1) inch; does not mean entire lot or parcel of land on which a sign has been placed. 
(28)  Sign structure shall mean any structure which supports or is capable of supporting any sign. A sign structure may be a single pole and may or may not be an integral part of a building. 
(29)  Time periods shall mean calendar days unless otherwise specified. Such periods shall start on the day following the event, starting the time period to run, and end at 5 p.m. local time on the last day of such period. Any period ending on a day city hall is closed for any reason shall be extended until the next actual working day at city hall of the City of Pasadena. 
(30)  Visible shall mean the message, copy area, or advertising display seen (legible or not) without visual aid by a person of normal visual acuity or, simply stated, can be seen. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-4. - Sign classifications. 
(a)  Site classification. For the purpose of this chapter signs shall be first classified as either an "on-premises sign" or an "off-premises sign." 
(1)  On-premises sign shall mean any sign identifying or advertising a business, person, or activity which is installed and maintained on the same premises as the business, person, or activity. 
(2)  Off-premises sign shall mean any sign displaying advertising copy that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service, or product which is not principally located or primarily manufactured or sold on the premises of which the sign is located. 
(b)  Type classification. All signs shall be classified further into one (1) of the following type signs and shall conform to the specifications and descriptions contained herein: 
(1)  Ground sign shall mean a sign which is supported by uprights or braces in or upon the ground including monument signs, two-pole monument signs, converted portable signs, and portable signs as described herein. 
(2)  Marquee sign shall mean a projecting sign attached to or hung from a canopy or covered structure, projecting from and supported by a frame or pipe support extending beyond a building. 
(3)  Monument sign shall mean a freestanding sign with a base at least one-half (½) the width of the sign face it supports. 
(4)  Projecting sign shall mean any sign which is affixed to any building, wall, or structure and extends beyond the building, wall, or structure more than twelve (12) inches. 
(5)  Roof sign shall mean any sign erected, constructed or maintained upon, and attached to and structurally supported by the roof of a building. 
(6)  Wall sign shall mean any sign affixed to or painted upon the wall of any building. 
(7)  Flag sign shall mean any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, or material affixed to a building, wall, or structure or on a staff or pole set in a concrete foundation. 
(8)  Awning sign shall mean any sign made of cloth, metal, or plastic with a metal frame attached to a building and projecting over a sidewalk, thoroughfare, or parking area when the same is so erected as to permit its being raised to a position flat against the building when not in use. 
(9)  Canopy sign shall mean any sign, other than an awning attached to a building, projecting over a thoroughfare, sidewalk, or parking area and not erected so as to permit its being raised to a flat position against the building, does not permit use of marquee letters, and is commonly supported by poles or uprights set upon the underlying ground. 
(10)  Multiple business sign shall mean that type of sign that is a single structure but has a different display for each different business, such as may be found at a shopping center. 
(11)  Special function classification. Any on-premises or off-premises sign of any type may also be included within one (1) or more of the following additional classifications according to the special functions of that sign: 
a.  Electrical sign shall mean any sign containing electrical wiring or utilizing electric current, but not including signs illuminated by a light source exterior to the sign structure. 
b.  Portable sign shall mean any sign designed or constructed to be easily moved from one (1) location to another including signs mounted upon a motor vehicle or designed to be mounted upon a trailer, bench, wheeled carrier, or other nonmotorized mobile structure. A portable sign with the wheels removed shall still be considered a portable sign hereunder. For the purpose of this chapter trailer signs and signs on benches are "portable signs." 
c.  Spectacular sign shall mean any sign which has any automatically changing advertising equipped with glaring or rotating strobe or spotlights. 
d.  Temporary commercial banners shall mean banners used by commercial businesses to advertise the business or a product related to that business and shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Be limited to placement for no more than fifteen (15) days per calendar quarter. Provided, however, temporary commercial banners designed and intended to promote or advertise a grand opening, going out of business, new location or new management, shall be allowed a single period of thirty (30) consecutive days, which shall be in addition to the fifteen (15) days per calendar quarter otherwise allowed. Furthermore, temporary commercial banners designed and intended to promote or advertise a special service, product, or sale during the hereinafter stated holiday periods shall be allowed for only the period of time hereinafter so specified, which shall be in addition to the fifteen (15) days per calendar quarter otherwise allowed: 
Holiday Sign Periods 	
Valentine's Day - February 	5 days 
Presidents Day - February 	5 days 
Easter - March or April 	5 days 
Memorial Day - May 	5 days 
Fourth of July - July 	5 days 
Labor Day - September 	5 days 
Thanksgiving - November 	7 days 
Hanukkah, Christmas, New Year's (Dec. 15 through Jan. 2) 	19 days 
 
2.  Not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size; 
3.  Be attached to a building so as not to project above the roof line of that building except for buildings with parapet walls; in which case, the sign shall not project above the parapet; 
4.  Be limited to one (1) side of the building which fronts upon a customer parking area; and 
5.  No permit shall be issued for a temporary commercial banner until a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is paid by the applicant to the city. Such permit shall expire one (1) year from the date of issue. 
6.  May be used to cover existing sign only while business is occupied by new tenant or owner during time new sign is being made but, in no event, shall the banner be used for more than thirty (30) days, which must be consecutive. 
e.  Temporary sign shall mean any sign not to exceed twelve (12) square feet in size. Further, a temporary sign is intended to be used for a specific period of time (not to exceed thirty (30) days) and then removed. A portable sign, temporary commercial banner, or flag sign shall not be considered a temporary sign. 
f.  Movable sign shall mean signs of six (6) square feet or less designed to be moved by hand and normally stored inside the building during the nighttime. 
g.  Emitting sign shall mean any sign or symbol that emits any noise, chemical substance, or odor. 
h.  Inflatable sign shall mean any sign that is erected or maintained by inflating with air, helium, or other gaseous substance. Such sign shall be permitted for no more than thirty (30) days per year. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, § 1, 1-29-02)  
Sec. 31-5. - Sign administration and enforcement. 
(a)  Sign administrator. The mayor shall appoint or shall designate a sign administrator to administer and enforce the terms and conditions of this chapter and all other provisions of the laws relating to signs. The sign administrator is empowered to delegate the duties and powers granted to and imposed upon him/her by this chapter to other persons serving under the sign administrator. The sign administrator and such other persons shall constitute the sign administration section. The sign administrator is directed to enforce and carry out all provisions of this chapter. Final policy, decision-making authority does not reside with the sign administrator. Policy-making authority of the City of Pasadena regarding signs resides with the Pasadena city council. 
(b)  Enforcement responsibility. The duties of the sign administrator shall include not only the approval of issuance of permits, as required by this chapter, but also the responsibility of ensuring that all signs comply with this chapter and all other applicable laws and that all signs for which a permit is required do, in fact, have a permit. The sign administrator shall make such inspections as may be necessary and initiate appropriate actions to bring about compliance with this chapter and other applicable laws if such inspection discloses any instance of noncompliance. The sign administrator shall investigate thoroughly any complaints of alleged violations of this chapter. 
(c)  Powers of the sign administrator. The sign administrator's power and authority is limited to administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and all other laws relating to signs. Included among such powers are the following specific powers: 
(1)  Inspection and approval. Every sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the sign administrator. When deemed advisable by the sign administrator, a sign may be inspected at the point of manufacture if such point is within or adjacent to the city limits of the City of Pasadena. 
(2)  Stop order. When the sign administrator or his/her representative discovers that a sign is being constructed not in conformance with this chapter, he/she shall issue a "stop work order" to the person or persons known to be so engaged. Upon notice and issuance of a stop order from the sign administrator, work on any sign being conducted in a manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter or being conducted in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice and order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. When an emergency exists and written notice is impractical or when work in progress on a sign is being done in violation of the law or city ordinance, written notice shall not be required to be given by the sign administrator. The stop order shall contain a notice of the right to appeal as provided herein. Work shall not resume until the condition causing the stoppage is corrected to the sign administrator's satisfaction or the appeal process results in a reversal of the sign administrator's stop order. A stop work order tag may be affixed to a sign pending the sign administrator's delivery of written notice. The stop work order tag shall constitute effective written notice pending formal notification. All work shall immediately stop and not resume once a stop work order tag is placed on a sign. 
(3)  a.  Permit and license revocation. The sign administrator shall have, and is hereby granted, the power and the authority to revoke any and all licenses or permits authorized by this chapter for violation of the terms and provisions of this chapter. 
b.  Appeal procedure. Upon revoking such license or permits, the sign administrator shall notify by certified mail return receipt requested to the address given by the permittee or licensee on the application for such permit or license, to advise the permittee or licensee of such revocation and notify the permittee or licensee that the revocation will become final if not appealed to the sign appeals committee within ten (10) days. 
(4)  Establish procedures. The sign administrator shall have the authority to adopt procedures and provide forms required to implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  Enforce state and federal regulations. Pursuant to and in accordance with any agreement between the City of Pasadena and the State of Texas, or the United States Government, the sign administrator is hereby authorized to enforce any applicable terms and provisions of the Texas Highway Beautification Act, Texas Civil Statutes Annotated, Article 6624v.1, the Agreement for Carrying Out National Policy Relative to Control of Outdoor Advertising, entered into between the United States of America and the State of Texas, by instrument dated May 2, 1972, and any supplements or amendments to that agreement, and any rules or regulations promulgated by the State of Texas and/or the Texas Highway Department, pursuant to the said act or agreements with regard to signs. 
(6)  Issue citations. The sign administrator or his/her designated representative shall have the authority to issue citations to any owner, agent of the owner, or person in charge of the premises for any violation of this code existing on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-6. - Sign appeals committee. 
(a)  Composition. There is hereby created by this chapter the sign appeals committee. This committee shall be composed of five (5) positions. Members and alternates shall be designated by position and by name. One (1) member and two (2) alternates for each position shall be designated. This number of choices or members and alternates allows the committee to meet with a quorum without delay. The positions are designated as follows: 
(1)  The city's chief building official or any of his designees. 
(2)  The city's director of traffic and transportation, a representative of the police department with ten (10) years' experience, or the safety coordinator. 
(3)  An employee of the city's electrical department, the electrical inspector, or a representative from the permit department designated by the building official. 
(4)  A person actively engaged in the sign industry; the alternates shall also be engaged in the sign industry. 
(5)  A resident of the city; the alternates shall also be residents of the city. 
All members of the committee shall be appointed by the mayor and confirmed by the city council. This committee shall be the body of first review for any appeal related to this chapter and shall conduct all hearings on the denial of licenses or permits, the revocation of any license or permit, the issuance of stop work orders, and orders of removal. Meetings shall be called by the sign administrator as needed. Decisions of this committee may be appealed to city council as provided for in this chapter. 
(b)  Scope of review. The committee's review of denial of licenses or permits, stop orders, and revocation of licenses or permits is limited to determining if the sign administrator followed the proper procedures and if, indeed, there was a violation of this chapter that permitted the action taken by the sign administrator. 
(c)  Appeal of a revocation or stop work order. Under this chapter in order to appeal a denial or revocation of a license or permit or the issuance of a stop work order or removal order, the person whose license or permit application is denied, whose license or permit is revoked, whose work has been ordered stopped by a stop work order, or whose sign has been ordered removed must within ten (10) days and not thereafter of notification of denial, revocation, or stop work order file a written notice of appeal to the sign appeals committee through the city secretary. At such hearing the person so notified shall be permitted to present relevant facts and legal argument regarding the denial, revocation, stop work order, or order of removal. Following such hearing the sign appeals committee shall consider the merits of the case and shall by a written opinion affirm or set aside such denial, revocation, stop work order, or order of removal. 
(d)  Quorum and majority. A quorum shall be three (3) members in a health or safety emergency; otherwise, because of the multiple members for each position the quorum shall be five (5). A simple majority will be sufficient for all matters except overturning the sign administrator's revocation or stop work action. 
(e)  Majority needed in appeals. The sign appeals committee may hear and decide appeals which allege error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the sign administrator or building official in the enforcement of this chapter. A 4/5 -vote of the members present is necessary to overrule a decision of the sign administrator or building official. 
(f)  Municipal board. 
(1)  If a municipality requires the relocation, reconstruction, or removal of a sign within its corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction, the presiding officer of the governing body of the municipality shall appoint a municipal board on sign control. The board must be composed of the following: 
• Two (2) real estate appraisers, each of whom must be a member in good standing of a nationally recognized professional appraiser society or trade organization that has an established code of ethics, educational program, and professional certification program; 
• One (1) person engaged in the sign business in the municipality; 
• One (1) employee of the Texas Department of Transportation who is familiar with real estate values in eminent domain proceedings; and 
• One (1) architect or landscape architect licensed by this state. 
(2)  A member of the board is appointed for a term of two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, § 2, 1-29-02)  
Sec. 31-7. - Appeals to city council. 
Any person wishing to appeal a decision of the sign appeals committee on the grounds that the decision misconstrues or wrongly interprets this chapter may within ten (10) days after receiving an adverse ruling of the committee, either by personal service or by certified mail return receipt requested, appeal the same to the city council, provided that the appealing party shall personally deliver to the city secretary or deposit that notice in the United States Mail addressed to the city secretary of the City of Pasadena within the said ten-day period. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the sign administrator may, subject to approval by the mayor, seek council review of matters brought before the sign appeals committee. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-8. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  (1)  General. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction by court of competent jurisdiction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(2)  Real property owner. Any person who is the owner of the real property upon which an on-premises or off-premises sign is located and who shall permit a violation upon such real property of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. Each day on which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. In addition, the city attorney is hereby authorized to take all actions, both legal and equitable, necessary to assure compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Subterfuge. Any permit secured before or after the effective date of this chapter which in the opinion of the sign administrator has been secured through subterfuge and not in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the sign administrator. 
(c)  Denial of entry for inspection. Whenever the sign administrator or his/her representative is denied admission to any premises for inspection or enforcement, the sign administrator may revoke all sign permits. 
(d)  Work done without a permit. Any person, firm, or organization installing, erecting, or reconstructing a sign or changing the location of a sign without a proper permit will be assessed an amount twice the applicable permit fees, in addition to any penalties, civil or criminal, which may be assessed as a result of a violation of the terms of this chapter. 
(e)  Illegal political campaign signs. No political campaign signs of any description shall be allowed on publicly owned property or the property of a public utility. All political campaign signs posted on private property shall be posted only with the consent of the owner or lessee of such property. 
(f)  Signs not currently permitted. Any sign not permitted under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all of the penalties and provisions of this chapter including removal, pursuant to the requirements of section 31-11 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-9. - Sign applications, permits, and fees.[2] 
(a)  Application procedure. Applications for permits required by this chapter shall be made upon forms provided by the sign administrator and shall contain, or have attached thereto, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. This shall be kept current at all times. 
(2)  Location of the building, structure, or lot to which or upon which the sign is to be attached or erected including lot, block, section number, and subdivision name or a metes-and-bounds description. 
(3)  Position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings or structures and all street curb lines and sidewalks bounding any part of the lot on which such sign is to be placed. 
(4)  Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings on a scale not smaller than one (1) inch to fifteen (15) feet of the plans and specifications showing the method of construction and attachment to the building or in the ground. 
(5)  Applications for new ground signs when erected or constructed to heights exceeding twelve (12) feet above ground level shall be accompanied by a drawing of the entire sign structure prepared and certified by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas. 
(6)  The sign administrator at his/her option may also require similar certification by a registered professional engineer where any unusual structural provisions of a proposed sign indicate such certification is necessary in the interest of public safety. 
(7)  A copy of stress sheets and calculations showing how the structure is designed for dead load and wind pressure on every point in the display surface. 
(8)  The name, street/business addresses, home/business telephone numbers, and driver's license number of the foreman, supervisor, or other person in charge of the construction, destruction, placement, or relocation of the sign and related structures. 
(9)  Notarized written consent of the owner, lessee, or duly authorized agent of the building, structure, or land to which or on which the sign is to be erected. 
(10)  Any electrical permit required and issued for the sign. 
(11)  Evidence of the insurance policy and bonds required by this chapter. 
(12)  Such other information as the sign administrator shall require to show full compliance with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances of the city. 
(13)  Permission for the sign administrator or his/her representative to enter the property at any time the sign administrator or his/her representative deems it necessary for inspection and enforcement. 
(14)  The location of the sign. 
(15)  Detailed diagrams or drawings of the landscaping plan for the sign as well as a written description of the barrier wall around the landscaping and the materials which will be used to form the landscaping. The sign shall not extend beyond the landscaped area. Curbing, railroad ties or landscaping stones, rocks, bricks or other types of approved vehicular barriers at least one and one-half (1½) feet in height shall be placed around the landscaped area if necessary for the protection of the sign and pole cover from vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall hereafter erect, takedown, construct, destroy, reconstruct, relocate, remove, alter, or use a sign without first having secured a written permit as herein provided from the City of Pasadena. All signs illuminated by direct or indirect lighting shall, in addition, be subject to the electrical code and the permit requirements thereof. Permits are not transferable and will be used only by the person to whom it was issued. A copy of the permit will be posted at each erection site. No sign permit issued is effective unless it has been approved in writing by the sign administrator. By applying for and/or maintaining a sign permit, the owner or person in control of the premises upon which the sign is located acknowledges that the sign administrator or his/her representative may enter the premises whenever the sign administrator or his/her representative deems it necessary for inspection or enforcement. The City of Pasadena does not waive any of the permit application and inspection requirements set forth in this chapter. Further, any administrative or clerical errors committed in issuing a permit do not constitute waiver of any such requirements. Any person or company issued a permit under this section shall satisfy all the requirements of section 31-10(h) of this Code regarding cash completion bonds. 
(c)  Permit duration. Any permit to erect, takedown, construct, destroy, reconstruct, relocate, remove, or alter a sign shall become null and void unless erection, takedown, construction, destruction, reconstruction, relocation, removal, or alteration of the sign is completed within ninety (90) days, or the permit is renewed for an additional ninety (90) days, in which case an additional fee shall be payable equal to one-half (½) the original fee paid and the proposed sign shall meet all of the requirements of this chapter on the date of renewal. 
(d)  Reports required. 
(1)  Change in condition. Any person holding a permit shall report any change in condition that makes the sign nonconforming within ten (10) days of when that condition becomes known to the permit holder. 
(2)  Damage to the structure. Any person holding a permit shall report any damage to the structure that makes the sign structure nonconforming within ten (10) days of when that condition becomes known to the permit holder. 
(3)  Consent of landowner for portable off-premises signs. Upon renewing the portable off-premises sign permit each year, the person shall provide a new notarized consent form evidencing the consent of the owner or agent thereof. 
(4)  Off-premises sign location. At the time of the renewal of the operating permit, the person obtaining the permit will list the location of all signs owned or operated by that person in the City of Pasadena and shall submit non-Polaroid photographs of all such signs showing the entire sign and its location. 
(5)  Change of address. Any change of address of the permittee must be provided to the sign administrator within ten (10) days of such change. 
(e)  Relocation permits. Relocation permits are required before any sign may be removed for relocation. 
(f)  Definition of permits, applications, and fees. The following is a list of the various required applications and permits and for which a fee is charged: 
(1)  Application. There shall be an application made for all permits or renewal of permits. 
(2)  Transfer of ownership application. If a sign owner or maintainer wishes to transfer its interest in the sign to another, the purchaser must make an application for transfer within twenty (20) days after the sale. Upon the payment of the transfer application fee and the prorated portion of the operating fee, a new operating permit will be issued. If application is not made within the twenty (20) days, the application will be considered an application for a new sign and subject to all provisions hereof. 
a.  Transfer application. Application for transfer of ownership or maintenance responsibility will be made for each sign transferred. The application will be the same as an application for a new sign, except structural information will not be required. The purchaser will acknowledge that the signs have been inspected and meet all code provisions, are structurally sound, and are not now a hazard to the public. 
b.  Construction/destruction/reconstruction permit. The permit required to construct, destroy, or reconstruct a sign or sign structure. 
(3)  Operating permit. Permit required to display and operate any sign other than a portable sign and exempt signs. These permits shall be valid for two (2) years and shall expire on December 31. Each face requires a separate operating permit. 
(4)  Inspection. No sign shall be legal and no advertising displayed thereon until all three (3) of the below inspections have been made and approval of the sign administrator obtained. Inspection, except for portable and exempt signs, will consist of these three (3) phases: 
a.  Site inspection required before a sign may be located; 
b.  Construction inspection to determine if the design requirements are met; and 
c.  Hole inspection required for all ground signs. 
(5)  Inspection of portable signs. Inspection of portable signs will consist of one (1) inspection after installation to determine if all requirements of this chapter are met. 
(6)  Portable sign operating permit. 
a.  Permit required for right to operate portable sign during permit term. All portable sign permits shall expire on December 31 of each year. 
b.  Before a portable on- or off-premises contractor sign operating permit may be issued by the sign administrator, an application containing the following information will be submitted to and approved in writing by the sign administrator: 
1.  The total number of portable sign permits requested; 
2.  Separate listing and identification of which signs are "on-premises" and which are "off-premises"; 
3.  Exact location of each portable sign with street designation and measured distance (in feet) to nearest intersecting street, as well as all compass directions necessary to locating such sign (Due to the exact measurement required by this subsection, no two (2) signs can occupy the same location.); 
4.  A separate affidavit for each sign from the owner or lessee of the real property on which the sign is located consenting to the placement of the sign on that owner's or lessee's property regardless of the number of signs on the real property of any one (1) owner or lessee. (For example, if one (1) owner consents to the placement of five (5) signs on property he/she owns, there must be five (5) separate affidavits from that owner.) Such affidavit must be acknowledged by a notary public in the presence of the owner or lessee and with all the attendant requirements of notary public law; 
5.  A notarized affidavit for each sign signed by the applicant that all signs are properly anchored with at least one (1) three-foot-long, screw-type anchor with steel cable attached; 
6.  Proof of liability insurance by a certificate of insurance and letter from the insurance company for each sign stating that the requisite insurance covers the exact on-premises portable sign for which an operating permit is sought; 
7.  All of the documents in original form (copies are not acceptable) shall be presented at the same time. Submission of less than all of the documents at one (1) time shall be grounds for rejection of the application; and 
8.  All documents submitted to the sign administrator in the application for an operating permit shall be original documents bearing original signatures. Copies of documents or signatures are not acceptable and shall be grounds for rejection of an application under this section. 
(7)  Reinspection. When the initial inspection reveals nonconforming items, inspection must continue until there are no nonconforming items. A fee for each reinspection will be charged. 
(8)  Renewal of operating permits. Before the expiration of each operating permit, the owner shall apply for a new operating permit. 
(9)  All documents submitted to the sign administrator in the application for an operating permit shall be original documents bearing original signatures. Copies of documents or signatures are not acceptable and shall be grounds for rejection of an application under this section. 
(g)  Fees. The applicant for a permit or holder of a permit shall not be entitled to a refund of any fee paid in the event the permit is revoked. 
(1)  Removal fund except licensed sign companies. Each applicant shall pay an additional ten dollars ($10.00) per application of an operating permit to the sign removal fund. 
(2)  Removal fund licensed sign companies. Each company shall pay fifty dollars ($50.00) annually into the removal fund, in addition to other fees. 
(3)  Fees for permits and other administrative procedures, unless specified differently elsewhere in this sign code, shall be as follows: 
Transfer application fee per sign ..... $10.00 
Registration fee per sign ..... 25.00 
Temporary commercial banner ..... 25.00 
Subdivision entrance/neighborhood signage ..... 25.00 
Non-Portable 
On-Premises Signs 	Off-Premises Signs 
Application fee ..... 	$ 5.00 		
			
Inspection fee ..... 	 40.00 		
Reinspection fee ..... 	 25.00 	Reinspection fee ..... 	$25.00 
			
Construction fee min. a ..... 	 25.00 		
			
 over min. ..... 	  0.10/ft. 2 		
			
Operating fee min. a ..... 	 30.00 	Operating fee min.;sup\sup; ..... 	 40.00 
			
 over min. ..... 	  0.10/ft. 2 	 over min. ..... 	  0.23/ft. 2 
			
Relocation 
fee total ..... 	 70.00 
			
Proration c ..... 	Proration c ..... 
 
Portable 
On-Premises Signs 	Off-Premises Signs 
Application fee ..... 	$  5.00 		
Inspection fee ..... 	  25.00 		
Reinspection fee ..... 	  25.00 	Reinspection fee ..... 	$25.00 
Operating fee ..... 	  25.00 	Operating fee ..... 	 25.00 
		Relocation fee ..... 	 25.00 
Proration c ..... 		Proration c ..... 	
Application for variance ..... 	$200.00 		
a Minimum size is 300 ft. 2 
;sup\sup;Minimum size is 200 ft. 2 
c Proration of operating fees will be 1/11 th per month of the annual fee for all months or fractional parts thereof remaining in the year. 
 
(h)  Electrical signs. Any electrical sign shall conform fully to the requirements of the prevailing City of Pasadena electrical code and shall additionally receive a permit under the provisions of that code. 
(i)  Political campaign signs. Must be placed in conformance and accordance with State of Texas law and cannot cause a hazard, found to be a hazard for traffic/pedestrians or found to be a traffic sight triangle problem that poses a hazard. This type signage is not subject to fees. State law does not apply to signs that do not conform with any of the following: 
(1)  An effective area of more than thirty-six (36) square feet. 
(2)  Is more than eight (8) feet in height. 
(3)  Is illuminated. 
(4)  Has any moving elements. 
Allowed installations must be on private real property with permission of the legal owner or tenant with specific conveyed rights. Political sign installations shall not be placed on public property, rights-of-way, easements or private real property without the expressed permission of the owner. Signs placed in violation of this chapter must be relocated to a lawful location or are subject to removal. 
(j)  Obligations upon sale of a sign. The seller must remove his name from the sign within ten (10) days after the sale and notify the city that the sign has been sold. It is the obligation of the buyer to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(k)  Permits not transferable. Permits are issued to the applicant only and no permits are transferable. 
(l)  Exemptions. No permit shall be required under this chapter for the following on-premises signs unless any such sign is a spectacular sign or a portable sign. Any sign listed hereunder shall be erected and maintained in conformity with the provisions otherwise of this chapter: 
(1)  Signs painted on glass surface of windows or doors not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the window or door area; 
(2)  Directional and regulatory signs erected by the city, State of Texas (inducing its political subdivisions such as counties and school districts), or the federal government and the lessees of such governmental entities; 
(3)  Railroad signs; 
(4)  Legal notices and house numbers: "no trespassing," "no parking," and other similar warning signs not exceeding two (2) in number; 
(5)  Temporary signs smaller than six (6) square feet, provided that the number of such signs on any one (1) address does not exceed one (1) in number; 
(6)  Signs required by federal, state, or local law; 
(7)  Signs displayed, designed, or used for or upon motor vehicles as long as such vehicles are used by the business for delivery or identification. (This is not to be construed to exempt signs built or placed upon a motor vehicle solely for the purpose of advertisement.); 
(8)  Signs which are painted on the face of a building not exceeding five (5) per cent of the wall surface area and no higher than the roof line and state only the street number and name of the proprietor, provided that the number of such signs shall be one (1) per address for such premises; 
(9)  Signs within a stadium, open-air theater, arena, or public or recreational area which are designed primarily to be viewed by patrons within such stadium, open-air theater, or arena; 
(10)  On-premises real estate signs five (5) square feet or less; 
(11)  Christmas displays and similar temporary displays erected without advertising; however, such displays shall be subject to the fire and electrical code and fire safety rules promulgated by the fire marshal; 
(12)  A sign not over forty (40) square feet in area setting forth information concerning a building or other structure under repair or construction or advertising the sale or rental of the premises; 
(13)  Subdivision identification signs: one (1) per subdivision, forty (40) square feet or under; 
(14)  For each business premises: one (1) flag of the United States, one (1) flag of the State of Texas, one (1) flag of the City of Pasadena, and/or one (1) corporate flag of the business occupying the business premises. The United States Flag Code, Title 36, United States Code, Chapter 10, as amended by P.L. 344, 94 th Congress, shall be used as a guideline for the display of the United States flag; 
(15)  Businesses and other establishments may have on-premises signs displaying no advertising copy setting forth only the location of or directions to parking entrances and exits, buildings located on the premises, or regulating the flow of on-premises traffic; provided, such signs contain no electrical wiring, in and out directional signs with the company name and/or logo if such signs do not exceed one and one-half (1½) square feet of sign face per side, two (2) sides maximum, and are not over forty (40) inches in height, in addition to the five (5) on-premises signs allowed by this subsection; 
(16)  Any on-premises sign viewed only from within the premises and not visible from any public road; 
(17)  Any nameplate sign placed on the entrance door or within six (6) inches of the entrance opening; 
(18)  Any on-premises sign located atop service station or convenience store gasoline pumps which has less than six (6) square feet of sign face area on any one (1) side of such sign. 
(19)  Signs exempt from operating permit only: 
a.  Any on-premises sign used for the purpose of perpetuating the doctrines and teachings of any generally recognized church or religious organization holding a valid "nonprofit" charter which has been filed in the office of Secretary of the State of Texas and for which a current tax exemption certificate has been issued by the Internal Revenue Service; 
b.  Signs which are mounted on the face of a building no higher than the roof line and state only the street number and name of the proprietor, provided that the number of such signs shall be one (1) per address for such premises; or 
c.  Any on-premises sign operated by and used to further the interests of other recognized charitable organizations holding valid "nonprofit" charters which have been filed in the office of Secretary of the State of Texas and for which current certificates have been issued by the Internal Revenue Service. 
It shall be the duty of any person, company, organization, or entity claiming exemption status under this section to provide any documentation or other items of proof to the sign administrator. An organization claiming exemption status as a tax-exempt organization shall submit a photocopy of its charter and state and federal tax exemption certificate to the sign administrator. 
(m)  Normal maintenance, changing of message or electric light bulbs. A sign permit is not required for normal maintenance of a sign previously permitted. Any change in advertising display shall require a permit unless the sign is a marquee, reader board, or portable sign. This provision shall not release a person from complying with all other applicable permitting requirements of the City of Pasadena, including those of the BOCA Basic Building Code. 
(n)  Misrepresentations. Any misstatement, misrepresentation, or incorrect information supplied in order to obtain any type of sign permit, whether or not intentionally done, shall be grounds for the revocation of such sign permit. Such sign shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after permit revocation. If the sign is not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after permit revocation, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and place a lien against the property of the owner for the cost of removal. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, § 3, 1-29-02; Ord. No. 02-100, § 1, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 06-291, § 1, 11-21-06) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Any previously adopted specific reference within this section to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code or the BOCA Basic Building Code is changed to read as per the relative section of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code. See § 9-60. 
 
Sec. 31-10. - Sign companies. 
(a)  License required. Any person or company wishing to engage in the business of selling, leasing, repairing, constructing, or erecting signs shall first obtain a license from the City of Pasadena. A notarized form, approved by the sign administrator, shall be completed by the person or company, submitted to the sign administrator and placed on file with the City of Pasadena. This license requirement shall apply to any business, firm, or individual selling, erecting, repairing, constructing, or leasing on or off-premises signs. 
(b)  License fee. Any person required to obtain a license under the terms of this section shall pay an annual license fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). Further, the sign company shall upon application, and thereafter annually by December 31, pay the fee to the removal fund as set out herein. 
(c)  Address and agent for service of process. Any person who is required to obtain a license under the terms of this section shall provide a current address and keep such address current at all times, at which services of process may be had, or provide the current name and address of its registered agent, such agent's name and address to be kept current. Any person failing to comply with this provision is subject to having his/her license revoked. 
(d)  Insurance. Each person licensed under the terms of this section shall submit copies of policies of insurance certified by the agent issuing them, together with written proof that the premiums have been paid, showing that the performance of work in connection with each sign will be covered by approved public liability and property damage insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any person injured, one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury to more than one (1) person, and fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for property damage. Such policies of insurance shall be in a form selected or approved by the city and shall name the city as an additional insured. In addition, such policies of insurance shall be issued by an insurance company duly authorized to do business and issue such policies of insurance in the State of Texas and maintaining an office or represented by an authorized agent in the State of Texas, shall expressly state that it may not be canceled unless ten (10) days' written notice is given to the sign administrator before cancellation of the policy, and must contain an endorsement to the effect that the issuer waives any claim or right in the nature of subrogation to recover against the city, its officers, agents, or employees. Whenever any policy of insurance is canceled the sign administrator shall require that all work, to which such policy applies, be stopped immediately. No permits shall be issued until such time that the person or company complies with these insurance requirements. 
(e)  Number to be displayed on vehicles. Vehicles owned or operated by a duly licensed sign installer shall have displayed thereon at all times the license number shown on such installer's license prefixed by the initials "P.S.I." 
(f)  Electrical sign contractors. Each person licensed under the terms of this section whose operations include signs that in any manner include the use of electrical power shall adhere to the requirement provisions of the electrical code of the City of Pasadena as that code now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(g)  Violations of chapter. Violations of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for the revocation of the license or denial of the license application of any person who has committed such violation. 
(h)  Contractor's bond. No person or company shall be issued a license under this section to engage in the business of selling, leasing, repairing, constructing, or erecting signs unless such person or company has deposited a contractor's completion cash bond in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to be used to complete signs, including landscaping, which the licensee fails to do. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, § 4, 1-29-02)  
Sec. 31-11. - Sign maintenance and removal. 
(a)  Maintenance. 
(1)  The area around any sign location must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six (6) feet from said billboard on all sides and entirely to the street curb on the side nearest the street and debris, etc., will be removed at least weekly. 
(2)  All signs shall be thoroughly painted as often as necessary, unless of galvanized or noncorroding metal or treated with appropriate wood preservative, and shall be kept in good repair consistent with good maintenance. All braces, bolts, clips, supporting frame, and fastenings shall be free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, or loosening. All signs shall be able to withstand safely, at all times, the wind pressures specified elsewhere in this chapter. In case any sign is not so maintained the sign administrator shall give written notice to the owner or lessee thereof to so maintain the signs or to remove the sign. Nonmaintenance shall be considered a misdemeanor and penalty shall be assessed accordingly. 
(b)  Unsafe signs. Should any sign in the opinion of the sign administrator become insecure or in danger of falling or otherwise unsafe, the sign administrator shall give written notice of the condition of the sign to the person owning, leasing, or responsible for the sign. Said person so notified shall correct the unsafe condition of the sign in a manner to be approved by the sign administrator in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Unlawful signs. In case any sign shall be installed, erected, constructed, or maintained in violation of any of the terms of this chapter, in addition to any other rights and remedies provided herein, the sign administrator shall give written notice to the owner, lessee, or person responsible for said sign ordering said owner, lessee, or person to alter the sign such that it complies with this chapter or to remove the sign. 
(d)  Removal fund. There is hereby established a removal fund which shall only be used to remove illegal signs. Each person or company that is issued a new on-premises sign permit for a sign not previously permitted shall be required to pay a ten-dollar ($10.00) sign removal fee as part of the application fee. However, licensed sign companies shall contribute only fifty dollars ($50.00) annually in lieu of a removal bond and, further, each request for a variance shall be accompanied by a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payment to the removal fund. The fund shall be maintained by the city as a separate trust account invested at interest. 
(e)  Removal of signs. 
(1)  Signs with current permits. Any sign with a current operating permit that is in violation of the provisions herein shall be subject to removal. The sign administrator shall notify the person responsible for the sign by certified mail return receipt requested, or by personal notice, to repair or remove within seven (7) days. Upon written request to the sign administrator for good cause, this period may be extended up to no more than thirty (30) days. If the sign is not repaired or removed, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and a lien may be placed against the property of the owner for such expense. 
(2)  Signs without current permits. Any sign without a current operating permit that is in violation of the provisions herein shall be subject to removal. The sign administrator shall notify the person responsible for the sign by certified mail return receipt requested, or by personal notice, to remove the sign within seven (7) days. Upon written request to the sign administrator for good cause, this period may be extended up to no more than thirty (30) days. If the sign is not repaired or removed, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and a lien may be placed against the property of the owner for such expense. 
(3)  Discontinued signs. Any abandoned sign or sign structure shall be treated as a sign without a current permit. An on-premises sign for a business location that is vacant or unused for more than sixty (60) days, or an on-premises sign itself that is unused as advertising for the business location on which it is located for more than sixty (60) days, shall be considered a discontinued sign and, as such, shall be considered a sign without a current permit, said permit having been made void by the vacancy or nonuse. Such discontinued sign shall be removed or made to conform to the size restrictions presently found in this chapter. If such discontinued sign is not removed or made to conform within ten (10) days after it is considered a discontinued sign under this section, the city may remove the sign at the owner's expense and place a lien against the property of the owner for the cost of removal. 
(4)  Removal of unlawful signs by the city. The following procedures will be followed by the city in removal of unlawful signs by the city: 
a.  Signs found on public property. All signs found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed and discarded by the city without notice to the owner. This removal does not relieve the owner of any penalties. 
b.  Portable signs found on public property. The owners of portable signs that have the proper identification on them found on public property or public utility property or easement may be removed by the city and stored for ten (10) days after the notice or removal is received by the owner for the owner to reclaim. If not reclaimed within ten (10) days, the sign may be sold at auction or disposed of by the city. The cost to reclaim shall be the sum of the following: 
• Two hundred dollars ($200.00) civil penalty; 
• Actual cost of removal and hauling, minimum fifty dollars ($50.00); 
• Storage fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day per one hundred sixty (160) square feet of storage surface; and 
• One hundred dollars ($100.00) for employee's time to administer such confiscation. 
c.  All other signs removed by the city under any provision of this chapter shall be stored for ten (10) days after the notice of removal is issued to the last known address of the owner of the sign or the owner is personally notified. If such sign is not reclaimed by the owner within ten (10) days of such notice, the sign may be sold at auction or disposed of by the city. The cost to reclaim shall be the sum of the following: 
• Two hundred dollars ($200.00) civil penalty; 
• Actual cost of removal and hauling, minimum fifty dollars ($50.00); 
• Storage fee of five dollars ($5.00) per day per one hundred sixty (160) square feet of storage surface; and 
• One hundred dollars ($100.00) for employee's time to administer such confiscation. 
(f)  Replacement or repair of sign. 
(1)  When any sign, or a substantial part of it, is blown down or otherwise destroyed or taken down or removed for any purpose other than for routine maintenance operations, it may not be replaced, re-erected, reconstructed, or rebuilt except in full conformance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to, the requirement of obtaining a permit. Changing any design, color, or symbol of any sign shall require a permit and full conformance with all of the other provisions of this chapter and shall not constitute routine maintenance. 
(2)  For the purpose of subsection (1) of this section, a sign or substantial part of it is considered to have been destroyed if the cost of repairing the sign is more than fifty (50) per cent of the cost of replacing the sign, exclusive of the pole or poles supporting the sign. 
(3)  The engineering specifications must receive final inspection and approval by the City of Pasadena sign administrator or his/her designee prior to setting. 
(4)  It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to continue any work after having been verbally advised to stop work or given a stop work order by the City of Pasadena sign administrator or his/her designee. 
(5)  It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter to remove a stop work order issued by the sign administrator or his/her designee. 
(6)  In addition to all other requirements of this chapter, a new sign permit is required whenever the cost of repairing the sign, exclusive of the pole, is more than fifty (50) per cent of the cost of erecting a replacement sign of the same type at the same location. 
(7)  Whenever there is a change in ownership or use of the business premises upon which an on-premises sign is located, any and all on-premises signs on such premises shall be made to conform to all applicable requirements of this chapter. 
(8)  Provided, however, that the wooden support structure of an off-premise sign, otherwise lawfully in place on January 1, 2003, may be replaced with metal or steel superstructure and monopole. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 03-27, § 1, 2-11-03)  
Sec. 31-12. - Prohibited use of signs. 
(a)  Signs not to be posted on or to public property. It shall be unlawful for any sign other than official signs erected by the city, county, independent school district, State of Texas, or railway company to be placed or caused to be placed, painted, printed, posted, or affixed in any manner, any picture, bill, sign, or other advertising matter whatsoever on any curb, sidewalk, pavement, telephone pole, electric pole, traffic signal standard or pole, or other public improvement in any public street or grounds; or upon any bridge, overpass, underpass or parts of the same, median, esplanade, road right-of-way, public utility easement, traffic island, or public building, structure, or erection of any type belonging to the city. 
(b)  No sign shall resemble an official sign. No sign shall be constructed which resembles any official marker erected by the city, state, or any governmental agency which by reason of position, shape, or color would conflict with the proper functioning of any traffic sign or signal or which by its shape or color would conflict with or be confused with emergency vehicle lights, especially blinking lights. Use of words such as stop, look, danger, or any other word, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic is prohibited. (See section 36-99 of this Code.) 
(c)  Signs not to interfere with official signs. Signs may not be located or illuminated in such a manner as to obscure or otherwise interfere with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, signal, or device or so as to obstruct or interfere with the view of a driver or approaching, emerging, or intersection traffic. All such signs shall comply with the provisions of section 36-22.1 and section 36-99 of this Code. 
(d)  Proper shielding of lighted signals; interference with drivers of motor vehicles. Signs containing lights which are not effectively shielded as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed at any portion of the traveled way from which the sign is primarily viewed and which are of such intensity or brilliance as to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle, or which otherwise interfere with any driver's operation of a motor vehicle, are prohibited. 
(e)  Spectacular signs. The following types of spectacular signs shall be deemed prohibited: 
(1)  Signs with strobe, rotating strobe, or blinking strobe lights. 
(2)  Signs with flashing spotlights, rotating spotlights, or blinking spotlights shall not operate in a capacity which will interfere with traffic. 
(3)  Automatically changeable advertising signs with more than one (1) message which changes every four (4) seconds. 
(4)  Flashing lights with bulbs of greater than fifteen (15) watts. 
(f)  Signs not to obstruct egress. 
(1)  No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to obstruct any means of egress or any opening necessary for required light, ventilation, or firefighting or for escape from the premises or so as to prevent free passage from one (1) part of a roof to any other part thereof. 
(2)  No sign shall be attached to any exterior stairway, fire escape, fire tower balcony, or balcony serving as a horizontal exit. 
(3)  No sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained so as to interfere with the operation of a counterbalanced section of a fire escape, and no projecting sign shall be erected, constructed, or maintained without a minimum of seven (7) feet of clearance over any such counterbalanced section. 
(4)  No sign shall obstruct the free use of any window above the first story. 
(g)  Emitting signs prohibited. No emitting sign shall be permitted and are strictly prohibited at any location within the city. 
(h)  Signs employing motion picture machines. No sign shall employ a stereopticon or motion picture machine. 
(i)  Signs not to create easements. No permit for a sign extending beyond private property onto a public street, public sidewalks, or public alley shall constitute a permanent easement, and every such permit shall be revocable at any time by action of the city council. The city shall not be liable for any damages to the owner by reason of such revocation. The only time such a permit shall be issued shall be in the case of a projecting sign extending over a public sidewalk, when such sidewalk abuts the front of the building to which the projecting sign is attached. 
(j)  Location on vacant buildings. No sign or sign structure shall be permitted to remain for more than thirty (30) days on any vacant building or premises, except a conforming sign pertaining to the lease or sale of the building or premises, or a sign which is maintained in a manner conforming to the requirements of this chapter. After thirty (30) days of vacancy, the message must be blanked out. 
(k)  Vision restrictions prohibited. Any sign that restricts vision necessary for safety is prohibited. If such a sign is erected and it does restrict vision so as to be a safety hazard, it will be removed or modified to correct such restriction and eliminate the hazard. It is the responsibility of the person owning and erecting the sign to ensure that the sign does not create such a hazard. The following are guidelines for construction to prevent such restrictions of vision: 
(1)  Any sign over pedestrian traffic shall be no lower than eight (8) feet above the pedestrian surface. 
(2)  Any sign over passenger vehicle traffic shall be no lower than ten (10) feet above the vehicular traffic surface. 
(3)  Any sign over general vehicular traffic shall be no lower than fourteen (14) feet six (6) inches above the traffic surface. 
(4)  Any sign which obstructs vision within the sight triangle as defined in section 31-3(u) of this chapter. 
(l)  Obscene signs prohibited. No obscene sign shall be permitted. 
(m)  Fence signs. Fence signs shall not be permitted except when structurally and permanently incorporated into a masonry or architecturally and aesthetically coordinated fence. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, § 5, 1-29-02)  
Sec. 31-13. - On-premises and off-premises sign regulations. 
(a)  General requirements. 
(1)  No new off-premises permits. In accordance with the fact, issuance of new off-premises sign permits has not been allowed since October 18, 1983, and as such, no new permits shall be issued for off-premises signs including temporary signs affixed to any post, stake, or other device off the property of the business being advertised within the city limits of the City of Pasadena. Only off-premises signs continuously and lawfully permitted prior to October 18, 1983, may receive permits. 
(2)  No sign in right-of-way. No sign shall be placed in or extend into a public street, sidewalk, easement or street right-of-way. 
(3)  Shall not obstruct view. No sign shall be installed in such a way to obstruct a motorist's view of oncoming traffic when exiting a private drive or at the intersection of two (2) (or more) public streets. The motorist's eye is assumed to be at a point fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the roadway. Traffic must be visible for a distance of ten (10) times the speed limit on either side of the vehicle parallel to the intersecting roadway. This shall be applied to all public and private approaches affected. 
(4)  Poles shall be covered. On-premises sign pole and poles shall be covered with pole cover(s) made of 6061T6 etched aluminum for painting or twenty-two-gauge paint grip sheet metal to make the sign resemble a monument sign. Such pole cover shall be a width of at least one-half (½) the width of the sign to which it is attached. Pole covers shall be painted. Unpainted metal pole covers shall not be permitted. 
(5)  Landscaping. All signs which are required to be permitted under section 31-9(b) shall be landscaped. The landscape area shall be comprised of a continuous space at least equal to the square footage of the sign face (one (1) side) from the base and at an equal distance from each side of the sign and extending along the entire length and width of the sign base and shall consist predominantly of living plant material. Provided, however, decorative stone or rock may be used when the area to be landscaped as described above is paved by existing asphalt, brick, or concrete. Use of living plant material is preferred. Installation of pavement to avoid the preference of landscaping with living plant material is prohibited. All living plant material landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition at all times. All decorative stone or rock landscaping shall be kept free of weeds and maintained in a neat and orderly appearance at all times. 
(b)  Street addresses. On-premises signs shall display the street addresses of the business location it advertises in numbers at least five (5) inches high on each pole cover in legible form within forty (40) feet of the nearest public roadway. Such numbers shall increase one (1) inch in height for each additional forty (40) feet, or fractional part thereof, the sign is located from such roadway. 
(c)  Face restrictions. 
(1)  No business may have more than five (5) faces per on-premises location except for wall signs. For signs on a double-faced, back-to-back, four-sided or V-type nature, each face is considered a separate sign in computing the face area. A curved surface sign shall be considered as three (3) faces and a circular sign shall be considered as four (4) faces. Those five (5) sign faces may not exceed in total face area the total of three hundred (300) square feet. 
(2)  In addition to five (5) sign faces per business location or premises, each business shall be allowed wall signs not to exceed one (1) per cent of the total usable square feet of the business building, plus one (1) square foot for each linear foot of street frontage of such location or premises, not to exceed twenty (20) per cent of the area of the wall or building below the roof line. 
(3)  No off-premises billboard shall exceed six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet plus cutouts as herein provided. 
(d)  Size and quantity of types restrictions. Total number of on-premises signs allowed at any one (1) business shall not exceed five (5). The maximum of the individual types of categories of signs are as follows: 
• One (1) portable sign for not more than sixty (60) days a year. 
• One (1) monument sign. 
• Two (2) monument signs if business has frontage on two (2) roads with a total street frontage of three hundred (300) feet or more. Such monument signs shall be at least two hundred (200) feet from each other. 
• One (1) marquee sign. 
• Two (2) canopy signs. 
• One (1) ground sign per separate street frontage. 
(e)  Monument signs. 
(1)  All on-premises ground signs shall be of the monument style. An on-premises monument sign shall not be erected that exceeds the dimensions allowed by the point system stated in the schedule provided by this subsection. Except, an on-premises sign that abuts State Highway 225 and Beltway 8, as measured by a straight line drawn perpendicular from the roadway to the on-premises sign, may have a maximum height of twelve (12) feet above the elevated portion of such roadway. Such sign may also have a maximum sign face of one hundred twenty (120) square feet plus thirty (30) square feet of architectural embellishment for each sign face. As with signs not abutting State Highway 225 and Beltway 8 (see Illustration 1-1), any architectural embellishment shall be included in the maximum allowable sign square footage. 
(2)  The points for each sign permitted under this subsection shall be equal to the number arrived at by adding together the following: (a) one (1) per cent of the total usable square feet of building floor space of the business building advertised by the sign and (b) the number of linear feet of street frontage of such business building. Provided, however, any on-premises sign located at a point more than fifty (50) feet from the roadway right-of-way nearest to it may be increased in size one (1) square foot for every linear foot such sign is from such point on a perpendicular line drawn from the roadway. Such sign shall not, however, exceed one hundred and twenty (120) square feet in size or one hundred and sixty (160) square feet with a reader board, regardless of its distance from the roadway. 
Maximum allowable height 	Maximum total sq. ft. allowed each sign face 	Points 
12 feet 	60 sq. ft. or 50 sq. ft. with 30 sq. ft. of reader board 	less than 1,100 
14 feet 	100 sq. ft. 	1,100 or more 
 
(f)  Cutout areas permitted. Exclusions or appendages (cutouts) shall not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the total sign face area and shall not exceed an additional five (5) feet in height or an additional three (3) feet in width. 
(g)  Roof signs. Roof signs must have one (1) foot of open space between the roof line and the bottom of the sign, three (3) feet of open space shall be required between the sign structure and the edge of the roof and between the sign structures. A roof sign may not at any point exceed six (6) feet above the roof line facia of the building upon which it is constructed and shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet of sign face. 
(h)  Spacing. No off-premises sign will be placed within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of another sign subject to the provisions hereof. No on-premises pole sign shall be erected within five hundred (500) feet of a pole sign for the same business on the same street, except each business within the limit of five (5) signs shall be permitted one (1) sign for each street frontage. 
(i)  Multiple business signs. Multiple business signs (MBS) advertising multiple business centers, in addition to all other regulations herein contained, shall observe the following rules that apply to the installation and operation of multiple business signs: 
(1)  A multiple business sign shall not be erected, constructed, or maintained within two hundred (200) feet of any other sign except for signs on the buildings of the businesses advertised on the multiple business sign and directional signs. 
(2)  There may be more than one (1) multiple business sign on each street frontage. The minimum distance between each such multiple business sign shall depend upon the maximum size of the multiple business sign allowed by section 31-13(i)(4) and shall be controlled by the following formula: 
Maximum Allowable 
Height 	Minimum Distance 
Between MBS 
16 feet 	300 feet 
19 feet 	400 feet 
25 feet 	500 feet 
 
A multiple business center (MBC) with less than three hundred (300) feet of street frontage shall be permitted no more than one (1) multiple business sign. 
(3)  A multiple business center with street frontage on more than one (1) street shall be allowed signage for each such additional street frontage in accordance with the rules set forth in section 31-13(i)(2) and section 31-13(i)(4). 
(4)  A multiple business sign shall not be erected that exceeds the dimensions allowed by the point system stated in the schedule that follows. The points for each sign permitted under this section shall be equal to the number arrived at by adding together the following two (2) items: (a) one (1) per cent of the total usable square feet of building floor space of the multibusiness center advertised by the multibusiness sign and (b) the number of linear feet of street frontage of such multibusiness center. If the multibusiness center is on two (2) or more separate streets, the calculations called for by the formula stated above shall be based upon each street separately. Linear feet of street frontage of separate streets shall not be combined. 
Maximum Allowable Height 	Maximum Total Sq. Ft. Allowed Each Side 	Points 
16 feet 	120 	less than 500 
19 feet 	200 	500 to 1099 
25 feet 	300 	over 1100 
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing or any other provision of this chapter, the maximum allowable size of a sign for any single business in a multibusiness center sign shall be fifty (50) square feet, regardless of the number of businesses. 
(5)  A multibusiness sign only shall be utilized in situations in which two (2) or more business entities or operations occupy the same location or building. Each business, however, must have a separate different address in order for such businesses to be entitled to use a multibusiness sign. Multiple single business signs shall not be allowed at locations where more than one (1) business is located or housed. 
(j)  Movable signs. Movable signs, in addition to all other regulations herein contained, shall observe the following rules applicable to the installation and operation of movable signs: 
(1)  The number of movable signs allowed for the first street of frontage is one (1) movable sign. 
(2)  One (1) additional movable sign will be allowed for each additional street that adjoins the business. 
(3)  Movable signs must be removed during the hours the business is closed. 
(k)  Subdivision signs. Only one (1) off-premises sign with the name of the subdivision and directions thereto will be permitted, in addition to the one (1) exempt sign for a residential subdivision situated within the city limits of the City of Pasadena that has been approved by the city and duly platted and recorded in the records of Harris County, Texas. The size of such sign inclusive of all sides shall not exceed a total of seventy (70) square feet. Such sign is allowed for a maximum period of two (2) years and shall be promptly removed at the end of the two-year period. If the subdivision is less than ninety-five (95) per cent sold, the sign may be repermitted for two (2) years. 
(l)  Location. No off-premises sign shall be located in a primarily residential area. 
(m)  Relocation, removal, and reconstruction. 
(1)  Relocation of off-premises signs will be permitted only in the case of a governmental taking of the land used for the sign location and no compensation paid to the sign owner. 
(2)  The owner of the billboard or portable sign must obtain a site for relocation of the billboard or portable sign within one (1) month of removal, and construction or placement must be completed within ninety (90) days thereafter. 
(3)  The city will only permit reconstruction if the sign proposed to be constructed will be in compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. 
(4)  Removal of any sign may be required if in the opinion of the sign administrator the sign unnecessarily distracts motorists, hinders the view of the natural landscape, or although grand fathered is still in too close proximity to other signs. 
(5)  Any off-premises sign relocated as required by this chapter shall not change its dimensions, shall be aesthetically pleasing, and shall have no exposed wood. Any sign taller than forty-two-and-a-half (42½) feet prior to relocation shall be constructed to a height not taller than forty-two-and-a-half (42½) feet upon relocation. 
(n)  Off-premises signs on private property. No person shall place an off-premises sign on private property without the consent of the owner or agent for the owner of said private property. Further, no person shall place an off-premises portable sign on private property without the authorized written, notarized consent of the owner or agent for the owner of said private property. 
(o)  Accumulation of rainwater prohibited. All signs shall be designed, constructed and maintained to prevent the accumulation of rainwater in or on the sign. 
(p)  Garage sale signs. The person obtaining the permit for the sale is entitled to post two (2) on-premises and three (3) off-premises temporary signs on private property only not to exceed one and one-half (1½) square feet in size. All signs must be removed after the sale or the holder of the sale is subject to penalties. 
(q)  Political campaign banners. Installations shall not exceed thirty-six (36) square feet in area and must be securely attached to a structure by acceptable means that will not allow the banner to become windborne. Political campaign banners are not subject to fees. Allowed installations must be on private real property with permission of the legal owner or tenant with specific conveyed rights. Political banner installations shall not be placed on public property, rights-of-way, or easements. Banners placed in violation of this chapter must be relocated to a lawful location or are subject to removal. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 02-38, §§ 6—8, 1-29-02; Ord. No. 06-156, § 1, 5-7-06; Ord. No. 06-291, § 1, 11-21-06)  
Sec. 31-14. - Structural requirements; generally and for specific signs.[3] 
(a)  Design. 
(1)  General. All sites and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to resist wind forces as specified in this section. All bracing systems shall be designed and constructed to transfer lateral forces to the foundations. For signs on buildings, the dead and lateral loads shall be transmitted through the structural frame of the building to the ground in such a manner as not to overstress any of the elements thereof. 
(2)  Wind loads. All signs and sign structures shall be designed to resist wind loads as follows: 
Wind Load Pressures in Pounds Per Square Foot For All Signs 
Height Above Ground*, Feet 	Pressure, Pounds/Ft. 2 
0—50 	30 
51—99 	35 
*Measured above the average level of the ground adjacent to the structure. 
 
(3)  Vertical design loads. Vertical design loads, except roof live loads, shall be assumed to be acting simultaneously with the wind loads. 
(4)  Working stresses. All signs shall be designed to conform with the requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code regarding allowable working stresses. The working strength of chains, cables, guys, or steel rods shall not exceed one-fifth ( 1/5 ) of the ultimate strength of such chains, cables, guys, or steel rods. 
(5)  Registered engineer's seal. All commercially erected signs over twelve (12) feet and all roof signs shall be approved by a professional engineer registered in the State of Texas, and all plans shall contain the registered engineer's seal. 
(b)  Construction. 
(1)  General. The supports for all signs or sign structures shall be placed in or upon private property and shall be securely built, constructed, and erected in conformance with the requirements of the BOCA Basic Building Code. All sign footings and foundations shall be buried beneath ground level. 
(2)  Materials. 
a.  Materials for construction of all signs and sign structures shall be of the quality and grade as specified for buildings in the BOCA Basic Building Code. Notwithstanding any of those provisions to the contrary, signs shall not be constructed of plywood. Examples of approved sign face materials are lexan, acrylic, MDO, duraply, and lustre. 
b.  Any sign which utilizes neon lighting shall be constructed so that any neon lighting below eight (8) feet above ground level shall be completely encased in clear plexiglass. 
(3)  Nonstructural trim. Nonstructural trim and portable display surface may be of wood, metal, approved plastics, or any combination thereof consistent with the BOCA Basic Building Code. 
(4)  Anchorage. All ground signs shall be anchored to resist the wind load specified in section 31-14(a)(2) herein acting in any direction. Anchors and supports shall be designed for safe-bearing loads on the soil and for an effective resistance to pull out. 
(c)  Electrical requirements. All electrical fixtures, equipment, and appurtenances installed in conjunction with a sign shall be designed and installed in accordance with the City of Pasadena electrical code as it now exists or may hereinafter be amended. 
(d)  Clearances. 
(1)  Clearance from high voltage power lines. Signs shall be located a minimum distance of twelve (12) feet measured horizontally and twelve (12) feet measured vertically from overhead electrical conductors commonly called distribution lines and a minimum distance of five (5) feet measured horizontally and five (5) feet measured vertically from what are commonly called service drop lines. The term electrical conductors as used in this subsection means any electrical conductor, either bare or insulated, installed above the ground. 
(2)  Clearance from poles. No sign shall be erected nearer than five (5) feet horizontally or eight (8) feet vertically from any telephone pole or cable pole or cross member of that pole. 
(e)  Exempt signs not exempt from this section. No sign which is otherwise exempt is exempt from the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Any previously adopted specific reference within this section to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code or the BOCA Basic Building Code is changed to read as per the relative section of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code. See § 9-60. 
 
Sec. 31-15. - Portable signs. 
(a)  Hitch. Every portable sign shall be equipped with a trailer hitch and locking device approved by the sign administrator to hold the trailer in a securely locked position during transport. All such hitching equipment shall also comply with all applicable federal, state, and local laws regulating same. 
(b)  Anchoring. Every portable sign not in transit shall be securely anchored to the ground by cables, ground supports, or such other methods in order to comply with the wind load requirements set out herein or so anchored so that the sign will fall to its side without moving beyond the limits of that fall. All anchoring systems intended to be used by the sign company or sign owner shall be approved by the sign administrator, and the application for a portable sign, whether it be original, repermit, or relocation, shall designate the anchoring system to be used on that particular sign. 
(c)  Standards. Portable signs for the purpose of this chapter shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including the structural requirements, spacing requirements, permitting and fee requirements, insurance and bonding requirements, and all other provisions of this chapter applicable to ground signs unless a provision specifically includes or excludes a portable sign. 
(d)  Maintenance. The area where any portable sign is located must be maintained and kept clean by the owner. Grass will be cut a minimum of six (6) feet from said sign on all sides and entirely to the street curb of the side nearest the street and debris, etc., will be removed at least every seven (7) days. 
(e)  Number on premises. Each business will be allowed one (1) on-premises improved portable sign or one (1) portable on-premises sign displayed for no more than sixty (60) days per calendar year and meets all requirements of this chapter. 
(f)  Electrical. No portable sign may contain electrical components unless it fully meets the city electrical code. Extension cords may not be laid across any sidewalk, driveway, or any other line of traffic. 
(g)  Changeable face protection. Portable signs with changeable face display shall be secured by a locked cover so that the message cannot be tampered with and the changeable items will not be blown away by any wind. 
(h)  Size. No portable sign shall exceed in outside dimension six and one-half (6½) feet vertical or twelve and one-half (12½) feet horizontal. The advertising space on each side shall not exceed seventy-two (72) square feet or a dimension of six (6) feet by twelve (12) feet. 
(i)  Prohibited signs. 
(1)  New portable signs are prohibited. No permits shall be issued for new portable signs. 
(2)  The owner or occupant of the premises shall not display portable on-premises signs more than sixty (60) days per calendar year. No portable on-premises sign shall be displayed for more than thirty (30) consecutive days. Furthermore, there shall be a fifteen-day waiting period between displays so that no portable sign shall be displayed with less than fifteen (15) days between displays. Each time the sign is intended to be displayed a permit must be obtained. The permit fee is one dollar ($1.00) per day of exhibition. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-16. - Off-premises sign locations continuously permitted since October 18, 1983. 
All off-premises sign locations permitted prior to October 18, 1983, will continue to be permitted locations notwithstanding the provisions hereof, provided that they have been continuously permitted and maintained as provided herein or as may have been required by previous ordinances then in existence. 
All off-premises sign locations permitted between October 18, 1983, and the date of passage of this chapter will continue to be permitted locations notwithstanding the provisions hereof, provided that they have been continuously permitted and maintained as provided herein or as may have been required by previous ordinances then in existence. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-17. - Variance procedure and committee. 
(a)  Definition of the committee. The sign appeals committee created herein may, for a particular site, authorize the following special variances and exceptions with respect to the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Functions. The sign appeals committee shall recommend to the city council legislation for amendments to this code in keeping with technological progress with respect to public health, safety, and welfare. 
(c)  Granting variances. The committee may, in specific cases and subject to appropriate conditions, recommend to the city council for final approval only the following special variances and exceptions to the regulations established in this chapter when the committee has made a finding from the evidence presented that strict compliance with the requirement of this chapter will result in a hardship or inequity to the applicant in accomplishing the objectives of this article, provided that economic or self-created hardship alone shall not be a sufficient basis for the granting of a variance or exception. 
(1)  Grant up to a forty (40) per cent variance in the following: 
• Total square footage of sign area 
• Height 
• Setback 
(2)  Authorize the relocation on site of a legal sign which meets the general requirements of this chapter or variable items in this section. 
(3)  Allow the erection of one (1) additional on-premises, freestanding sign per site, provided that the additional sign shall not be located within one hundred (100) feet of any other freestanding sign. 
(d)  Nonconforming signs. The committee may require a nonconforming sign to be brought into immediate conformity with all current standards of all ordinances of the city or to be removed when, from the evidence presented, the commission finds the sign to be hazardous to the public or to have been abandoned by its owners. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-18. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Adverse possession. No sign or its location will gain any future rights to that location or rights to a sign no matter how long it has been displayed. 
(b)  Presumptions of ownership. There is a rebuttable presumption of ownership under the following circumstances: 
• Printed name of the owner on the sign. 
• Holder of the permit number on the sign. 
• The beneficiary of the display on the sign. 
• The property on which the sign is located. 
(c)  Current address required. Any person, company, firm, partnership, or corporation who is required to obtain any permit under this chapter will maintain his current address with the sign administrator. The last address furnished by the entity holding the permit shall be presumed to be the correct address and any notice sent to that address shall be effective delivery of notice. 
(d)  Presumption of notice. Each notice required hereunder shall be sent to the listed owner of any sign by certified mail return receipt requested and at the same time by regular mail. If the registered mail is not picked up, refused, or undeliverable but the regular mail is not returned, it will be presumed that the notice sent by regular mail was delivered on the 5th day after posting or the date that first notice of registered/certified mail was given to the addressee. 
(e)  Notice to presumed owner. Notice of a violation will be sent to the person presumed to be the owner in the order above set out, and if the presumed owner refused to acknowledge that he/she is responsible for the sign, the city may without further notice remove the sign. 
(f)  City permit is not an endorsement. Any approval of a sign or its structure by the city is not a verification or endorsement of the worthiness of the sign, and any failure of the sign or its structure is strictly the responsibility of the owner, operator, designer, or person erecting the sign and its structure. 
(g)  The sanitation division is designated to assist in removals. The sanitation division of the public works department is designated as the division of the city government to assist and aid the sign administrator in the removal of signs. The sign administrator shall make a request in writing on forms provided and prepared by him/her to the sanitation division indicating the sign and its location and the location to which it is to be removed. 
(h)  City-sponsored and community events. 
(1)  Except for banners, signs advertising city-sponsored or community events will be permitted for not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the event, provided that the signs meet all other requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  Banners advertising city-sponsored or community events shall conform to the following requirements of this subsection: 
a.  Approval. No banner advertising a city-sponsored or community event may be displayed until approved in writing by the sign administrator. 
b.  Terms and conditions. In order to receive approval to display a banner, the following requirements must be met: 
1.  The banner shall be used only to inform the community of an upcoming event. 
2.  Banners may be displayed during and up to thirty (30) days prior to a community event and must be removed within two (2) days after event has ended. 
3.  A banner shall not be displayed unless approved by the traffic director who shall consider traffic safety and flow in the decision to approve the display. 
4.  Approval of the display of a banner at a particular location shall be on a first-come, first-serve basis. However, preference may be given for recurring annual events, historically or traditionally tied to a specific date or holiday season. Additionally, a request to advertise the reoccurrence of the same event, or same type of event within any one (1) calendar year, may be honored if no request for the banner site of a recurring annual event is received. 
5.  All banners over public property shall be placed by city personnel. 
6.  Maximum banner size shall not exceed four (4) feet by thirty (30) feet, and minimum size shall not be less than three and one-half (3½) feet by twenty-four (24) feet. 
7.  Day-glo or fluorescent colors shall not be allowed. 
8.  Banners shall be constructed of suitable water-resistant fabric. 
9.  Banners must be slit to reduce wind resistance. 
10.  Banners must be reinforced with rope within the casing of the edge of the banner. 
11.  The owner of a banner shall agree to assume full liability and indemnify the city for any damage to persons or property arising from the display of the banner by the city. 
12.  The city is not responsible for any damage that may occur to the banner for any cause. 
13.  Prices or fees charged for the event shall not be displayed. 
(i)  Official state historical signs and markers are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 00-145, § 1, 9-26-00)  
Sec. 31-19. - Electronic off-premises signs. 
(a)  Authorization. An existing off-premises ground sign structure may be modified to support an electronic face subject to the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Electronic sign standards. An off-premises electronic sign face shall conform to all specifications herein: 
(1)  Dwell time. Each message on an off-premises electronic sign face shall remain static for at least eight (8) seconds and a change of message shall be accomplished within two (2) seconds. 
(2)  Change of message. A change of message on an off-premises electronic sign face must occur simultaneously on the entire sign face. 
(3)  Brightness. The brightness level is limited to 0.3 footcandles over ambient light conditions at a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet from the sign. 
(4)  Malfunction. An off-premises electronic sign face shall contain a default mechanism, that will freeze the sign in one (1) position if a malfunction occurs. 
(5)  Driver impairment. An off-premises electronic sign face shall not face light of such intensity or brilliance to cause glare or otherwise impair the vision of the driver, or results in a nuisance to the driver. 
(6)  Automatic dimmer. An off-premises electronic sign face shall be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell which automatically adjusts the face's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions. 
(7)  Official signage. An off-premises electronic sign face must not resemble or simulate any lights or official signage used to control traffic in accordance with the 2003 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, with Revision No. 1 published by the Federal Highway Administration (FHVVA). 
(c)  Static face removal. An existing static face off-premises sign may only be modified to support an electronic face if the owner presents the sign administrator with pictorial proof and a sworn affidavit evidencing the removal of at least three (3) square feet of static face from within the city for every one (1) square foot of electronic face to be erected. (Example: for a six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet electronic face, an owner would have to remove at least two thousand sixteen (2,016) square feet of existing face area.) The removal of the face which the electronic face will replace shall not count toward the removal total. 
(1)  Completed signs. Sign faces used for this purpose must be from physically completed sign structures with complete sign faces. No partially erected/completed signs may be used. 
(2)  Size. No electronic sign face may exceed six hundred seventy-two (672) square feet. 
(d)  Structure modification. The owner of an existing off-premises sign may replace any structural components necessary to support an electronic face. A sign structure that is modified: 
(1)  Shall not increase the number of poles used to support the sign's superstructure. 
(2)  Shall not increase the sign support's height or the number of faces on the structure. 
(3)  Shall obtain all necessary permits, including electrical and sign permits for the electronic face, from the city. 
(e)  Emergency messages. The owner of an off-premises electronic sign face shall coordinate with local authorities to display, when appropriate, emergency information important to the traveling public such as Amber Alerts, alerts concerning terrorist attacks, natural disasters or as authorized by the office of emergency management. Emergency information messages shall remain in the advertising rotation according to the protocols of the agency that issues the information. 
(f)  Except as provided by this section (31-19), electronic off-premises signs shall otherwise conform to the requirements of this chapter 31. 
(Ord. No. 10-283, § 1(Exh. A), 12-21-10; Ord. No. 11-033, § 1, 3-1-11) 
 
Illustration 1-1 
 
Illustration 2-1 
 
Illustration 3-1  
Chapter 32 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Authority of city relative to streets, sidewalks and other public ways, Art. I, §§ 4, 5. 
Cross reference— Ambulances, Ch. 4; auto wreckers, Ch. 7; riding bicycles on sidewalks, § 8-5; setback requirements for buildings, § 9-76 et seq.; moving of buildings on streets, § 9-111 et seq.; littering streets and alleys generally, § 14-19; littering streets by patrons of drive-in restaurants, § 20-59; discharging firearms, air guns, etc., in or across streets, § 20-3; loitering on streets, § 20-4; pipeline transportation, Ch. 27; franchises for use of streets, sidewalks, etc., for pipeline transportation, § 27-18 et seq.; planning, Ch. 28; duties of planning and zoning commission relative to streets, § 28-41; traffic, Ch. 36; streets and sidewalks in townhouse subdivisions, App. A; streets and sidewalks in townhouse subdivisions, App. B. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to streets and sidewalks, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175 (16—18). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting the validity of any ordinance: 
(1)  Dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, improving, widening or vacating any street or other public way in the city; 
(2)  Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; or 
(3)  Establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein.  
Sec. 32-2. - Street numbers for buildings. 
(a)  All houses erected within the city limits shall have affixed thereto permanent, or semipermanent, house numbers prior to inspection by the city inspectors. Such numbers shall be made of aluminum, iron, plastic, or a similar material. Before such numbers are attached to such houses, the owner or the builder shall request the assignment of a proper street number from the building official. 
(b)  No official of the city shall authorize the connection of utilities to any building in the city unless a proper street number has been attached to such building. 
(c)  All buildings shall display the street address of the business location it advertises in numbers at least four (4) inches in height, in a legible form and within forty (40) feet of the nearest public roadway. Such numbers shall increase one (1) inch in height for each additional forty (40) feet or fractional part thereof from the center of the nearest public roadway. 
(Code 1964, § 24-7; Ord. No. 00-201, § 1, 12-12-00) 
Cross reference— Buildings generally, Ch. 9.  
Sec. 32-3. - Obstructions or encroachments on streets or alleys. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place, build, construct or maintain any fence, gate, pole, post, sign, building or other obstruction or encroachment upon any public street or alley or any portion of a public street or alley within the city or to cause any of such things to be done. The enumeration of certain types of obstructions and encroachments shall not limit the scope and effect of this section, but the same shall be construed to prohibit and forbid every type and kind of obstruction or encroachment upon any public street or alley of whatever nature or character. 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall authorize the prosecution of any person for obstructing or encroaching upon any street or alley within the city, where such obstruction or encroachment is permitted by some other provision of the ordinances of the city or the laws of the state; provided that, it shall not be necessary, in any complaint, action or proceeding under this section, to negate this exception, but the same shall be proved by the defendant by way of defense. 
(Ord. No. 67-1915, § 1, 2-28-67) 
Charter reference— Authority of city to remove street encroachments, Art. I, § 4. 
Cross reference— Signs generally, Ch. 31; signs projecting over streets and sidewalks, § 31-8; location of signs near streetlight standards, § 31-10; minimum height of signs over sidewalks, § 31-65 et seq.  
Sec. 32-4. - Use of sidewalks for display of goods, wares, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any merchant, owner, manager or person in charge of any mercantile or other business located in the city to display or permit to be displayed upon the sidewalk in front of or adjacent to his place of business any goods, wares or merchandise kept for sale, or to leave or permit to be left on the sidewalk, in front of his place of business or adjacent thereto any boxes, barrels, crates, packages or containers, whether empty or containing merchandise, waste materials or trash. It shall not be deemed a violation of this section for goods, wares and merchandise, whether in containers or not, to be unloaded upon the sidewalk for immediate removal into the place of business, or for same to be placed upon the sidewalk for the purpose of being immediately loaded upon trucks or other vehicles for shipment or for delivery to a purchaser, or for removal to some other location, provided such goods, wares and merchandise or boxes, barrels, crates, packages or containers, whether empty or not, shall in no case be permitted to remain on such sidewalk for more than ten (10) minutes after being placed thereon. 
(Code 1964, § 24-8)  
Sec. 32-5. - Inspection and repair of utility fixtures in streets and alleys. 
The city fire marshal, building official, electrical inspector, police officers, and such other persons as may be designated by the city shall have power and it shall be their duty to examine and inspect, from time to time, all gas pipelines, and other fixtures in the streets, alleys and other public places within the city for the purpose of seeing that all of same are in a safe and suitable condition, and whenever any such item is found unsafe or unsuitable for the purpose for which it is used, the person using, possessing or maintaining same shall be notified and required to place same in a safe and suitable condition. 
(Code 1964, § 24-9) 
Cross reference— Pipeline transportation, Ch. 27.  
Sec. 32-6. - Liability of city for damages caused by defective streets and sidewalks. 
The city shall not be liable to any person for damages caused from streets, ways, crossings, bridges, culverts or sidewalks being out of repair from negligence of the city, unless the same shall have remained so for ten (10) days after special notice in writing given to the city council. 
(Code 1964, § 24-10)  
Sec. 32-7. - Change in names of certain streets lying north and south of Shaw Street and east and west of Shaver Street. 
(a)  All of the streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes or plazas lying north of Shaw Street and West Shaw Street, presently having like corresponding numbers south of Shaw Street and West Shaw Street shall be designated with the prefix of "North" to each street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane or plaza; example, to wit; that portion of Shaver Street lying north of Shaw Street shall be designated as North Shaver Street and that portion lying south of Shaw Street shall be designated as Shaver Street only. 
(b)  All of the streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes or plazas lying south of Shaw Street and West Shaw Street, presently having like corresponding numbers north of Shaw Street and West Shaw Street shall be designated by only the name of such street so as to eliminate the prefix "South"; example, to wit; that portion of Shaver Street lying south of Shaw Street shall be designated as Shaver Street. 
(c)  All of the streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes or plazas lying west of Shaver Street and west of North Shaver Street presently having like corresponding numbers east of Shaver Street and North Shaver Street shall be designated by the prefix "West" to each street; example, to wit; that portion of Shaw Street lying west of Shaver Street shall be West Shaw Street and that portion of Shaw Street lying east of Shaver Street shall be designated as Shaw Street only. 
(d)  All of the streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, lanes or plazas lying east of Shaver Street and east of North Shaver Street presently having like corresponding numbers west of Shaver Street and North Shaver Street shall be designated by the name of such street only so as to eliminate the prefix "East"; example, to wit; that portion of Shaw Street lying east of Shaver Street shall be designated as Shaw Street. 
(Ord. No. 72-23, §§ 1—4, 2-1-72) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 72-23 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1—4 herein as § 32-7 was at the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 32-8. - Obstruction of street crossing by railroad train. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person in charge of any railway train to obstruct a street crossing in the city for a longer period of time than five (5) minutes at one time. After a crossing has been illegally obstructed for the initial period of five (5) minutes, each succeeding period of five (5) minutes of illegal obstruction shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  By the term "obstruct a street crossing" is meant the blocking of the flow of traffic on such street by stopping a railway train on the railroad tracks across such street, or by occupying the tracks across the street with a moving railway train, or by a combination of both, it being the intent and purpose of this section to prevent the person in charge of the railway train from obstructing traffic flowing upon the street by either a moving railway train or a stopped railway train or a combination of both. 
(Ord. No. 74-186, §§ 1, 2, 9-3-74) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 74-186, not expressly amendatory of this Code, has been codified as § 32-8 by the editors.  
Secs. 32-9—32-16. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - IMPROVEMENTS ON RIGHT-OF-WAY PROPERTY[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— Installation of electrical conduits, wires, etc., on, over or under streets, § 12-18. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 32-17. - Purpose of article. 
The purpose of this article is to set out the standards, specifications, minimum requirements, fees, permits, and any other standards that this article shall require of any person for work to be done in this city on any public, private or city right-of-way property. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, § A, 11-25-69)  
Sec. 32-18. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply, unless clearly indicated to the contrary: 
Builder. Any person, partnership, company or corporation, or a representative of any of them, shall be referred to as "builder" or "person," and such terms shall be synonymous with each other. 
Director. The term "director" shall mean the director of planning for the city. 
Exhibits. Reference to various "exhibits" refer to the exhibits attached to the original of Ordinance No. 69-254 and made a part of this article by section 32-19. 
Inspector. The term "inspector" shall mean the building official of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
Opening. An "opening" is any breaking in or on any public street, curb or sidewalk for the purpose of placing pipelines, sewer lines or other utilities. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, § B, 11-25-69)  
Sec. 32-19. - Minimum standards. 
(a)  No person shall construct, alter, improve or install any curb, gutter, tile drain, sidewalk, street or driveway, or make any other installation upon the streets or upon any other city-owned property or right-of-way, unless the same meets the minimum standards and specifications as set out in this article, chapter 9 of this Code and Exhibits "A" through "G", as attached to the original of Ordinance No. 69-254 on file in the city secretary's office, which exhibits are hereby made a part of this article to the same extent as if set out at length herein; however, where public sidewalks are required in a residential subdivision, the wire mesh as shown on the City of Pasadena "Standard Paving Detail" may be eliminated. 
(b)  If there is any variance between any portion of this article, chapter 9 of this Code, or the exhibits referred to in subsection (a), then such exhibits shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ D2, F1, 11-25-69; Ord. No. 74-151, § 1, 7-23-74)  
Sec. 32-20. - Work permit generally. 
(a)  A permit from the building inspection department shall be required before any work is started on any type of construction project for improvements, altering, landscaping, or construction governed by this article. A permit will be required for each street, sidewalk, curb, culvert, opening, or alteration of same that a builder intends to construct or make, even though the job site includes more than one of same in his contract, except in residential subdivisions, the permit for a new house shall also authorize construction of sidewalks and driveways according to the approved plans and the City Code, however, in no event shall the five dollar ($5.00) permit fee provided for in section 32-20(d) be waived. 
(b)  All sidewalks that are constructed in this city shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall comply with the minimum specifications set out in Exhibits "C" and "E" referred to in section 32-19, except in residential subdivisions, the wire mesh may be eliminated. 
(c)  No permit shall be issued for the paving of any portion of the public right-of-way without the express written approval of the director. 
(d)  A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for each permit issued by the building inspection department under this article. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ E1—E3, E4, E6, 11-25-69; Ord. No. 70-120, § 3, 6-16-70; Ord. No. 74-151, §§ 2, 3, 7-23-74) 
Cross reference— Provisions of building code relative to fee for construction or alteration of sidewalk, culvert or driveway, § 9-63(118.4).  
Sec. 32-21. - Plans and specifications for work. 
Plans and specifications shall be required and must be submitted to the building inspection department for any type of improvements, altering, landscaping or construction of any building, structure, sidewalk, gutter, curb, culvert, opening, drainpipe, or the like that is within the scope of this article. Such plans and specifications must meet the minimum standards as set out in this article and must be approved in writing by the director of planning. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, § D1, 11-25-69)  
Sec. 32-22. - Inspection of work. 
(a)  For the purpose of inspecting the forms and materials used on the site for work authorized by a permit issued under this article, the builder shall notify the building inspection department at least twenty-four (24) hours before pouring any concrete. 
(b)  When the inspector is called on a job site for inspection approval and, upon his inspection, he determines that the work does not meet the required minimum standards, then the builder shall be required to pay a reinspection fee of five dollars ($5.00) before the inspector can be called to reinspect the work. Such fee shall be required to reinspect each and every job that has failed to pass the first inspection by the inspector. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ C2, C3, E7, 11-25-69)  
Sec. 32-23. - Correction of defects. 
(a)  When the inspector makes an inspection of the job site covered by a permit issued under this article and finds that defective workmanship or defective materials are being used, and therefore do not meet the minimum standards provided for in this article, he shall order all further work to be stopped until the defective condition is remedied. If the work is not stopped or the defective condition is not remedied, then the inspector shall void the permit and instruct the builder, in writing, to replace the street, alley, easement or sidewalk in an approved manner. 
(b)  If, within fifteen (15) days after written notice by the inspector, the builder fails to replace the street, alley, easement or sidewalk opening in an approved manner, the director may order the work done by the city employees or by city contract and shall bill and collect from the builder the cost of restoring the street, alley, easement or sidewalk opening to its original condition. If the replacement work is done by city employees or by city contract, the cost thereof shall be deducted from the deposit made by the builder under this article or a claim on the builder's bond shall be filed. If the deposit is insufficient to restore the street, alley, easement or sidewalk to its original condition, the builder shall reimburse the city for such replacement by paying such difference to the city. 
(c)  If the director orders uncompleted work to be completed by city employees or by city contract, then all permits issued to that builder shall be cancelled and no permit shall be issued under this article to that builder for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the director's order. In the event that the city is unable to collect from the builder for the costs incurred by the city for the completion of the work, then that builder shall not be issued any permit until such costs are paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ C, C1, 11-25-69)  
Secs. 32-24—32-28. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC IMPROVEMENTS AND WORK 
 
Sec. 32-29. - Sidewalks. 
(a)  Where a building is to be constructed and it faces one or more streets, it shall be required by the city that sidewalks shall be constructed and installed on all sides of the building fronting or siding a street, except that, where more than fifty (50) per cent of the block fronting on the street where a proposed residential building is to be constructed has been developed without sidewalks, such residential construction shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
(b)  All sidewalks that are constructed in this city shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall comply with the minimum specifications set out in Exhibits "C" and "E" referred to in section 32-19. 
(c)  There shall be a minimum space of six (6) feet between the curb of the adjacent street and the edge of the sidewalk nearest the curbline, unless a lesser distance is approved by the director in writing. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ G1, G2, 11-25-69; Ord. No. 70-120, § 1, 6-16-70)  
Sec. 32-30. - Culverts. 
(a)  Concrete culverts shall be installed in all open ditches adjacent to all public streets which are adjacent to the construction site where a building or driveway permit is obtained for the purpose of constructing a building or driveway, unless otherwise approved by the director in writing. 
(b)  The size and type of culvert to be installed shall be as specified by the director of public works and in accordance with city specifications. 
(c)  The flow line of the culvert shall be determined by the director of public works or by a registered professional engineer and approved by the director of public works. 
(d)  Inspection of the culvert installation shall be made by the city inspector, and no building or driveway permit shall be finally approved until such time as the culvert installation is approved and accepted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, § G3, 11-25-69)  
Sec. 32-31. - Openings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make any opening in any street, alley, easement or sidewalk in the city for any purpose, including the making of any connection with a city sewer, without first having obtained written permission for such openings from the director and obtaining a permit from the building inspection department. The permit shall specify the number of and type of openings to be made. Such openings shall comply with all requirements of this article, and construction must be completed within thirty (30) days. 
(b)  No permit required by this section shall be issued unless the builder first files with the building inspection department a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) cash bond for each opening. In lieu of the cash deposit, the builder may submit a written bond or an insurance policy in the amount required for each opening or for each instance where the deposit is required. The company that issues the insurance policy or bond shall be a reputable company doing business in, and under the laws of, the State of Texas. Such insurance policy or surety bond shall be valid from the date of the issuance of the permit and shall expire not less than five (5) years from the date of final completion of the construction project. 
(c)  Any person having a franchise to do business in the city may, under circumstances creating an emergency or upon request of a city official, open a street, alley, easement or sidewalk for the purpose of making emergency repairs or the installation of facilities, without complying with the provisions of this section. In any event, utility companies holding franchises to do business in the city shall be exempt from payment of fees for such openings. 
(d)  The builder shall be required to place barricades around or near any opening or construction project, and such barricades shall be properly located, lighted and maintained in order to maintain minimum safety to the public, either as pedestrians or in vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 69-254, §§ E5, H, 11-25-69) 
Cross reference— Boring streets for purpose of making sewer taps, § 37-6; street excavations by persons holding pipeline franchises, § 27-23 et seq.  
Sec. 32-32. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Section 2 of Ord. No. 95-218, adopted Nov. 7, 1995, repealed § 32-32 in its entirety. Former § 32-32 provided for construction of off-street parking areas and derived from Ord. No. 69-254, § I, adopted Nov. 25, 1969; Ord. No. 70-120, § 3, adopted June 16, 1970; and Ord. No. 73-295, § 1, adopted Nov. 27, 1973. See § 9-7.1 of this Code for similar provisions.  
Sec. 32-33. - Driveways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct or permit to be constructed, as a means of ingress and egress to and from the public streets, ways, alleys and easements within the city, any driveway, other than such as are necessary for ingress and egress to and from the property to be served and as shall be deemed as not interfering with or creating unsafe conditions for traffic on the public streets, ways, alleys and easements. The director of public works and the traffic director shall jointly determine, upon application to be made to the director of public works for a permit to construct a driveway as such means of ingress and egress, whether the construction of the driveway proposed in the application is necessary and safe as provided herein for such ingress and egress. The directors of public works and traffic shall arrive at their determinations pursuant to the requirements and standards prescribed in this article, and in accord with applicable, generally accepted principles and techniques of civil engineering and of public traffic control. No permit shall be issued in contravention of the express requirements or restrictions of this section and without the written approval of both the director of public works and the traffic director. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by the decision under this section of the directors of public works and traffic shall have the right of appeal to the city council within fourteen (14) days after the refusal of the permit application. The city council, upon such appeal, shall determine whether or not the proposed driveway is necessary for ingress and egress to and from the property to be served, at a hearing, either in regular or special meeting of the council, as it shall determine from case to case, of which the applicant shall have notice by certified return receipt mail. Within seven (7) days after such hearing, the city council shall enter and file with the city secretary an order either affirming or reversing the appealed action. 
(c)  All plats approved by the planning and zoning commission shall conform with the requirements and standards of this section, except where different, applicable requirements and standards are provided by another effective ordinance or ordinances. 
(d)  The herein prescribed dimensions shall be observed in the issuance of permits for and the construction of driveways: 
(1)  Minimum width of driveway opening: Ten (10) feet. 
(2)  Maximum widths of driveways: 
a.  On thirty (30) foot to fifty (50) foot lot or parcel frontage: Twenty (20) feet net clearance. 
b.  On fifty (50) foot and more lot or parcel frontage: Thirty-five (35) feet net clearance. 
(e)  A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall separate the outer edges of the entrances of any two (2) driveways opening onto any public street, way, alley or easement. 
(f)  No driveway in the city shall be permitted to open into or within thirty-five (35) feet of the extended curbline's intersection of the nearest public street, way or alley intersection, or if there is no intersection of two (2) or more curblines thereat, within thirty-five (35) feet of the nearest point of intersection of the traveled portions of such public streets, ways or alleys. 
(g)  Every driveway shall, as nearly as practicable, be of the same materials and standards as the public street, way, alley or easement abutting thereon, or of approved equals and as fixed by current Driveway Construction Materials and Methods Specifications, prepared by the director of public works and filed with the city secretary. 
(h)  For the purpose of processing any driveway permit application, the personnel of the department of building inspection are hereby designated as the duly authorized representatives of the director of public works, subject to his direction in all matters appertaining thereto. It shall be the responsibility of such personnel to handle all such applications with the traffic director. 
(i)  Every driveway permit application shall be accompanied by a complete, scaled plat of the existing premises, a scaled plan of the proposed driveway, a description and quantity list of materials to be used, and such other plans and specifications as the director of public works may require to ascertain the exact construction proposed. 
(Ord. No. 1818, § 1, 6-14-66; Ord. No. 67-1995, § 1, 8-8-67) 
Cross reference— General requirements for driveways for multifamily residential developments, § 9-2(4); driveway required for mobile home located outside mobile home park, § 21-50; limitation on driveways in mobile home parks, § 21-65. 
 
 
 
DIMENSIONS 
Dimension A 	35 ft. Maximum 	Driveway opening 
	10 ft. Minimum 	Driveway opening 
Dimension B 	20 ft. Minimum 	
	45 ft. Maximum 	
Dimension C 	15 ft. Desirable 
10 ft. Minimum 	In no case shall the beginning of the driveway return "R 3 " encroach on the curved section of an existing intersection return, if the return radius is 25 feet or less, or abutting property. 
Dimension D 		Distance between sidewalk and curbs. 
Dimension E 	10 ft. Minimum 	Commercial property 
	2 ft. Minimum 	Residential property 
Dimension F 	2 ft. Minimum 	
Radius "R 1 " 	25 ft. Maximum 
14 ft. Minimum 	Note: Acute angle intersection—special design problem. 
Radius "R 2 " 	5 ft. Maximum 
2 ft. Minimum 	Where sidewalks are in place, "R 2 " shall not exceed dimension "D", but not greater than 5 feet. When sidewalks extend to back of curb, the maximum radius for driveway curb returns shall depend upon the cross slope and longitudinal slopes of the sidewalk; the details of such construction shall be determined by the director of public works. The two sides of a driveway shall be parallel within the right-of-way limits on all major thoroughfares and on all commercial property. 
Dimension G 		Minimum of 20 feet unobstructed depth for passenger car parking. 
Dimension H 	Paving within R-O-W 	A 3-inch mountable curb shall be constructed whenever the area between the property line and the curb is paved. (Concrete required.) The curb shall be placed adjacent to the property line except when used as a vehicle wheel stop; in which case, it shall be 6-inch concrete curb or similar permanent type wheel stop placed a minimum of 2½ feet from the property line. 
	Paving outside R-O-W 	A 3-inch mountable curb shall be constructed whenever the area behind the property line is to be paved or used for parking. The curb shall be placed adjacent to the property line except when used as a vehicle wheel stop; in which case, it shall be a 6-inch concrete curb or similar permanent type wheel stop placed a minimum of 2½ feet from the property line. 
Dimension I 	20 ft. Minimum 	
Dimension J 	3½ ft. Maximum 	
Dimension K 	8½ ft. Minimum 	Unless distance between property line and curb is less than 10 feet. 
Dimension L 		The location of the curb shall be subject to the approval of the director of public works and the city traffic director. 
Dimension M 		Driveway openings shall not be permitted within the limits of any intersection on major thoroughfares. 
Note: 
 (1)  Permit from director of public works required for any work performed on public right-of-way. 
 (2)  Work to be performed by contractor furnishing bond in the principal sum of $1,000.00 payable to the city conditioned on contractor's failure to repair, per city specifications, any or all damage to city easements, streets, curbs or gutters caused by construction of a driveway, or a cash deposit to be fixed by the director of public works according to the city property to be cut. 
 
(Ord. No. 1818, § 1, 6-14-66)  
Sec. 32-34. - Median openings. 
(a)  Where an opening is to be constructed in the median of a divided street, such median opening shall be located a minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet from the nearest point of an adjacent median opening or street intersection. 
(b)  Standards for design of approved median openings are shown in Table 1. 
(c)  All median openings hereafter constructed shall have a length equal to the width of any intersecting street, if any, plus sixteen (16) feet, or as shown in Table 1, whichever is greater. 
(d)  Every median opening shall, as nearly as practicable, be of the same materials and standards as the public street upon which it is constructed, or of approved equals and as fixed by current construction materials and methods specifications, prepared by the director of public works and filed with the city secretary. 
(e)  Requests for construction of median openings on existing streets shall be submitted in writing to the director of traffic and transportation stating the desired location(s). 
(f)  Variances to the minimum distance of four hundred (400) feet as specified in subsection (a) may be approved by the city council. Such variance shall be placed on the city council agenda under Item 22, "Other Business," for consideration by city council. 
(Ord. No. 81-147, § 1, 8-25-81; Ord. No. 84-120, § 1, 6-19-84)  
Secs. 32-35—32-43. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STREET BANNERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Signs, Ch. 31. 
 
Sec. 32-44. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, a "banner" shall be any sign erected or maintained for any type of advertising or public display on or across a public street, whether it be of a commercial or noncommercial nature. 
(Ord. No. 68-69, § 1, 5-21-68)  
Sec. 32-45. - Permit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct or maintain, or cause or permit to be erected, constructed or maintained, any banner in the city, without first having obtained a permit from the director of public works. Any person desiring such a permit must submit a request to the director of public works, in writing, stating the type and nature of the banner, its size, materials, and the proposed location of the same. The request must be approved by the director before a permit will be issued. A permit shall be required for each location where a banner will be placed along or across a public street. 
(b)  A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall be charged for each permit issued under this section and each permit shall state the location of the banner to be erected. 
(Ord. No. 68-69, §§ 3, 4, 5-21-68)  
Sec. 32-46. - Material and erection requirements. 
Banners placed on or across any public street shall be constructed of cloth or similar material. The banner itself shall be no higher than forty (40) inches and it must be at least thirteen (13) feet above the roadway. Such banner shall not be constructed or erected in any manner so as to constitute a traffic obstruction or hazard. 
(Ord. No. 68-69, § 2, 5-21-68)  
Sec. 32-47. - Maximum time permitted. 
No banner shall be erected or maintained along or across a public street for a period of more than fifteen (15) days. 
(Ord. No. 68-69, § 5, 5-21-68)  
Sec. 32-48. - City not liable for damages caused by banner. 
The city shall not be liable for any damages to any person or persons caused by any manner. 
(Ord. No. 68-69, § 6, 5-21-68)  
Secs. 32-49—32-58. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - PERMIT FOR MAIN GAS PIPELINE EXTENSIONS IN OR PARALLEL TO STREETS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Pipeline transportation, Ch. 27. 
 
Sec. 32-59. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this article, a "main gas pipeline extension" is defined as any gas pipeline extension which runs in or parallel to any street, avenue, parkway, easement or other public property within the corporate limits of the city. This definition shall not be construed to include lines one and one-fourth (1¼) inches in diameter, or less, by which gas is transported from a main line to the consumer, such a line being commonly known as a "service line", and it shall not be necessary to obtain the special permit required by this article in order to lay such a service line. 
(Code 1964, § 24-18)  
Sec. 32-60. - Required. 
No person using or maintaining any gas pipeline, pipes, and other fixtures for the distribution of gas in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other public places within the corporate limits of the city shall build, make, construct or install any main gas pipeline extension within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a permit therefor from the director of public works. 
(Code 1964, § 24-19)  
Sec. 32-61. - Application. 
Application for a permit required by this article shall be made to the director of public works upon a form to be prescribed by him, such form to include a plat or map showing the location of the proposed extension. Such application shall give complete information as to the location, kind and character of the proposed extension, the depth to be installed, the pressure to be carried, and if more than one hundred fifty (150) pounds pressure and less than thirty (30) inches in depth, the reason that it cannot be installed at that depth. 
(Code 1964, § 24-20)  
Sec. 32-62. - Fee. 
There shall be a fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00) for each permit issued by the director of public works for a main gas pipeline extension. 
(Code 1964, § 24-21)  
Sec. 32-63. - Issuance or refusal. 
(a)  If the application for a permit under this article is for an extension for a distance of six hundred (600) feet or less, upon the filing of the application and examination of same by the director of public works, he shall, unless such extension is to carry more than one hundred fifty (150) pounds pressure and is not to be buried at least thirty (30) inches below the surface, or in his opinion the extension would, in other respects, seriously interfere with the public welfare and convenience of the inhabitants of the city, promptly issue a permit. If any application is refused by the director, he shall, within two (2) days, certify same with his recommendation thereon to the city council for its consideration by filing the same with the city secretary. If the application is not approved by the city council, it shall notify the director within seven (7) days after receipt of same of such disapproval and the permit shall not be granted; provided, however, that whenever the city council refuses such permit, the applicant may make written application to the city council, within ten (10) days, for a reconsideration and a personal hearing thereon, and the decision of the city council thereon at such hearing shall be final. 
(b)  If such application is for a distance of more than six hundred (600) feet, the director of public works shall not grant the same without prior approval of the city council. If such permit is denied, the applicant may, within seven (7) days, make written application for reconsideration and a personal hearing thereon, and the decision of the city council at such hearing shall be final. 
(Code 1964, § 24-22)  
Sec. 32-64. - Condition. 
Every permit issued under this article shall be issued on condition that the permittee agrees to lower such line at his own expense, within thirty (30) days of the mailing of written notice by the director of public works to the permittee at the address shown in the application, in the event future street construction or other city improvement projects should require that such line be lowered, in the opinion of the director of public works. 
(Code 1964, § 24-23)  
Secs. 32-65—32-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - STREET RENTAL CHARGE FOR GAS MAINS, PIPES, ETC.[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Pipeline transportation, Ch. 27. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to fix compensation to be paid for use of streets and alleys by utility companies, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175 (12). 
 
Sec. 32-75. - Imposed; amount; when payable. 
Upon the first day of February of each year, every person occupying or using the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks, or other public places in the city with gas mains, pipes and other fixtures for the distribution of gas shall, as a condition to such further occupancy, pay to the city annually for such privilege, a rental equal to two per cent (2%) of the gross receipts received by such person from gas sold and delivered to residential and commercial consumers at residential and commercial rates within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1964, § 24-31) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to make reasonable charge, not exceeding 2% of gross receipts, for use of streets, alleys, etc., by public utilities, V.A.T.S. Tax.—Gen. art. 11.03.  
Sec. 32-76. - Report of gross receipts of payor. 
All persons using or maintaining any gas pipelines, pipes and other fixtures in any of the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks or other places within the corporate limits of the city shall, on the first day of February of each year, file with the city controller a sworn report showing the gross receipts from gas sold and delivered to residential and commercial consumers at residential and commercial rates by such persons within the corporate limits of the city for the preceding year ending December thirty-first. 
(Code 1964, § 24-32)  
Sec. 32-77. - Examinations of books and records of payor. 
The city council may, when it may see fit, have the books and records of any person rendering the statement required in section 32-76 examined by a representative of the city to ascertain whether such statement is accurate, but nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the city from ascertaining the facts by any other method. 
(Code 1964, § 24-33)  
Sec. 32-78. - Receipt for payment. 
Upon receipt of the rental charge imposed by this article by the city, the city controller shall deliver to the person paying the same a receipt therefor, which receipt shall authorize such person to use and occupy the streets, highways, easements, alleys, parks and other public ways of the city in carrying on his business for twelve (12) months from January first of such year. 
(Code 1964, § 24-34)  
Sec. 32-79. - Charge is not a tax, but is additional to taxes. 
The rental charge imposed by this article is not charged as a tax but is made for the privilege now enjoyed by the persons upon whom it is imposed of using the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways of the city in the conduct of their business, and such charge is additional to all ad valorem and franchise taxes and to all taxes of every nature whatsoever against such persons. 
(Code 1964, § 24-35) 
Cross reference— Taxation, Ch. 34.  
Sec. 32-80. - Article grants no relief from other laws and ordinances. 
Nothing in this article is intended to relieve any person of any condition, restriction or requirement imposed by any law or ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 24-36)  
Sec. 32-81. - Article does not grant franchise; cancellation of privileges and refund of rental. 
This article does not grant a franchise to any utility or person to use the streets, easements, alleys, and other public ways and shall never be so construed by the courts or otherwise, and the city reserves the right to cancel the privileges granted hereunder and refund the unearned rentals paid to the city. 
(Code 1964, § 24-37)  
Sec. 32-82. - Right of city to adopt restrictions, regulations, etc. 
The city hereby reserves the right to put into effect at any time other restrictions and regulations as to the erection and maintenance of gas mains, pipes, and other appurtenances in the streets, easements, alleys and other public ways of the city and from time to time to require such gas mains, pipes and other property, equipment and fixtures as it may deem proper to be removed on such terms as the city may deem proper. 
(Code 1964, § 24-38)  
Secs. 32-83—32-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - SALE OF GOODS ON STREETS OR SIDEWALKS 
 
Sec. 32-89. - Sale of goods on streets or sidewalks prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to expose for sale or to sell any foodstuffs of any nature, any liquids, or any other goods, wares, or merchandise, either exposed or enclosed in boxes, crates, barrels, baskets or any other container or any animals, on any sidewalk, street, parkway, esplanade or any other public property or any property dedicated to public use. It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, build, maintain or occupy any booth, stand or other structure, either permanent or temporary, or occupy any vehicle upon any sidewalk, street, parkway, esplanade or other public property or any property dedicated to public use for the purpose of carrying on or furthering any private business, enterprise, calling, vocation or profession. 
(Ord. No. 89-92, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 32-90. - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Persons selling or dispensing frozen dessert products that are fully wrapped, enclosed and contained in individual wrappers or containers from sanitary and such other refrigerated vehicles approved and licensed by the director of public health pursuant to this Code, provided that such vehicles shall be operated in full compliance with the health, food, drug and sanitary provisions of this Code and the applicable statutes of the state; 
(2)  Persons selling and/or installing any nonelectrical apparatuses for the sale of newspapers on sidewalks, or other public property or property dedicated to public use, provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to install any apparatus for the sale of newspapers where such apparatus will impede or interfere with the free passage of persons on sidewalks or other public property. The permission granted by this subsection shall apply to the extent of the city's right, title, and interest only; 
(3)  Persons acting in compliance with a franchise granted by the city; 
(4)  Religious, charitable and non-profit organizations that have obtained approval from city council to sell merchandise or products on public property; or 
(5)  Transactions in public buildings or on public property in which transaction the city is a party. 
(Ord. No. 89-92, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 32-91. - Enforcement. 
This article shall be enforced by any police officer of the City of Pasadena in addition to being enforced by other applicable departments and employees of the city. 
(Ord. No. 89-92, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 32-92. - Penalty. 
Any person convicted for a violation of this article shall be fined in a sum not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 89-92, § 1, 6-13-89)  
ARTICLE VII. - RIGHTS-OF-WAY MANAGEMENT 
 
Sec. 32-93. - Findings and purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to: 
(a)  Assist in the management of facilities placed in, on or over the public rights-of-way in order to minimize the congestion, inconvenience, deterioration, visual impact and other adverse effects, and the costs to the citizens resulting from the placement of facilities within the public rights-of-way; 
(b)  Govern the use and occupancy of the public rights-of-way; 
(c)  Assist the city in its efforts to protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
(d)  Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the city; 
(e)  Preserve the physical integrity of the city's streets, utilities and highways; 
(f)  Control the orderly flow of vehicles and pedestrians; 
(g)  Keep track of the different entities using the public rights-of-way to prevent interference between them and the city's utilities; 
(h)  Assist in scheduling common trenching borings and street cuts and other general construction impacting city infrastructure; and 
(i)  Protect the safety, security, appearance, and condition of the public rights-of-way. 
This article may be referred to as the "city public rights-of-way management ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 1, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-94. - Authority; scope. 
This article applies to all persons that place facilities in, on or over public rights-of-way. Compensation for use of the public rights-of-way shall be paid in accordance with all applicable law, including, but not limited to, cable and video service providers, in accordance with the Federal Cable Act, 47 USC § 541, et seq. and Chapter 66 of the Texas Utilities Code; for certificated telecommunication providers providing services within the scope of Chapter 283 and not installing the facilities described in Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code, Chapter 283 of the Texas Local Government Code; for network providers, Chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code; for distributors of natural gas or as otherwise applicable. Texas Tax Code § 182.025; and/or in accordance with Tex. Civil Statute, Art. 1175(1), all as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 2, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-95. - Definitions. 
In this chapter the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
Abandonment shall mean the permanent cessation of all uses of a facility; provided that this term shall not include cessation of all use of a facility within a physical structure where the physical structure continues to be used. By way of example, and not limitation, cessation of all use of a cable within a conduit, where the conduit continues to be used, shall not be "abandonment" of a facility in public rights-of-way. 
Applicant means an applicant for a permit under this chapter. 
Bond means a cash deposit with the city, or a bond executed by the permittee, as principal, and a corporate surety authorized to transact business, as such, in Texas on condition that the permittee will promptly and fully comply with all provisions of this chapter and will reimburse the city or any utility company for all costs associated with the removal of the facility and the restoration of the facility site if removed by the city or a utility company pursuant to this chapter. A surety bond must be in a form approved by the director and be accompanied by a power of attorney or other convincing evidence of the issuing agent's authority to act for the surety company. A surety bond issued by a company that is not listed on the then current listing of accepted sureties on federal bonds as published by the United States Treasury Department must also be accompanied by a certificate of qualification as a surety from the Texas Board of Insurance Commissioners. 
Cable or video service provider (or CVSP) means the same as defined in Texas Utilities Code, § 66.002 (3) and (11) [any entity that has been issued a certificate of franchise authority by the Public Utility Commission of Texas to offer cable or video service]. 
Certificated telecommunications provider (or CTP) means the same as defined in Tex. Loc. Gov't § 283.002(2) [any entity that has been issued a certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority, or service provider certificate of operating authority by the Texas Public Utility Commission to offer local exchange telephone service]. 
City means The City of Pasadena, Texas. As used throughout, the term city also includes the designated agent of the city. 
City property means all city buildings, infrastructure, bridges, parks, golf courses, parking lots and other real property that is not dedicated for utility or street transportation purposes. 
Direction of the city means all ordinances, laws, rules, resolutions, and regulations of the city that are not inconsistent with this article and that are now in force or may hereafter be passed and adopted. 
Director means the director of public works department or such director's designee. 
Excavation means an activity that cuts, penetrates, or bores under any portion of the public way that has been improved with a paved surface for street, sidewalk, surface drainage, or related public transportation infrastructure purposes. The term includes but is not limited to cutting, tunneling, jacking and boring in the public rights-of-way. The term does not include a transportation improvement; however, it does include excavations that are undertaken for the improvement or maintenance of publicly owned utility systems, such as water and wastewater lines and facilities. The term also does not include utility maintenance or other activities that are performed within already existing structures, vaults, conduits, or cableways that are located underneath street improvements, provided that any access required for the work is obtained through existing manholes, or other previously constructed entrances that may be utilized without cutting or penetrating any pavement or other street improvement. 
Facilities means any and all of the wires, cables, fibers, duct spaces, manholes, poles, conduits, underground and overhead passageways, other equipment, structures, plant and appurtenances, monitoring well and its associated apparatus designed and constructed to measure or monitor the quality or movement of foreign substances, elements, chemicals, fluids, or pollutants below the surface of the ground; or any mechanical device, method, or apparatus designed and constructed to obtain a sample soil core boring from a depth of greater than one (1) foot below the surface of the ground, for the purpose of removing soil for environmental quality or geotechnical testing and all associated physical equipment placed in, on or under the public rights-of-way. 
Hazardous substance shall mean any hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance, material, waste, pollutant, or contaminant. The term shall specifically include natural gas, petroleum and petroleum products and their bi-products, residue, and remainder in whatever form or state. The term shall also be interpreted to include any substance which, after release into the environment, will or may reasonably be anticipated to cause death, disease, injury, sickness, illness, behavior abnormalities or, genetic abnormalities. 
Maintenance means non-emergency repairs of a facility located in the right-of-way without causing any damage to the surface of pavement and no more than one (1) foot of excavation of unpaved areas and no more than three (3) hours during any non-peak traffic period. 
Network provider means the same as defined in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 284.002(13) [either (A) a wireless service provider; or (B) a person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or installs on behalf of a wireless service provider: (i) network nodes; or (ii) node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a network node]. 
Peak traffic periods means 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays. 
Permit means a current and valid authorization issued under Section 4 of this article and as defined in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code § 284.002(15) [a written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required from a municipality before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over which the municipality has police power authority]. 
Permittee means a person who holds a permit: the singular term includes the plural if two (2) or more persons jointly hold the permit, where applicable. 
Person means a natural Person (an individual), corporation, company, association, partnership, firm, limited liability company, joint venture, joint stock company or association, and other such entity. 
Public rights-of-way means the same as defined in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 283.002(6) and 284.002(18) and Texas Utilities Code, § 66.002 (8) [the area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley, waterway, or utility easement in which the municipality has an interest.] The term does not include the airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications. The term does not include city property or a private easement. 
Public street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every way which is held by the city in fee or by easement or dedication when any part thereof has been accepted by the city, or has been opened to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel; the term "public street" shall include any designated state or federal highway or road or any designated county road which is under the administrative control of the City for maintenance, repair, or vehicular traffic control purposes. 
Roadway means that portion of a public street which is improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the curb, berm, or shoulder. In the event that a public street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, "roadway" means each such roadway separately. 
Sidewalk means that portion of a public street which is between the curb lines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines and is improved and designed for, or is ordinarily used for, pedestrian travel. 
Transportation improvement means the portion of work within the finished paved surface of a public right-of-way undertaken by or pursuant to contract for the state or a political subdivision of the state for the purpose of improving or maintaining public right-of-way transportation and related storm drainage and street lighting infrastructure, but does not include any activity, such as connection to other facilities, that cuts, penetrates, or bores under a public right-of-way after installation of new paving. 
Utility means the city or any other person, whether franchised as a public utility or not, who is lawfully authorized to construct, install, or maintain any pipes for transportation of gas, liquids, or other materials, or any electrical distribution system, or any telephone or intelligence distribution systems, or any cable television transmission system, in, on, under or over a public street. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 3, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-96. - Municipal authorization required. 
(a)  (1)  Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way, shall pay a five hundred dollars ($500.00) construction permit application fee (except CTPs and CVSPs and their contractors to the extent exempted by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, Chapter 283, and Texas Utilities Code, Chapter 66, respectively, or network providers to the extent limited by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 284) and shall file an application for such construction permit with the director and shall abide by the terms and provisions of this article pertaining to use of the public rights-of-way and with an applicable design manual adopted by the city. If there are additional direct costs to the city in processing the applications, the city may recover those from the applicant prior to the issuance of the construction permit. Persons exempt from obtaining a permit are not exempt from providing evidence of compliance with applicable city ordinances and regulations and providing timely, advance reasonable notice to the city of construction activities in the public rights-of-way in a form as reasonably determined by the city, provided that such reasonable notice to the city shall require substantially similar information as would be provided by applicants for construction permits in the public rights-of-way. 
(2)  With such application, applicants shall submit to director of the department of public works written applications for such permits identifying the applicant and all of the applicant's affiliates that may have physical control of facilities within the public rights-of-way, with a map of the proposed installations, general description of the services to be provided, a construction schedule, and a general description of the effect on public rights-of-way as detailed in subsection (h) below. 
(b)  Any person, except a CTP, CVSP, or network provider prior to placing, reconstructing, or altering facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way, must obtain separate municipal authorization from the city, such as a license agreement or franchise, as may be applicable. 
(c)  Any person with an unexpired franchise agreement or other unexpired person specific authorization from the city ("grant") to use the public rights-of-way for fixed and certain specific time that is still in effect at the time this article is adopted shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant (except to the extent the police power regulations in such grant are inconsistent with this article, in which event, this article will control, as determined until the grant expires or until it is terminated in accordance with its terms or by mutual agreement of the city and the person, or is terminated as otherwise provided for in law). 
(d)  Prerequisites to issuance of construction permit - each person must register with the city. In order for the city to have a record of the persons owning and having control over the facilities and excavation and boring activities in the public rights-of-way within the city, each such person must register with the city. Registration form can be obtained from the public works department or the city's web site. 
(e)  Provisions of this subsection (e) do not apply to any person with a franchise agreement, CTPs and CVSPs, or network providers. The requirement to obtain a permit or permits applicable to a network provider is as prescribed in Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 284.152 and 284.156. A separate permit is required for each facility. Upon registration of existing facilities as required by this Chapter, permits for the facilities will be issued to the owners at no cost (first time only) with expiration date of one year from the effective date of this chapter of the ordinance. An annual fee will be charged for renewal of permits. Any person seeking to place facilities on, in or over the public rights-of-way after the effective date of this chapter, shall pay construction permit fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and upon completion of construction a permit (renewable annually) will be issued at no charge for the first time. A permit renewal fee will be charged annually, thereafter. Annual permit renewal fee shall be calculated based upon the following fee structure: 
Facilities with a minimum of four (4) feet horizontal and two (2) feet vertical distance from city's utilities and up to seven (7) feet deep shall be charged five hundred dollars ($500.00) for up to one hundred (100) feet of length and $0.10/foot for each additional foot of length. 
Facilities with less than minimum distance from city's utilities as given above or more than seven (7) feet deep shall be charged $700.00 for up to 100 feet of length and $0.15/foot for each additional foot of length. 
In addition to assessment of penalties per section 32-98 of this chapter, failure to renew a registration may result in the (city) restricting the issuance of additional permits until the facility owner has complied with the registration requirements of this article. 
(f)  Except CTPs and CVSPs, no transfers, sales or assignments can be made without written consent of the city. If a person is granted permission to transfer, sell or assigns its assets, in part or all, located in public rights-of-way incident to a transfer, sale or assignment of the person's assets, the transferee, buyer or assignee shall be obligated to comply with the terms of this article. 
(g)  A permit for any excavation shall be obtained by the owner of the facility. If the owner of a facility will not be making the excavation with its own personnel, then the contractor retained to perform the work shall join with the owner as an applicant in obtaining the permit. Where two or more related excavations are being performed as part of the same project, the application and permit may cover the related work, consistent with the requirements of this chapter. 
(h)  Applications for permits and registration of facilities located within rights-of-ways shall be signed before a Texas Notary Public, notarized and submitted to the Director. The application shall include the following: 
(1)  The name, assumed name, or business name, business type (corporation, partnership, individual/sole proprietor or other) of each applicant; 
(2)  Each applicant's mailing address (and street address if different), telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address; 
(3)  The location, depth, length, and width of each excavation to be made in each block and/or intersection, which may alternatively be set forth on the provided drawings and specifications; 
(4)  The purpose of the excavation, including a description of the facilities to be installed, maintained and/or repaired; 
(5)  The method of excavation; 
(6)  The proposed excavation start date and duration; 
(7)  A statement that each person executing the application is fully authorized to act on the behalf of and bind his principal in executing and filing the application; 
(8)  A statement that each applicant accepts and obligates itself to the following indemnification provisions: 
INDEMNIFICATION 
PERMITTEE AGREES TO INDEMNIFY THE CITY PER THIS ORDINANCE SECTION 14 WHICH PROVIDES: 
(A)  EXCEPT AS TO CTPS, CVSPS, AND NETWORK PROVIDERS, EACH PERSON PLACING FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY SHALL INDEMNIFY AND HOLD THE CITY AND ITS OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES HARMLESS AGAINST ANY AND ALL CLAIMS, LAWSUITS, JUDGMENTS, COSTS, LIENS, LOSSES, EXPENSES, FEES (INCLUDING REASONABLE ATTORNEY'S FEES AND COSTS OF DEFENSE, WHICH EXPENSES SHALL INCLUDE THE REASONABLE VALUE OF ANY SERVICES RENDERED BY ANY EMPLOYEES OF the CITY), PROCEEDINGS, ACTIONS, DEMANDS, CAUSES OF ACTION, LIABILITY, AND SUITS OF ANY KIND AND NATURE, INCLUDING PERSONAL OR BODILY INJURY (INCLUDING DEATH), PROPERTY DAMAGE, OR OTHER HARM FOR WHICH RECOVERY OF DAMAGES IS SOUGHT THAT IS FOUND BY A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION TO BE CAUSED SOLELY BY THE NEGLIGENT ACT, ERROR, OR OMISSION OF THE PERSON, ANY AGENT, OFFICER, DIRECTOR, REPRESENTATIVE, EMPLOYEE, AFFILIATE, OR SUBCONTRACTOR OF THE PERSON, OR THEIR RESPECTIVE OFFICERS, AGENTS, EMPLOYEES, DIRECTORS, OR REPRESENTATIVES, WHILE INSTALLING, REPAIRING, OR MAINTAINING FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. 
(B)  THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED BY THIS SECTION DOES NOT APPLY TO ANY LIABILITY RESULTING FROM THE NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY, ITS OFFICERS, EMPLOYEES, CONTRACTORS, OR SUBCONTRACTORS. IF A PERSON AND THE CITY ARE FOUND JOINTLY LIABLE BY A COURT OF COMPETENT JURISDICTION, LIABILITY SHALL BE APPORTIONED COMPARATIVELY IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE LAWS OF THIS STATE WITHOUT, HOWEVER, WAIVING ANY GOVERNMENTAL IMMUNITY AVAILABLE TO THE CITY UNDER STATE LAW OR THE CITY CHARTER AND WITHOUT WAIVING ANY DEFENSES OF THE PARTIES UNDER STATE LAW OR THE CITY CHARTER. 
(C)  A PERSON OR CITY SHALL PROMPTLY ADVISE THE OTHER IN WRITING OF ANY KNOWN CLAIM OR DEMAND AGAINST THE PERSON OR THE CITY RELATED TO OR ARISING OUT OF THE PERSON'S ACTIVITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. THE PERSON SHALL PROMPTLY PROVIDE A DEFENSE TO ANY SUCH CLAIM, DEMAND, SUIT OR SUITS, INCLUDING ANY APPELLATE PROCEEDINGS BROUGHT IN CONNECTION THEREWITH. 
(D)  THE PROVISIONS OF THIS INDEMNITY SECTION ARE SOLELY FOR THE BENEFIT OF THE CITY AND ARE NOT INTENDED TO CREATE OR GRANT ANY RIGHTS, CONTRACTUAL OR OTHERWISE, TO ANY OTHER PERSON OR ENTITY. 
(E)  UPON FAILURE OF THE PERSON TO COMPLY WITH THE PROVISIONS OF THIS ORDINANCE, AFTER REASONABLE NOTICE BY THE CITY, THE CITY SHALL HAVE THE RIGHT TO DEFEND THE SAME AND IN ADDITION TO BEING REIMBURSED FOR ANY SUCH JUDGMENT THAT MAY BE RENDERED AGAINST THE CITY, TOGETHER WITH ALL COURT COSTS INCURRED THEREIN, THE PERSON SHALL PROMPTLY REIMBURSE THE CITY FOR ATTORNEY'S FEES, INCLUDING THOSE EMPLOYED BY THE CITY IN SUCH CASE OR CASES, AS WELL AS ALL EXPENSES INCURRED BY THE CITY BY REASON OF UNDERTAKING THE DEFENSE OF SUCH SUIT OR SUITS, WHETHER SUCH SUIT OR SUITS ARE SUCCESSFULLY DEFENDED, SETTLED, COMPROMISED, OR FULLY ADJUDICATED AGAINST THE CITY. 
(F)  IN THE EVENT THE CITY IS COMPELLED TO UNDERTAKE THE DEFENSE OF ANY SUCH SUIT BY REASON OF A PERSON'S FAILURE TO PERFORM AS HEREINABOVE PROVIDED, THE CITY SHALL HAVE FULL RIGHT AND AUTHORITY TO MAKE OR ENTER INTO ANY SETTLEMENT OR COMPROMISE OF SUCH ADJUDICATION AS THE CITY COUNCIL SHALL DEEM IN THE BEST INTEREST OF THE CITY, THIS WITHOUT THE PRIOR APPROVAL OR CONSENT OF THE PERSON WITH RESPECT TO THE TERMS OF SUCH COMPROMISE OR SETTLEMENT. 
WHERE APPLICABLE, THE PROVISIONS OF SECTIONS 283.057 AND 284.302 OF THE TEXAS LOCAL GOVERNMENT CODE OR SECTION 66.012 OF THE TEXAS UTILITIES CODE SHALL CONTROL IN LIEU OF THE FOREGOING; ADDITIONALLY, TO THE EXTENT THAT THE APPLICANT HOLDS A CURRENT AND VALID UTILITY FRANCHISE FROM THE CITY, THE INDEMNIFICATION PROVISIONS OF THE FRANCHISE SHALL CONTROL IN LIEU OF THE FOREGOING." 
a.  The name of the owner of the facility; 
b.  The twenty-four-hour telephone number at which each applicant's representative who will respond to emergencies may be contacted; 
c.  The name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number, and e-mail address of a person who is authorized to receive all notices authorized to be given by the city under this chapter to each applicant; 
d.  Confirmation that all materials necessary for construction will be on hand and ready for use so as not to delay the excavation; 
d.  A transmittal number issued by the Texas Underground Facility Notification Corporation evidencing that the applicant has complied with the Texas Underground Facility Damage Prevention and Safety Act or an assurance that the transmittal number will be provided to the director before the excavation commences; 
f.  Evidence of insurance as required in section 32-104 of this chapter; 
g.  Drawings and specifications, as provided in subsection 32-99(d) of this chapter; and 
h.  The work warranty as required by the subsection 32-99(g) of this chapter; 
i.  An application for a permit for an excavation performed pursuant to subsection 32-99(k) of this chapter shall, in addition to the items required above, also include a written statement: 
1.  Explaining the basis for the emergency actions; 
2.  Describing the excavation being performed; 
3.  Describing any work remaining to be performed in the public right-of-way; and 
4.  Stating the time and date when the emergency occurred. 
(i)  It is unlawful to place a steel plate at an excavation without a permit. The director may authorize as a condition of a permit the use of a steel plate as a temporary surface for an excavation. Any such permit shall specify the length of the time the steel plate is allowed to remain in the public right-of-way. It shall be unlawful for any permittee or former permittee to maintain or cause to be maintained a steel plate in the public right-of-way after the time specified in the permit for the excavation at which the steel plate is located. Each steel plate shall be clearly marked with the name of the owner of the steel plate, and a permittee's failure to use a steel plate so marked shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(j)  It is unlawful to close a lane(s) of a public street without a permit issued by the director. Any such permit shall specify the date(s) and length of the time of the lane closure. Failure to comply with this provision shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 4, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-97. - Administration and enforcement. 
(a)  The director, police, fire and other appropriate agencies shall administer and enforce compliance with this article. Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance will result in enforcement action per section 32-98 of this chapter. 
(b)  A person shall report information related to the use of the public rights-of-way that the director requires in the form and manner reasonably prescribed by the director. 
(c)  The director shall report to the city council upon the determination that a person has failed to comply with this chapter. 
(d)  In addition to other persons, the provisions of this chapter are applicable to excavations made by or on behalf of other governmental entities and subdivisions, to the extent of the city's police power jurisdiction. The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to the city and its contractors. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to give any person or permittee any property right in or to the use of the public rights-of-way. All permits issued and held under this chapter shall be subject to the superior right of the public to control the use of the public rights-of-way and ensure the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 5, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-98. - Penalties. 
Any person convicted for a violation of any provision, restriction, requirement or prohibition of chapter 32, for which no specific penalty is provided, shall be fined in a sum of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offence shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 6, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-99. - Construction obligations. 
A person is subject to reasonable police power regulation of the city to manage its public rights-of-way in connection with the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities in the public rights-of-way, pursuant to the city's rights as a custodian of public property based upon the city's historic rights under state and federal laws. Such regulations include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(a)  At the city's request, a person shall furnish the city accurate and complete information relating to the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities performed by the person in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  A person may be required to place certain facilities within the public rights-of-way underground according to applicable city requirements, in accordance with the city's design manual, and consistent with the requirements applicable to a designated historic district or design district, unless the person makes a compelling demonstration that, in any specific instance, this requirement is not reasonable, feasible or equally applicable to other similar users of the public rights-of-way. 
(1)  The undergrounding of facilities is encouraged. In any event, facilities shall be installed underground where existing utilities are already underground. A minimum of four (4) feet of horizontal and (2) feet of vertical distance shall be maintained between the City of Pasadena utilities and facilities and if this distance cannot be maintained, a request for variance can be submitted to the director. A variance will be considered if it will not adversely effect public safety or cause the city to incur excessive maintenance costs. The utility owning the underground facilities shall make a reasonable determination as to whether space is available to accommodate the new facilities. A negative determination shall not relieve the person of the responsibility to underground its facilities in underground utility areas. To the degree reasonably feasible previously installed aerial facilities shall be placed underground in concert, and on a cost-sharing basis, with other utilities when such other utilities convert from aerial to underground construction. 
(2)  Underground conduits and ducts shall be installed in the public rights-of-way between the adjacent property line and the curb line unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(3)  Conduits and ducts shall be installed parallel with the curb line and cross the public rights-of-way perpendicular to the public rights-of-way centerline unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(4)  Ducts and conduits shall be installed by trenchless excavation or directional boring when placing these facilities under paved public rights-of-way or a driveway crossing to avoid motor vehicle interruptions, unless otherwise directed by the city. 
(c)  A person shall perform excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements, including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirement of trenchless technology if it determines that, based upon information provided to the city by the person, the particular field conditions such as known or unknown or unknown underground conditions that may necessitate open cut warrant a waiver. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to minimize interference with the use of public and private property. Any plant or facility placed within the public rights-of-way which is suspended in any manner above ground shall either be placed on existing poles or equipment or be suspended at a height not less than twenty-two (22) feet above ground level, unless otherwise approved by the director, but in no event less than fifteen (15) feet, except to the extent state law controls. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to minimize any such interference. 
(d)  (1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (d)(3) below, a person must obtain a permit, as reasonably required by applicable city codes, including section 39-93 (requiring a permit from the traffic and transportation department), seventy-two (72) hours prior to any excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the person's facilities, which seventy-two (72) hours may be waived or altered by the city for good cause shown by the applicant. All permit applications shall be accompanied by the certification of a professional engineer licensed in Texas that the drawings, plans and specifications submitted with the application comply with applicable technical codes, rules and regulations when required by state law. A Person shall submit a traffic control plan signed and sealed by a professional engineer licensed in the state of Texas at the director's discretion based upon traffic density, duration for street closure and public safety. 
(2)  Bonding will be required as in subsection 32-99(m) below, and insurance as in section 32-104. 
(3)  A construction permit is not required for routine maintenance that does not require excavation of the public rights-of-way or which does not block traffic lanes or sidewalks during peak traffic periods between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. on weekdays, or for more than three hours during any non-peak traffic period. The failure of the person to request and obtain a permit from the city prior to performing any of the above listed activities in, on or over any public right-of-way, except in an emergency as provided for in subsection 32-99(j) below, will subject the person to a stop-work order from the city and enforcement action pursuant to the city's Code of Ordinances. If the person fails to act upon any permit within one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid unless extended by the city upon a showing of good cause. Upon expiration of a permit, a person shall be required to obtain another permit pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(4)  A person shall furnish the director with construction plans, specifications and maps using the standard format adopted by the department of public works including the location and proposed routing of new construction or reconstruction at least three (3) business days before beginning construction or reconstruction that involves an alteration to the surface or subsurface of the public rights-of-way, unless otherwise approved by the director. A person may not begin construction until the location of new facilities and proposed routing of the new construction or reconstruction and all required plans and specifications have been approved in writing by the city, which approval will not be unreasonably withheld, taking due consideration of the surrounding area and alternative locations for the facilities and routing. 
(5)  These construction plans shall show all features within the public rights-of-way that would affect the placement of the proposed facilities such as, but not limited to, existing underground and aerial wires or conduits, ducts, poles, wires, pipes, sewer, water lines, and cables as well as their ownership; traffic signal and street light poles; fire hydrants; driveways; curbs, inlets and drains; sidewalks, wheelchair ramps; and trees and large shrubs. Drawings shall be drawn to an appropriate scale of no larger than one (1) inch equals fifty (50) feet using the standard format adopted by the public works department. State plan coordinates shall be shown for benchmarks, curb lines, and structures. Drawings shall show horizontal dimensions from the curb line and elevations. If typicals are used, they shall reference the station numbers for which they are to be applied. Traffic control plans shall be in conformance with the latest revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(6)  A person shall use its best efforts to coordinate joint trenching with any other persons and/or public utilities which may be constructed in and along the same public-rights-of-way in a time frame reasonably similar to the persons construction time table. The department of public works may mandate such coordination to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(7)  To the extent known, plans for ongoing repair, maintenance, and improvements which involve cutting into paved city roads or streets shall be submitted to the department of public works on an annual basis, no later than April 1 of each year, and updated based upon any changes. This does not require any proprietary information, such as equipment or customer specific information. Such information may be designated confidential, and to the extent allowed by law, will be kept confidential by the city. Alternatively, a person may meet with the appropriate representative of public works each calendar quarter to provide such plans to the extent known. 
(8)  Once all required permits are issued, the departments of public works and the department of traffic and transportation shall be notified in writing or via e-mail or facsimile at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance that construction in the public rights-of-way is ready to proceed by a person or its representative. Information signs (at least 3 ft. × 3 ft. in size) stating the identity of the person doing the work, their telephone number, shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur forty-eight (48) hours prior to the beginning of work in the public rights-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring and/or until permanent repairs are completed. 
(9)  Person owning a gas line, high pressure hazardous material, petroleum pipeline or facilities shall provide the area residents and businesses located within one-half (½) mile area at least ten (10) calendar days written notice prior to start of any construction and/or maintenance, or other substantial activity. A Pasadena Police Officer is required to be present during the time of construction and/or maintenance. This requirement does not apply to emergencies, routine inspections and maintenance, by the person, its agents, employees or contractors on person's pipeline(s), gas lines or facilities. 
(10)  Erosion control measures and advance warning signs, markers, cones, and barricades must be in place before work begins. A person may be required to show proof of engineered plans relating to stormwater and erosion when applicable or a letter stating a person is not required to provide such plans. A person shall be responsible for storm water management erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines, as applicable. 
(11)  Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. unless the traffic and transportation department grants prior approval. All lane closures shall comply with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways. Arrow boards will be required on lane closures with all barricades, advance warning signs, and thirty-six (36) inches reflector cones placed according to the specifications of the city. Excepting emergency conditions, working hours in the public rights-of-way are limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, work to be performed after 6:00 p.m. on Monday through Friday or on Saturday must be approved by the traffic and transportation department in advance. Directional boring is permitted only Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. No work in the public rights-of-way shall be performed except for emergencies, on Sunday's or on holidays. 
(12)  Without affecting the legal relationship between person and its contractors, a person is responsible for the workmanship and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor. 
(13)  If additional poles and existing aerial utility route are required, a Person shall negotiate with the utility company for the installation of the needed poles in accordance with existing statutes and regulations. 
(e)  Within fourteen (14) days of completion of excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of facilities or other work in the public rights-of-way, a person shall temporarily restore and repair the public rights-of-way in accordance with section 32-99 of the Code of the City of Pasadena, any other applicable sections of the Code, and most current revision of the city's design criteria manual. Within thirty (30) calendar days after completion of work in the public rights-of-way, the person shall permanently restore, replace, relay and/or repair the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other city facilities and infrastructure located on, in or under any public rights-of-way that has been excavated, altered or damaged by reason of the excavation, construction, installation, expansion, reconstruction, relocation, alteration, removal, maintenance or repair of the person's facilities in accordance with existing standards of the city in effect at the time of the work. Upon a showing of good cause, the city may at its sole discretion extend the time for restoration and repair of the public rights-of-way under this subsection. Unless the person provides a recent dated photograph or a video tape of the public rights-of-way before the construction, the condition of the public rights-of-way before construction should be presumed in good condition, subject only to reasonable wear and tear, as determined by the director. 
Whenever a person shall disturb or destroy any right-of-way markers or monuments, it shall restore the same within thirty (30) days after construction has ceased. A person shall furnish three (3) sets of drawings, blueline or blackline, detailing the restored monumentation. state plane coordinates shall be shown for all monumentation (existing or restored). The drawings shall be signed (original signature), sealed and certified, by a registered professional land surveyor, and delivered to the director of public works for approval, no later than thirty (30) days after construction has ceased. 
(f)  Upon failure of a Person to perform any such repair or replacement work after five (5) days written notice has been given by the city to the person, and in the event repairs have not been initiated during such five day period, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by the person, its contractors or agents. The city may, at its discretion, for good cause, alter the five day period. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the person shall reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. Failure to comply with the provisions of this article may also result in enforcement action per section 32-98 of this chapter. 
(g)  Should the director reasonably determine, within one year from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, curbs, drainage systems, irrigation systems, landscape treatment or other city facilities and infrastructure located on, in or under any public rights-of-way requires additional restoration, replacement or repair work to meet existing standards of the city, a person shall perform such additional restoration, replacement or repair work to the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein and within five (5) days of written notice from the director stating the repairs necessary. 
(h)  Notwithstanding the foregoing in subsection 32-99(g), if the director determines that the failure of a person to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances, and the person failed to respond within a reasonable time specified by the city. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, a person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city within thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the city invoice. 
(i)  If the director declares an emergency with regard to the health and safety of the citizens and requests by written notice the removal or abatement of facilities, a person shall remove or abate the person's facilities by the deadline provided in the director's request. The person and the city shall cooperate to the extent possible to assure continuity of service. If the person, after notice, fails or refuses to act, the city may remove or abate the facility, at the sole cost and expense of the person, without paying compensation to the person and without the city incurring liability for damages. 
(j)  Except in the case of customer service interruptions and imminent harm to property or persons ("emergency conditions"), a person may not excavate the pavement of a street or public rights-of-way without first complying with city requirements. In the event of an emergency condition before the excavation is initiated, the city department of public works shall be notified by the person at the twenty-four-hour city response telephone number. The person shall also notify any other city, state, or federal authority required under law to be notified. The person shall apply for a permit for the excavation within twenty-four hours after the initiation of the excavation or, if the city offices are then closed, within twenty-four hours after the offices of the city are first opened subsequent to the initiation of the excavation. The person shall comply with the requirements of city standards and of this article for the restoration, replacement or repair of the public rights-of-way. 
(k)  Before excavation activities are initiated, written door hanger notification will be required to all area residents and businesses within one-fourth (¼) mile that may be impacted by such activities at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to start of such activities. A copy of the notification shall also be provided to the city secretary and the director. 
(l)  Within one hundred twenty (120) days of completion of each new permitted section of a person's facilities, the person shall supply the city with a complete set of "as-built" drawings for the segment, but excluding customer specific, proprietary or confidential information and as reasonably prescribed by the city as is described below, and as may be allowed by law. Such "as-built" maps may be corrected and revised construction plans. In the event the facilities were built as specified in the originally submitted plans, the person may certify to the city that there were no changes. In case "as built" drawings are not available, the city may, at its discretion, accept in lieu of "as-built" drawings, any reasonable alternative which provides adequate information as to the vertical depth, linear location and size of facilities in the public rights-of-way, which may include direct on-line access to such information. 
To the extent the person's customary as-built format will confirm without economic impracticability, a person shall furnish the city "as-built" drawings as follows: drawings shall show ownership of conduits, ducts, poles, cables, and any other facilities placed within the public rights-of-way. Drawings shall be drawn to a scale of 1 in. equals 20 ft. on 24 in. × 36 in. sheets and 1 in. equals 40 ft. on 11 in. × 17 in. sheets using the standard format adopted by the department of public works. A person shall provide one set of all such drawings on diskette in Autocad or Microstation format drawn to full scale and one set of blue or blacklined "as-built" drawings on vellum or Mylar to the director of the department of public works and one set of drawings and diskettes to the director of the traffic and transportation department. State plane coordinates shall be shown for bench marks, curb lines, and structures. Drawings shall show horizontal dimensions from the curb line and elevations. 
All persons who have facilities in the public rights-of-way existing as of the date of this article shall register with the city as provided in subsection 32-96(d). Those (persons) who have not provided "as-built" drawings shall do so within the same period of time, unless the Person demonstrates an economic impracticality to provide such "as-built" drawings in the above format. The city may waive such "as-built" drawings as to existing facilities, for good cause. The "as-built" drawings submitted by the person shall be integrated into the city's GIS system within ninety (90) days from the date they are received and no permits shall be issued during that period of time except for emergencies. 
If "as-built" drawings submitted under this section include information expressly designated by the person as a trade secret or other confidential proprietary information protected from disclosure by state or federal law, the director may not disclose that information to the public without the consent of the person, unless otherwise required by an opinion of the Attorney General pursuant to the Texas Open Records Act, as amended, or by a court having jurisdiction of the matter pursuant to applicable law or as otherwise required by law. This subsection may not be construed to authorize a person to designate all matters as confidential or as trade secrets. 
(m)  Except as to CVSPs to the extent modified by Texas Utilities Code, Chapter 66, the director shall require reasonable bonding requirements of a person, as are required of other entities that place facilities in the public rights-of-way. Such bonding amounts will be reasonably determined by the director depending on several factors as to public safety and risk of harm to persons and property. Such factors include: (1) the nature of the construction project (overhead, trenchless, open trench), (2) type of facility (gas, electric, water, telecommunications, cable, fiber), (3) past construction history of person in the city as to any damage claims, repairs and timeliness of construction. The city may in a non-discriminatory manner waive or reduce the amount of the bond in the event the person provides written documentation as to reserves available to compensate the city for damages, and has a two-year history of no claims, or damages to city property by the city, or of prompt payment on such claims. 
(n)  In determining whether any requirement under this section is unreasonable or unfeasible, the director or his/her designee shall consider, among other things, whether the requirement would subject the person or persons to an unreasonable increase in risk or service interruption, or to an unreasonable increase in liability for accidents, or to an unreasonable delay in construction or in availability of its services, or to any other unreasonable technical or economic burden. 
(o)  A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall, at all times, employ the standard of care attendant to the risks involved to prevent actions, failures and accidents which may cause damage, injury or nuisance to persons, the public, the facilities of other persons, or to any city structures or structures owned by other persons located in the public rights-of-way. A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall observe all federal and state statutes and regulations and all applicable city ordinances and safety codes. A person issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall keep and maintain its facilities in a safe and suitable condition, and in good order and repair. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 7, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-100. - Inspections of excavations. 
(a)  With the exception of emergencies as provided in subsection 32-99(j), all excavations shall be inspected by the city. Based upon the depth and location of the excavation and as specified in the permit, inspections may be required during the performance of the excavation, immediately upon completion of the excavation or both. 
(b)  Consistent with the applicable laws and established engineering design criteria the director may, in addition to or in lieu of the inspections called for under subsection (a), require that a permittee at the permittee's expense for any excavation over four (4) feet deep, retain a professional engineer licensed in Texas to observe the excavation and, based upon the observations, to provide written certification upon completion of the excavation stating that the public right-of-way has been restored in accordance with the drawings and specifications and all other applicable technical requirements. The director's discretion would be based on the following non-exclusive factors as to public safety and risk of harm to persons and property: 
(1)  The depth and proximity of the construction project relative to other underground facilities, 
(2)  Type of facility (gas, electric, water, telecommunication, cable, fiber), 
(3)  Past construction history of person in the city as to any damage claims, repairs and timeliness of construction). 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 8, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-101. - Conditions of public rights-of-way occupancy. 
(a)  In the exercise of governmental functions, the city has first priority over all other users of the public rights-of-way. The city reserves the right to lay sewer, gas, water facilities, and any other pipe lines or cables and conduits, and to do underground and overhead work, and have attachments and require, restructuring or changes in the city's aerial facilities in, across, along, over or under a public street, alley or public rights-of-way that may be occupied by a person, and to change the curb, route or grade of sidewalks and streets, to the fullest extent allowed by law. 
(b)  The city shall assign the location in or over the public rights-of-way among competing users of the public rights-of-way with due consideration to the public health and safety considerations of each user type, and to the extent the city can demonstrate that there is limited space available for additional users, may limit new users, as allowed under state or federal law. As a priority, each user of the public rights-of-way will be allowed one alignment on one side of the street for placement of its facilities, provided there is adequate space available. In the event an additional alignment(s) or both sides of the street has been requested by a user, the director of public works and the director of traffic will grant such request, provided there is adequate space available and the requestor has demonstrated the financial or technical impracticability of the use of the requestor's single alignment or use of only one side of the street. 
(c)  If the city authorizes abutting landowners to occupy space under the surface of any public street, alley, or public rights-of-way, the grant to an abutting landowner shall be subject to the rights of the previously authorized user of the public rights-of-way. 
(d)  If the director gives written notice, a person shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of a person's facilities that are in the public rights-of-way within one hundred twenty (120) days, except in circumstances that require additional time as reasonably determined by the city based upon information provided by the person. For projects expected to take longer than one hundred twenty (120) days to remove, relocate, change or alter, the Director will confer with the person before determining the alterations to be required and the timing thereof. The director shall give notice whenever the city has determined that removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the construction, operation, repair, maintenance or installation of a city governmental public improvement in the public rights-of-way. This section shall not be construed to prevent a person's recovery of the cost of relocation or removal from private third parties who initiate the request for relocation or removal, nor shall it be required if improvements are solely for beautification purposes without prior joint deliberation and agreement with the person. On a non-discriminatory basis, the director and a person may agree in writing to different time frames than those provided above if circumstances reasonably warrant such a change. 
(e)  If the person fails to relocate facilities in the time allowed by the director in this section, the person may be subject to liability to the city for such delay and as set forth in the City Codes or Ordinance, now or hereafter enacted. 
(f)  A person may trim trees or other vegetation in or over the public rights-of-way as needed for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the city. Should the person, its contractor or agent, fail to remove such trimmings within twenty-four (24) hours, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt of a bill from the city, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within thirty (30) working days. A person shall not be responsible for tree trimming or removal, except as to the trimming required to construct, maintain or restore utility service. 
(g)  A person shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures, if the requesting party provides written notice of no less than ten (10) days, except for good cause shown. The expense of these temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The person may require prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move. 
(h)  In the event a person's use of the facilities is discontinued, the person shall be notified by the city and thereafter shall forthwith remove its facilities therefrom unless specifically permitted to continue the same, and on the removal thereof shall restore, repair or reconstruct the street area where such removal has occurred, and place the street area where such removal has occurred in the condition prior to the removal, as determined by the city. In the event of failure, neglect or refusal of the person, after thirty (30) days' notice by the director to repair, improve or maintain such street portion, the city may do such work or cause it to be done, and the reasonable cost thereof as determined by the city shall be paid by the person and collection may be made by court action or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 9, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-102. - Monitoring wells, geotechnical and environmental test boring facilities. 
(a)  Permit required for nongovernmental use. 
(1)  By authority of a permit issued by the director under the provisions of this article, a permittee may install and maintain a facility at a designated location upon a public street. A separate permit is required for each separate facility to be installed. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or maintain a facility unless there is a permit for the facility. 
(3)  A single application for permits for multiple facilities may be filed with the director provided that the physical location of each proposed facility logically arises out of, and reasonably pertains to, the scheme and plan of a single environmental testing or geotechnical project. A separate permit is required for each separate facility to be installed. The requirements of this section governing the issuance of a permit must be fulfilled for each separate facility. 
(b)  Location on public street. 
(1)  Facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in such a manner as to comply with the provisions of this section. 
(2)  A facility may not be located on, extend on to, nor intrude upon any portion of a roadway or a sidewalk unless the director determines that no reasonable alternative site exists. In any instance in which a facility must be situated on a sidewalk or roadway, it shall be installed entirely below the surface and covered in such a manner as to allow normal use of the roadway or sidewalk. 
(3)  A facility may not create any hazardous condition or obstruction of vehicular or pedestrian travel upon a public street. 
(4)  The design and location of a facility shall include all reasonable planning to minimize potential harm, injury, or interference to the public in the use of the public streets. 
(5)  Upon its removal a facility shall be properly closed by cementing or other sound engineering practice to prevent injuries to persons at the surface and underground contamination. 
(c)  Design standards, plans. 
(1)  The director may approve and promulgate design, construction, and maintenance standards for facilities, including development of a design manual. Such standards shall be so drafted as to ensure that facilities do not impose a significant risk of personal injury or property damage. 
(2)  Consistent with this chapter and the standards promulgated under subsection (1), above, the director may adopt and promulgate standardized plans and specifications that permittees may utilize for facilities. Each applicant shall either adopt an approved plan or submit his own detailed plans prepared under the seal of a professional engineer registered as such in Texas with his application. Each set of plans shall show the design, dimension, and depth of the facility, the manner in which it will be placed, and the process that will be used for its removal and closure. 
(3)  The director may require the revision of any applicant's plans to conform to the standards promulgated or adopted in this section as a condition of granting a permit. 
(d)  Other permits. The granting of a permit shall neither excuse the permittee from obtaining nor obligate the city to grant any other permit or license that may be required by law for the installation or construction of the facility. 
(e)  Intent of the section. It is the intent of the city council by the enactment of this section to regulate the surface and subsurface use and occupancy of public streets and rights of way by permittees and to establish a permitting mechanism and fee in accordance with the city's general power of control and regulation of public streets and highways as provided by law. However, this chapter shall not be construed as an assertion by the city of any property rights in derogation of abutting land owner's fee simple title and rights incident therein, in those cases where the city does not own fee simple title. It shall be the duty of permittees hereunder to notify all abutting landowners, whether title is held in fee or easement, of the permittee's receipt of the permit provided for in this section and to obtain any requisite permission to access said land. 
(f)  Transfer; assignment; termination. A permit shall apply only to the designated location specified thereon, and no deviation from the plans for the facility as approved by the director may be made without the prior written consent of the director. Permits issued shall be persona1 to the permittee and his agents and employees. No assignment by any permittee of any obligation assumed or right granted under this section shall be effective unless and until expressly consented to in writing by the director. A permittee may terminate a permit prior to its designated expiration date by giving thirty (30) days' written notice to the city, removing the facility, and restoring the site as provided in this chapter. Such termination shall not release or excuse the permittee or his insurers from any obligation which arose in any manner by virtue of the acceptance or enjoyment of the permit. 
(g)  Street repairs; utilities. 
(1)  The permittee shall upon five (5) days' prior written notice from the city or any utility company and at the sole expense of the permittee, temporarily remove his facility for such period of time as may be reasonably specified in the notice to accomplish any street or utility installation, repairs, replacement, or expansion. 
(2)  In the event of any emergency condition in which the notice required in subsection (a) may not be given without creating an inconvenience to the public or in the event that the permittee fails to comply with a notice given pursuant to subsection (a), then the city or the utility company may remove the facility and close the bore site at the sole risk and expense of the permittee by utilizing whatever reasonable force or means are necessary therefore. 
(3)  Each permittee shall bear all costs associated with the relocation of lines and other improvements belonging to the city or any utility that may require relocation for the installation or maintenance of the permittee's facilities. The city or the utility, as applicable, may require a deposit for the estimated cost of the work prior to the commencement of the relocation work. 
(h)  Maintenance; inspection. 
(1)  The permittee shall maintain his facility in a good and safe condition and repair at all times. The permittee shall assume all risk of loss or damage to the facility, and neither the city nor any other person shall have any obligation to replace or repair the same under any circumstances. 
(2)  The director, the health officer, the utility officials, or any other inspector designated by the city shall have the right to inspect any facility at any time without the necessity of prior notice. Upon at least one-hour notice given during regular hours (8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, holiday excepted) the permittee shall open the facility and make a sample of the well contents available to the health officer. 
(3)  The director may notify the permittee in writing of any deficiency under this chapter in the physical condition of any facility and shall afford the permittee a reasonable period of time to correct the same. In determining the length of time to be allowed the director shall consider the danger, if any, which is posed by the deficiencies and the nature of the changes or repairs required. In the event that the director is of the opinion that the continued existence of the facility will constitute a significant threat to the safety of the public pending its repair, he may order it removed at once. 
(i)  Site work; restoration. 
(1)  At all times during the installation of any facility within the public street, the roadway(s) shall be kept open by the permittee for vehicular traffic in a reasonable manner, and no obstruction of the sidewalks shall be permitted so as to prevent the use thereof by pedestrians for an unreasonable period of time. Dirt and other material removed during the installation of the facility within the public street shall not be permitted to remain on the public street, and said dirt and other material from the site shall be removed at the risk, liability, and expense of the permittee. All excavations or obstructions of any kind which are permitted during the period of permittee's construction shall be properly barricaded and shall also be well illuminated during the night time. 
(2)  Upon revocation or expiration of the permit, if not renewed, the permittee shall remove the facility, close the bore site, and restore the bore site to its previous condition at his sole expense. Any facility which has not been removed by the tenth day next following the revocation or expiration of the permit shall be deemed abandoned, and it may be removed by the city without notice to the permittee. Removal of the facility by the city shall be at the sole expense of the permittee and shall be recorded as a charge against the permittee's restoration bond. 
(j)  Notices. 
(1)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to the city under this article may be given by certified United States Mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed to the director at his then current mailing address. 
(2)  Any notice required or permitted to be given to a permittee under this article may be given by certified United States Mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee at the mailing address designated in the permit application. A permittee may amend the mailing address specified in his application from time to time, upon written notice to the director given in the manner specified in this section. 
(3)  Notices mailed as provided in this section shall be deemed given upon their deposit in the United States Mail. 
(k)  Indemnity. By the acceptance of a permit the permittee, his assigns, successors, and representatives agree, obligate, and bind themselves to indemnify the city, its officers, agents, and employees per section 32-106 of this chapter. 
(l)  Insurance; bond. 
(1)  Each permittee shall as a condition of the permit hereunder furnish to the director written evidence that He has in effect a policy of public liability insurance in the amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence for property damage and two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injuries or death occurring in relation to, or arising in any manner out of, the permittee's installation, maintenance operation, or removal of the facilities covered thereby in the public streets. The policy shall be issued by a carrier authorized to do business in the state, shall designate the city as an additional insured, and shall include a cross-liability endorsement. 
(2)  Each permittee shall furnish the bond in an amount and form determined by the director to be adequate to cover the cost of removal of his facilities, closure of the well bore, and restoration of the public street to its condition prior to the installation. 
(3)  The bond and evidence of the insurance need not be furnished with the application; however, they shall be furnished to the director prior to the issuance of the permit. The proof of insurance shall include a covenant extending through the term of the permit that the insurer will provide the director ten (10) days' prior written notice in the event of cancellation or nonrenewal thereof. 
(m)  Application. 
(1)  Any person who desires a permit shall make application therefore to the director. Each application shall set forth and include the following: 
a.  The name of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, or association, then the applicant shall provide evidence of its existence, of its authority to maintain the facility, and of the authority of the persons signing the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
b.  The applicant's mailing address for any written notice required or permitted to be given under this article. 
c.  An acknowledgment that the applicant is aware of the terms and provisions of this section and will be acceptance of a permit, if awarded, agree to be bound thereby and by all amendments adopted thereto in all respects in the exercise of the rights granted under the permit. 
d.  The name, home and business street dresses,, and home, and business telephone number of two (2) persons who may be contacted by the city, any utility, or other person in the event of any emergency regarding the facility. 
e.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any agents who will perform any work for the permittee regarding the installation, monitoring, or removal of the facility. 
f.  The accurate location of the proposed facility which shall be depicted on a diagram prepared by a registered professional surveyor or engineer. 
g.  Any other information specified pursuant to the terms of this article or reasonably required by the director to review and act upon the application. 
(2)  Such application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant and shall be submitted in any reasonable number of copies that the director may specify. 
(3)  Applications for renewal permits shall be submitted in the same form and manner as original applications, provided that any information furnished in a prior application which has not changed may be adopted by reference. 
(n)  Issuance; review. 
(1)  The director shall forward copies of the application to his designated engineer for review pursuant to subsections (2) and (3) prior to his acting on the application. Upon its approval under subsections (2) and (3) the director shall review and approve the application for the facility unless he finds: 
a.  That the application or required information furnished therewith is incomplete; 
b.  That any statement on the application or information furnished therewith is false in any material respect; or 
c.  That the applicant's proposed facility does not comply in any manner with the requirements of this article and regulations adopted hereunder. 
(2)  Each application shall also be referred by the director to the designated engineer who shall review the proposed facility to determine whether its installation or maintenance will interfere with any existing or planned improvement of the city or any existing or planned improvement by a utility that is known by the city. The director, as a condition for award of the permit, may require an applicant to furnish, from utilities that are not owned, operated, or maintained by the city, letters of release; or leases, licenses, or other instruments that have been duly recorded in the office of the county clerk where the facility is to be situated, evidencing the applicant's right to utilize the site. The engineer may, by his own action, refer copies of the application to utilities for comment or may require the applicant to do so. The engineer shall approve the application unless he/she find that the proposed facility will interfere with existing or planned lines or improvements of the city or any utility. The approval of the application by the engineer and utility official shall not be deemed to excuse any obligation of a permittee to pay relocation fees as provided in subsection (g)(3) of this chapter. 
(3)  The director may condition his award upon any revisions that the engineer determines to be necessary in the design of the proposed facility to meet the standards specified in this chapter. Additionally, the director shall condition his award upon the furnishing-of any requirement of this chapter which was not submitted with the application. The amount of the bond shall be specified by the director. 
(o)  Fees. 
(1)  A nonrefundable fee of three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) is hereby imposed for each original application. 
(2)  The nonrefundable fee provided for in subsection (1) of this section, plus an additional nonrefundable processing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) levied on the second and each additional proposed facility is hereby imposed for each original application for permits for multiple facilities. 
(3)  A nonrefundable fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) is hereby imposed for each renewal permit. 
(4)  All fees shall be tendered to the director with the application by certified or cashier's check on a bank that is authorized to transact business in the State of Texas. 
(p)  Term. The term of each permit, whether original or renewal that is issued hereunder shall be one (l) year from the date of its issuance. 
(q)  Revocation. 
(1)  Any permit issued under this article may be revoked in accordance with the provisions of this section if it is found that: 
a.  Any material statement made or information furnished with or in. connection with the review of the. application was false; 
b.  Conditions have changed such that the use of the permittee's facility no longer meets all applicable requirements of this chapter or such that the permittee's use interferes with the public's use of the public streets or creates any hazardous condition thereon; 
c.  The permittee has failed to comply with any provision of this chapter; or 
d.  The facility has not been installed in compliance with the permit within ninety (90) days after its issuance, unless an extension is granted for good cause by the director; 
e.  Whenever the director receives reliable information that grounds for revocation of a permit exist, he shall investigate the facts. If he finds that there are grounds for revocation of a permit, he shall give a written notice to the permittee setting forth the specific grounds upon which the permit in question may be revoked; 
(2)  The director may revoke any permit in whole or in part upon ten (10) days' notice to the permittee if he determines that the facility should be removed or relocated to accommodate any widening, realignment, or extension of the public streets or other public improvements or utility improvements. The director may also revoke a permit for which the insurance or bond has been cancelled or has expired without renewal, after five (5) days' written notice and failure of the permittee to replace the insurance or bond. 
(3)  The revocation of a permit under this section shall not release or excuse the permittee or his insurers or sureties from their duty to remove the facility or any other obligation which arose by virtue of the acceptance or enjoyment of the permit. 
(r)  Other appeals. Except as provided in subsection (q)(2), any decision of the director under this article may be appealed, by a permittee or applicant, to the director upon written notice of appeal given to the director within ten (10) days after the permittee receives notice of the decision from the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 10, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-103. - Discontinuation of use of a facility. 
(a)  Upon discontinuation of use of a facility owned by a person in public rights-of-way, the person shall submit a plan for removal of the facility to the director. The person is required to start removal of the facility within ninety (90) days from the date of approval of the plan at the owner's sole expense. Removal of the facility shall be completed within a year (three hundred sixty-five (365) calendar days) from the start date. The person shall notify the director of the start date of removal. The entire removal process of a facility shall be inspected by the city. The facility owner shall be invoiced by the city at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per day for inspections. 
(b)  In the event that the director does not direct the removal of the non-operating facility, the person, by its notice of discontinuation of use to the city, shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the facility by the city or another person at such third party's cost. 
(c)  If the person fails to remove all or any portion of an non-operating facility as directed by the director within the required time period as provided in subsection 32-103(a), the city may perform such removal and charge the cost of the removal against the person that owns the facility. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 11, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-104. - Insurance requirements. 
(a)  Except as to CVSPs to the extent modified by Texas Utilities Code, Chapter 66, a person shall obtain and maintain insurance in the amounts reasonably prescribed by the director with an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of Texas acceptable to the city. A person shall furnish the director with proof of insurance at the time of the request for construction permits. The director reserves the right to review the insurance requirements and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and limits when the director determines that changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the industry or the person require adjustment of the coverage. For purposes of this section, the city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the State of Texas or letters written by the person in those instances where the state does not issue such letters, and in all such instances, the person that self-insures shall provide written documentation as to substantially the same coverage, claims process and defense to the city as would be provided by an insurance carrier as required herein, all as may be detailed in the information provided to the city. However, for the director to accept such self-insurance coverage the person must demonstrate by written information that it has adequate financial resources to be a self-insured entity as reasonably determined by the city, based on financial information requested by and furnished to the city. The city's current insurance requirements are described in Exhibit "A" attached hereto. 
(b)  A person shall furnish to the director, at no cost to the city, copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required by this section. The city may request the deletion, revision or modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations or exclusions, unless the policy provisions are established by a law or regulation binding the city, the person, or the underwriter. If the city requests a deletion, revision or modification, a person shall exercise reasonable efforts to pay for and to accomplish the change. 
(c)  The insurance certificate required under subsection (b) shall: 
(1)  Name the city of and its officers, employees, board members and elected representatives as additional insured for all applicable coverage; 
(2)  Provide for thirty (30) days' notice to the city for cancellation, non-renewal, or material change; and 
(3)  Provide that notice of claims shall be provided to the director by certified mail. 
(d)  A person shall file and maintain proof of insurance with the director. An insurance certificate obtained in compliance with this section is subject to city attorney approval. The city may require the certificate to be changed to reflect changing liability limits. A person shall immediately advise the city attorney of actual or potential litigation that may develop may affect an existing carrier's obligation to defend and indemnify. 
(e)  An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the person and the city. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies. 
(f)  The policy clause "other insurance" shall not apply to the city if the city is an insured under the policy. 
(g)  A person shall pay premiums and assessments for the insurance required under this section. A company which issues an insurance policy has no recourse against the city for payment of a premium or assessment. Insurance policies obtained by a person must provide that the issuing company waives all right of recovery by way of subrogation against the city in connection with damage covered by the policy. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 12, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-105. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  Existing facilities. Any and all existing facilities currently operating, either by previous permit or permission issued by the city, shall automatically be governed by the terms and provisions of this chapter as of the effective date of this chapter except as to those persons in the public rights of way pursuant to unexpired city grants, which person's activities in the public rights-of-way shall be governed by section 32-96(c). All owners or operators of existing, operating and non-operating, permitted and unpermitted facilities shall, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this chapter, file with the director a registration form for each facility listing the name and address of the owner or the operator, the location, type and proposed life span of the facility, and any other information the director shall find reasonable to properly manage the public rights-of-way. All unpermitted owners or operators of said facilities, except CTPs and CVSPs shall, within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of registration of the facility, obtain a permit for said facility or shall have removed said facility from the public rights-of-way and restored said site. Failure to register each existing, operating and non-operating facility, to obtain a permit for each facility or to remove each facility, within the time periods provided for herein, shall be unlawful and shall subject the owner or the operator of said facility to a penalty of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day during the continuance of the violation. The city shall have the right to remove each non-complying unlawful facility after the passage of ten days following the date of non-compliance and the city shall have the right to institute a civil suit for damages, costs of removal and restoration, and attorney fees against the owner or the operator of said non-complying unlawful facility. The existence of any penalty and costs levied against an owner or the operator of a facility shall serve as a bar to future issuance, to the owner or the operator, of a permit provided by this chapter until all such penalties and costs are paid in full. 
(b)  The permit required under the provisions of this section shall not apply to the city, Harris County, the State of Texas, or any of their respective departments, employees, agents, or contractors acting upon the orders of an appropriate official for the purpose of obtaining immediate information for the alleviation or prevention of imminent danger or harm to the public health or the environment; for the purposes of responding to a trial or appellate court order or injunction; or for the purpose of the preparation of, or in response to, pre-trial discovery for civil and criminal actions. This exception to the permit required by this subsection shall specifically not be available, to non-governmental persons or entities operating under an administrative or court order or directive issued by the Texas Water Commission, the Environmental Protection Agency, or their respective successor or subsidiary agencies, for the purpose of identification and remediation of toxic waste sites or for voluntary and independent exploratory or preventative environmental investigations not subject to such orders or directives. Anyone operating under this permit exemption (except the city) will be required to submit the required information for permit and incident report to the director within forty-eight (48) hours after completion of work. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 13, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-106. - Indemnity. 
(a)  Except as to CTPs, CVSPs, and network providers, each person placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall indemnify and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable attorney's fees and costs of defense, which expenses shall include the reasonable value of any services rendered by any employees of the city), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the negligent act, error, or omission of the person, any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the person, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or representatives, while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the public rights-of-way. 
(b)  The indemnity provided by this section does not apply to any liability resulting from the negligence of the city, its officers, employees, contractors, or subcontractors. If a person and the city are found jointly liable by a court of competent jurisdiction, liability shall be apportioned comparatively in accordance with the laws of this state without, however, waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or the city charter and without waiving any defenses of the parties under state law or the city charter. 
(c)  A person or city shall promptly advise the other in writing of any known claim or demand against the person or the city related to or arising out of the person's activities in the public rights-of-way. The person shall promptly provide a defense to any such claim, demand, suit or suits, including any appellate proceedings brought in connection therewith. 
(d)  The provisions of this indemnity section are solely for the benefit of the city and are not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. 
(e)  Upon failure of the person to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, after reasonable notice by the city, the city shall have the right to defend the same and in addition to being reimbursed for any such judgment that may be rendered against the city, together with all court costs incurred therein, the person shall promptly reimburse the city for attorney's fees, including those employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred by the city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether such suit or suits are successfully defended, settled, compromised, or fully adjudicated against the city. 
(f)  In the event the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any such suit by reason of a person's failure to perform as hereinabove provided, the city shall have full right and authority to make or enter into any settlement or compromise of such adjudication as the city council shall deem in the best interest of the city, this without the prior approval or consent of the person with respect to the terms of such compromise or settlement. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 14, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-107. - Severability. 
The provisions of this article are severable. However, in the event this article or any procedure provided in this article becomes unlawful, or is declared or determined by a judicial, administrative or legislative authority exercising its jurisdiction to be excessive, unenforceable, void, illegal or otherwise inapplicable, in whole or in part, the remaining and lawful provisions shall be of full force and effect and the city shall promptly promulgate new or revised provisions in compliance with the authority's decision or enactment. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 15, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-108. - Governing law. 
This article shall be construed in accordance with the City Code(s) in effect on the date of passage of this article to the extent that such Code(s) are not in conflict with or in violation of the Constitution and laws of the United States or the State of Texas, subject to the city's ongoing authority to adopt reasonable police power based regulations to manage its public rights-of-way, pursuant to sections 32-99 and 32-101 or as otherwise provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 16, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-109. - Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way. 
The city may institute all appropriate legal action to prohibit any person from using the public rights-of-way unless the person has complied with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 17, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-110. - Construction permit acceptance. 
Each construction permit application to use the public rights-of-way shall contain, or have attached, the following: 
"By this application for a construction permit to use the Public Rights-of-Way, I, as the lawful representative of ____________________ (not the contractor but a representative of the Facility Owner with authority to bind the Owner), hereby agree to use the City's Rights-of-Way under the terms and conditions approved by the City of Pasadena by City Public Rights-of-Way Management Ordinance (Ordinance No. ______). 
	      Name 
      Title 
      Date 
 	 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 18, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Sec. 32-111. - Effective date. 
This article becomes effective immediately upon passage and publication required by law. 
(Ord. No. 09-062, § 19, 3-17-09; Ord. No. 17-116, § 1(Exh. A), 8-15-17)  
Chapter 33 - SWIMMING POOLS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Section 1 of Ord. No. 94-153, adopted August 23, 1994, repealed Ch. 33, Arts. I, II, §§ 33-1, 33-2, 33-18—33-44, which pertained to swimming pools and derived from Ord. No. 1733, §§ 1—4, adopted November 30, 1965; Ord. No. 68-39, § 1, adopted March 12, 1968; Ord. No. 81-228, § 1, adopted December 1, 1981 and Ord. No. 85-210, § 2, adopted October 29, 1985. Section 2 of Ord. No. 94-153, added a new Ch. 33 to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference— Amusements, Ch. 5; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 33-1.001. - Adoption. 
The City of Pasadena adopts the standards of construction and maintenance for swimming pools as hereinafter set out and pursuant to the provisions of Sec. 214.101 of the Local Government Code and Chapters 757, Pool Enclosures, and 341, Sanitation and Environmental Quality, of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.002. - City repair. 
(a)  The city may repair, replace, secure, or otherwise remedy an enclosure or fence that is damaged, deteriorated, substandard, dilapidated, or otherwise in a state that poses a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  The city can require the owner of the property on which the swimming pool or enclosure or fence is situated, after notice and hearing as provided in Local Government Code Sections 214.001(c) and (d), to repair, replace, secure, or otherwise remedy an enclosure or fence of a swimming pool if the city determines it violates the minimum standards adopted under this chapter. 
(c)  If the enclosure or fence is on unoccupied property or is on property occupied only by persons who do not have a right of possession to the property, the city shall give notice to the owner, in accordance with the procedures set out in Local Government Code Sections 214.0001(c) and (d), (section 33-1.005 (b) (c) herein) of the municipality's action to repair replace secure, or otherwise remedy an enclosure or fence of a swimming pool. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.003. - Liens and repairs. 
If the city incurs expenses under this chapter, the municipality may assess the expenses on, and the municipality has a lien against, unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the swimming pool or the enclosure or fence is situated. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to the property reimburses the municipality for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the lien is recorded in the office of the county clerk in the county in which the property is situated. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the swimming pool or the enclosure or fence is situated, the amount of expenses incurred by the municipality, and the balance due. The lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real property to which the municipality's lien attaches. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.004. - Fines. 
For violations of the provisions of this chapter the violator may be fined not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each day the violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.005. - Inspections and notice. 
(a)  The city health inspector, acting under the authority granted by this chapter may enter any unoccupied premises at a reasonable time to inspect, investigate, or enforce the powers granted under this chapter. After providing a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours' notice to the occupant, a municipal official, agent, or employee, acting under the authority, granted by this chapter may enter any occupied premises to inspect, investigate, or enforce the powers granted under this chapter. A municipality and its officials, agents, or employees shall be immune from liability for any acts or omissions not knowingly done that are associated with actions taken in an effort to eliminate the dangerous conditions posed by an enclosure or fence that is damaged, deteriorated, substandard, dilapidated, or otherwise in a state that poses a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare and for any previous or subsequent conditions on the property. 
(b)  Before the eleventh day after the date the building is secured, the municipality shall give notice to the owner by: 
(1)  Personally serving the owner with written notice; 
(2)  Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post office address; 
(3)  Publishing the notice at least twice within a ten-day period in a newspaper of general circulation in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown; or 
(4)  Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown. 
(c)  The notice must contain: 
(1)  An identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property on which it is located; 
(2)  A description of the violation of the municipal standards that is present at the building; 
(3)  A statement that the municipality will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and 
(4)  An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the municipality's securing of the building. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.006. - Conflicts in construction.[2] 
Any conflicts between the construction guidelines set out herein and the guidelines of "The BOCA Basic Building Code 1978" as adopted by the city for other construction shall be resolved with the standards required hereunder shall control. 
(Ord. No. 94-152, § 3, 8-23-94) 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Any previously adopted specific reference within this section to the BOCA Building Code, the BOCA National Building Code or the BOCA Basic Building Code is changed to read as per the relative section of the NFPA 5000 Building Construction and Safety Code. See § 9-60. 
 
Sec. 33-1.007. - License fee. 
All nonprivate swimming pools in the city limits shall be licensed as hereinafter set out with a license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year except that the director may exempt any governmental entity, religious organization or charitable enterprise from such license fee. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-1.008. - Operations. 
(a)  All pool owners shall have a pool test device that will enable the owner to determine the pH and the free chlorine residue. 
(b)  All nonprivate pools shall be equipped with a first aid kit in good working condition. 
(c)  Day to day operations. 
(1)  All pool owners and/or operators shall adhere to provisions of the pool operations manual of the Texas Department of Health, Division of Environmental Engineering, entitled Swimming Pool Operations. 
(2)  The operations manual will be available for a fee at the city health department. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 
 
Sec. 33-2.001. - Definitions. 
Doorknob lock means a lock that is in a doorknob and that is operated from the exterior by a key, card, or combination and from the interior without a key, card, or combination. 
Dwelling or rental dwelling means one or more rooms rented to one or more tenants for use as a permanent residence under a lease. The term does not include a room rented to overnight guests. 
French doors means double doors, sometimes called double-hinged patio doors, that provide access from a dwelling interior to the exterior and in which each of the two (2) doors are hinged and closable so that the edge of one door closes immediately adjacent to the edge of the other door with no partition between the doors. "French door" means either one of the two (2) doors. 
Keyed dead bolt means a door lock that is not in the doorknob, that locks by a bolt in the doorjamb, that has a bolt with at least a one-inch throw if installed after September 1, 1993, and that is operated from the exterior by a key, card, or combination and operated from the interior by a knob or lever without a key, card, or combination. The term includes a doorknob lock that contains a bolt with at least a one-inch throw. 
Keyless bolting device means a door lock not in the doorknob that locks: 
(1)  With a bolt with a one-inch throw into a strike plate screwed into the portion of the doorjamb surface that faces the edge of the door when the door is closed or into a metal doorjamb that serves as the strike plate, operable only by knob or lever from the door's interior and not in any manner from the door's exterior, and that is commonly known as a keyless dead bolt; 
a.  By a drop-bolt system operated by placing a central metal plate over a metal doorjamb restraint which protrudes from the doorjamb and which is affixed to the doorjamb frame by means of three (3) case-hardened screws at least three (3) inches in length. One-half (½) of the central plate must overlap the interior surface of the door and the other half of the central plate must overlap the doorjamb when the plate is placed over the doorjamb restraint. The drop-bolt system must prevent the door from being opened unless the central plate is lifted off of the doorjamb restraint by a person who is on the interior side of the door; or 
b.  By a metal bar or metal tube that is placed across the entire interior side of the door and secured in place at each end of the bar or tube by heavy-duty metal screw hooks. The screw hooks must be at least three (3) inches in length and must be screwed into the door frame stud or wall stud on each side of the door. The bar or tube must be capable of being secured to both of the screw hooks and must be permanently attached in some way to the door frame stud or wall stud. When secured to the screw hooks, the bar or tube must prevent the door from being opened unless the bar or tube is removed by a person who is on the interior side of the door. 
(2)  The term does not include a chain latch, flip latch, surface-mounted slide bolt, mortise door bolt, surface-mounted barrel bolt, surface-mounted swing bar door guard, spring-loaded night latch, foot bolt, or other lock or latch. 
Multiunit rental complex means two (2) or more dwelling units in one or more buildings that are under common ownership, managed by the same owner, managing agent, or management company, and located on the same lot or tract of land or adjacent lots or tracts of land. The term includes a condominium project. The term does not include: 
(1)  A facility primarily renting rooms to overnight guests; or 
(2)  A single family home or adjacent single family homes that are not part of a condominium project. 
Pool means a permanent swimming pool, permanent wading or reflection pool, or permanent hot tub or spa over eighteen (18) inches deep, located at ground level, above ground, below ground, or indoors. 
Pool yard means an area that contains a pool. 
Pool yard enclosure or enclosure means a fence, wall, or combination of fences, walls, gates, windows, or doors that completely surround a pool. 
Public or semi-public means any pool open to the public for a fee or a membership or belonging to a class or group. 
Self-closing and self-latching device means a device that causes a gate to automatically close without human or electrical power after it has been opened and to automatically latch without human or electrical power when the gate closes. 
Sliding door handle latch means a latch or lock that is near the handle on a sliding glass door, that is operated with or without a key, and that is designed to prevent the door from being opened. 
Sliding door pin lock means a pin or rod that is inserted from the interior side of a sliding glass door at the side opposite the door's handle and that is designed to prevent the door from being opened or lifted. 
Sliding door security bar means a bar or rod that can be placed at the bottom or across the interior side of the fixed panel of a sliding glass door and that is designed to prevent the sliding panel of the door from being opened. 
Tenant means a person who is obligated to pay rent or other consideration and who is authorized to occupy a dwelling, to the exclusion of others, under a verbal or written lease or rental agreement. 
Window latch means a device on a window or window screen that prevents the window or window screen from being opened and that is operated without a key and only from the interior. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
ARTICLE III. - SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS POOL YARD ENCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 33-3.001. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-3.002. - Application. 
This chapter applies to a pool owned, controlled, or maintained by the occupant of a single-family dwelling residence, and these pools will be herein after also referred to as private pools. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.003. - Enclosure for pool yard. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 33-3.005, the owner or occupant of a private dwelling with a private pool shall completely enclose the pool yard with a pool yard enclosure. 
(b)  The height of the pool yard enclosure must be at least forty-eight (48) inches as measured from the ground on the side away from the pool. 
(c)  Openings under the pool yard enclosure may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass under the pool yard enclosure. 
(d)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(e)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(f)  The use of chain link fencing materials is prohibited entirely for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. The use of diagonal fencing members that are lower than forty-nine (49) inches above the ground is prohibited for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. 
(g)  Decorative designs or cutouts on or in the pool yard enclosure may not contain any openings greater that one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in any direction. 
(h)  Indentations or protrusions in a solid pool yard enclosure without any openings may not be greater than normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints [must be] on the side away from the pool. 
(i)  Permanent equipment or structures may not be constructed or placed in a manner that makes them readily available for climbing over the pool yard enclosure. 
(j)  The wall of a building may be part of the pool yard enclosure only if the doors and windows in the wall comply with sections 33-3.006 and 33-3.007. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.004. - Gates. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by sections 33-3.005 and 33-3.006, a gate in a fence or wall enclosing a pool yard as required by section 33-3.003 must: 
(1)  Have a self-closing and self-latching device; 
(2)  Have hardware enabling it to be locked, at the option of whoever controls the gate, by a padlock or built-in lock operated by key, card, or combination; and 
(3)  Open outward away from the pool yard. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (c) and sections 33-3.005 and 33-3.006, a gate latch must be installed so that it is at least sixty (60) inches above the ground, except that it may be installed lower if: 
(1)  The latch is installed on the pool yard side of the gate only and is at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate; and 
(2)  The gate or enclosure has no opening greater that one-half (½) inch in any direction within eighteen (18) inches from the latch, including the space between the gate and the gate post to which the gate latches. 
(c)  A gate latch may be located forty-two (42) inches or higher above the ground if the gate cannot be opened except by key, card, or combination on both sides of the gate. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.005. - Existing pool yard enclosures. 
If a pool yard enclosure was constructed or modified before January 1, 1994, and if the enclosure was in compliance with the provisions of chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena as it existed on January 1, 1994, for pool yard enclosures, sections 33-3.003, 33-3.004 (a)(3), and 33-3.004(b) do not apply to the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.006. - Door. 
A door in a wall used to enclose the pool yard, leading from other than the living quarters to the pool yard must be equipped with a self closing device that will engage the door latch of such door upon closing. Such latch is to be located at least sixty (60) inches above the floor level. Garage areas are not considered living quarters regardless of attachment to the remainder of the residence. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.007. - Window. 
A wall of a residence may not be used as part of a pool yard enclosure unless each window in the wall has a latch or is a permanent window that does not open. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.008. - Building in pool yard. 
The wall of any building that has a door opening onto the pool yard that has no entrance to the building from any other source is exempt from the provision of 33-3.006 and 33-3.007. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.009. - Inspection, repair and maintenance. 
An owner or occupant of a single-family dwelling that owns, controls, or maintains a private pool shall exercise ordinary and reasonable care to inspect, maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the pool yard enclosures, gates, and self-closing and latching devices required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.010. - Compliance with chapter. 
Except as provided by subsection (b) and section 33-3.011, a person who constructs or modifies a pool yard enclosure to conform with this chapter may not be required to construct the enclosure differently by a local governmental entity, common law, or any other law. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.011. - Authority of Texas Board of Health. 
The Texas Board of Health may adopt rules requiring standards for design and construction of pool yard enclosures that exceed the requirements of this article and that apply to all pools and pool yards subject to this article. An owner or occupant of a single family residence with a private pool shall comply with and shall be liable for failure to comply with those rules to the same extent as if they were part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.012. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city may enforce the provisions of this article by any means provided in this chapter or any other legal means of enforcement available to the city. 
(b)  The city or any affected person may bring a civil action against an owner may maintain an action against the owner or property owner for failure to comply with the requirements of this article, and obtain any relief or damages allowed by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.013. - Application to other bodies of water and related facilities. 
The owner of a residence or other property covered by this article is not required to enclose a body of water or construct barriers between the owner's property and a body of water such as an ocean, bay, lake, pond, bayou, river, creek, stream, spring, reservoir, stock tank, culvert, drainage ditch, detention pond, or other flood or drainage facility. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.014. - Effect on other laws. 
(a)  The duties established by this chapter for an owner or occupant of a single family residence are in addition to those of the common law, the Property Code, the Health and Safety Code, the Local Government Code other that Section 214.101, relating to duties to inspect, install, repair, or maintain: 
(1)  Pool yard enclosures; and 
(2)  Pool yard enclosure gates and gate latches, including self-closing and self-latching devices. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.015. - Nonexclusive remedies. 
The remedies contained in this article are not exclusive and are not intended to affect existing remedies allowed by law or other procedure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-3.016. - Interpretation and application. 
The provision of this chapter shall be liberally construed to promote its underlying purpose which is to prevent swimming pool deaths and injuries in this city. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
ARTICLE IV. - MULTIUNIT DWELLING POOL YARD ENCLOSURES 
 
Sec. 33-4.001. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-4.002. - Application. 
This article applies only to: 
(1)  A pool owned, controlled, or maintained by the owner of a multiunit rental complex or by a property owners association; and 
(2)  Doors and windows of rental dwellings opening into the pool yard of a multiunit rental complex or condominium, cooperative, or town home project. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.003. - Enclosure for pool yard. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 33-4.005, the owner of a multiunit rental complex with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool shall completely enclose the pool yard with a pool yard enclosure. 
(b)  The height of the pool yard enclosure must be at least forty-eight (48) inches as measured from the ground on the side away from the pool. 
(c)  Openings under the pool yard enclosure may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass under the pool yard enclosure. 
(d)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(e)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(f)  The use of chain link fencing materials is prohibited entirely for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. The use of diagonal fencing members that are lower than forty-nine (49) inches above the ground is prohibited for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. 
(g)  Decorative designs or cutouts on or in the pool yard enclosure may not contain any openings greater than one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in any direction. 
(h)  Indentations or protrusions in a solid pool yard enclosure without any openings may not be greater than normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints [must be] on the side away from the pool. 
(i)  Permanent equipment or structures may not be constructed or placed in a manner that makes them readily available for climbing over the pool yard enclosure. 
(j)  The wall of a building may be part of the pool yard enclosure only if the doors and windows in the wall comply with sections 33-4.006 and 33-4.007. 
(k)  The owner of a multiunit rental complex with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool is not required to: 
(1)  Build a pool yard enclosure at specified locations or distances from the pool other than distances for minimum walkways around the pool; or 
(2)  Conform secondary pool yard enclosures, located inside or outside the primary pool yard enclosure, to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.004. - Gates. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 33-4.005, a gate in a fence or wall enclosing a pool yard as required by section 33-4.003 must: 
(1)  Have a self-closing and self-latching device; 
(2)  Have hardware enabling it to be locked, at the option of whoever controls the gate, by a padlock or built-in lock operated by key, card, or combination; and 
(3)  Open outward away from the pool yard. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (c) and section 33-4.005, a gate latch must be installed so that it is at least sixty (60) inches above the ground, except that it may be installed lower of: 
(1)  The latch is installed on the pool yard side of the gate only and is at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate; and 
(2)  The gate or enclosure has no opening greater than one-half (½) inch in any direction within eighteen (18) inches from the latch, including the space between the gate and the gate post to which the gate latches. 
(c)  A gate latch may be located forty-two (42) inches or higher above the ground if the gate cannot be opened except by key, card, or combination on both sides of the gate. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.005. - Existing pool yard enclosures. 
If a pool yard enclosure was constructed or modified before January 1, 1994, and if the enclosure was in compliance with chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena existing on January 1, 1994, for pool yard enclosures, sections 33-4.003, 33-4.004(a)(3), and 33-4.004(b) do not apply to the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.006. - Door. 
(a)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door may not open directly into a pool yard if the date of electrical service for initial construction of the building or pool is on or after January 1, 1994. 
(b)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door may open directly into a pool yard if the date of electrical service for initial construction of the building or pool is before January 1, 1994, and the pool yard enclosure complies with subsection (c), (d), or (e) as applicable. 
(c)  If a door of a building, other than a sliding glass door or screen door, opens into the pool yard, the door must have a: 
(1)  Latch that automatically engages when the door is closed; 
(2)  Spring-loaded door-hinge pin, automatic door closer, or similar device to cause the door to close automatically; and 
(3)  Keyless bolting device that is installed not less than thirty-six (36) inches or more than forty-six (46) inches above the interior floor. 
(d)  If French doors of a building open to the pool yard one of the French doors must comply with subsection (c)(1) and the other door must have: 
(1)  A keyed dead bolt or keyless bolting device capable of insertion into the doorjamb above the door, and a keyless bolting device capable of insertion into the floor or threshold; or 
(2)  A bolt with at least a three-fourths-inch throw installed inside the door and operated for the edge of the door that is capable of insertion into the doorjamb above the door and another bolt with at least a three-fourths-inch throw installed inside the door and operated from the edge of the door that is capable of insertion into the floor or threshold. 
(e)  If a sliding glass door of a building opens into the pool yard, the sliding glass door must have: 
(1)  A sliding door handle latch or sliding door security bar that is installed not more than forty-eight (48) inches above the interior floor; and 
(2)  A sliding door pin lock that is installed not more than forty-eight (48) inches above the interior floor. 
(f)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door that opens into a pool yard from an area of a building that is not used by residents and that has no access to an area outside the pool yard is not required to have a lock, latch, dead bolt, or keyless bolting device. 
(g)  A keyed dead bolt, keyless bolting device, sliding door pin lock, or sliding door security bar installed before September 1, 1993, may be installed not more than fifty-four (54) inches from the floor. 
(h)  A keyed dead bolt or keyless dead bolt, as described by section 33-2.001, installed in a dwelling on or after September 1, 1993, must have a bolt with a throw of not less than one inch. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.007. - Window and window screens. 
A wall of a building constructed before January 1, 1994, may not be used as part of a pool yard enclosure unless each window in the wall has a latch and unless each window screen in a window in the wall is affixed by a window screen latch, screws, or similar means. This section does not require the installation of window screens. A wall of a building constructed on or after January 1, 1994, may not be used as part of a pool yard enclosure unless each ground floor window in the wall is permanently closed and unable to be opened. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.008. - Building in pool yard. 
Each door, sliding glass door, window, and window screen of each dwelling unit in a residential building located in the enclosed pool yard must comply with sections 33-4.006 and 33-4.007. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.009. - Inspection, repair, and maintenance. 
(a)  An owner of a multiunit rental complex or a rental dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or town home project with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool shall exercise ordinary and reasonable care to inspect, maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the pool yard enclosures, gates, and self-closing and self-latching devices required by this chapter and within the control of the owner or property owners association. 
(b)  An owner of a multiunit rental complex or a rental dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or town home project with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool shall exercise ordinary and reasonable care to maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the window latches, sliding door handle latches, sliding door pin locks, and sliding door security bars required by this chapter and within the control of the owner or property owners association after request or notice from the tenant that those devices are malfunctioning or in need or repair or replacement. A request or notice under this subsection may be given orally unless a written lease applicable to the tenant or written rules governing the property owners association require the request or notice to be in writing. The requirements in the lease or rules must be in capital letters and underlined or in ten-point boldface print. 
(c)  An owner of a multiunit rental complex or a rental dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or town home project with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool shall inspect the pool yard enclosures, gates, and self-closing and self-latching devices on gates no less than once every thirty-one (31) days. A log of such inspections will be maintained in the same manner as all other logs and be open for inspection by the Health Department. 
(d)  An owner's or property owners association's duty of inspection, repair, and maintenance under this section may not be waived under any circumstances and may not be enlarged except by written agreement with a tenant of occupant of a multiunit rental complex or a member of a property owners association or as may be otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.010. - Compliance with chapter. 
An owner of a multiunit rental complex or rental dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or town home project with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool may, at the person's option, exceed the standards of this chapter or those adopted by the Texas Board of Health under section 33-4.011. A tenant or occupant in a multiunit rental complex and a member of a property owners association may, by express written agreement, require the owner of the complex or the association to exceed those standards. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.011. - Authority of Texas Board of Health. 
The Texas Board of Health may adopt rules requiring standards for design and construction of pool yard enclosures that exceed the requirements of this article and that apply to all pools and pool yards subject to this article. An owner of a multiunit rental complex or a rental dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or a town home project with a pool or a property owners association that owns, controls, or maintains a pool shall comply with and shall be liable for failure to comply with those rules to the same extent as if they were part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.012. - Enforcement. 
(a)  A tenant of an owner of a multiunit rental complex, a member of a property owners association, a governmental entity, or any other person or the person's representative may maintain an action against the owner or property owners association for failure to comply with the requirements of this article. In that action, as provided by Chapter 757 Pool Yard Enclosures of the Health and Safety Code the person may obtain: 
(1)  A court order directing the owner or property owners association to comply with this chapter; 
(2)  A judgment against the owner or property owners association for actual damages resulting from the failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter; 
(3)  A judgment against the owner or property owners association for punitive damages resulting from the failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter if the actual damages to the person were caused by the owner's or property owners association's intentional, malicious, or grossly negligent actions; 
(4)  A judgment against the owner or property owners association for actual damages, and if appropriate, punitive damages, where the owner or association was in compliance with this chapter at the time of the pool-related damaging event but was consciously indifferent to access being repeatedly gained to the pool yard by unauthorized persons; or 
(5)  A judgment against the owner or property owners association for a civil penalty of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) if the owner or property owners association fails to comply with this chapter within a reasonable time after written notice by a tenant of the multiunit rental complex or a member of the property owners association. 
(b)  A court has been authorized by award reasonable attorney fees and costs to the prevailing party in an action brought under subsection (a)(5) of Chapter 757 Pool Yard Enclosures of the Health and Safety Code. 
(c)  The city may enforce this chapter by any lawful means, including inspections, permits, fees, civil fines, criminal prosecutions, injunctions, and, after required notice, governmental construction or repair of pool yard enclosures that do not exist or that do not comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.013. - Tenant's request for repairs. 
A tenant in a multiunit rental complex with a pool may verbally request repair of a keyed dead bolt, keyless bolting device, sliding door latch, sliding door pin lock, sliding door security bar, window latch, or window screen latch unless a provision of a written lease executed by the tenant requires that the request be made in writing and the provision is in capital letters and underlined or in ten-point boldface print. A request for repair may be given to the owner or the owner's managing agent. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.014. - Application to other bodies of water and related facilities. 
The owner of a multiunit rental complex or a property owners association is not required to enclose a body of water or construct barriers between the owner's or property owners association's property and a body of water such as an ocean, bay, lake, pond, bayou, river, creek, stream, spring, reservoir, stock tank, culvert, drainage ditch, detention pond or other flood or drainage facility. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.015. - Effect on other laws. 
(a)  The duties established by this chapter for an owner of a multiunit dwelling project, an owner of a dwelling in a condominium, cooperative, or town home project, and a property owners association supersede those established by common law, the Property Code, the Health and Safety Code, the Local Government Code other than Section 214.101, and local ordinances relating to duties to inspect, install, repair, or maintain: 
(1)  Pool yard enclosures; 
(2)  Pool yard enclosure gates and gate latches, including self-closing and self-latching devices; 
(3)  Keyed dead bolts, keyless bolting devices, sliding door handle latches, sliding door security bars, self-latching and self-closing devices, and sliding door pin locks on doors that open into a pool yard area and that are owned and controlled by the owner or property owners association; and 
(4)  Latches on windows that open into a pool yard area and that are owned and controlled by the owner or property owners association. 
(b)  This chapter does not affect any duties of a rental dwelling owner, lessor, sublessor, management company, or managing agent under Subchapter D, Chapter 92, Property Code. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.016. - Nonexclusive remedies. 
The remedies contained in this chapter are not exclusive and are not intended to affect existing remedies allowed by law or other procedure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.017. - Interpretation and application. 
The provision of this chapter shall be liberally construed to promote its underlying purpose which is to prevent swimming pool deaths and injuries in this city. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
ARTICLE V. - PUBLIC POOL ENCLOSURE 
 
Sec. 33-5.001. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-5.002. - Application. 
This article applies to a pool owned, controlled, or maintained for public or semi-public use, including but not limited to pools at or in parks, amusement parks, country clubs, social clubs, clubs of any kind, fraternal organizations, hotels, motels, pools that charge a fee for admittance, membership pools, and pools of educational institutions, all of which are hereinafter referred to as public pools. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.003. - Enclosure for pool yard. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 33-5.005, the owner of a public pool or [person who] maintains a pool shall completely enclose the pool yard with a pool yard enclosure. 
(b)  The height of the pool yard enclosure must be at least forty-eight (48) inches as measured from the ground on the side away from the pool. 
(c)  Openings under the pool yard enclosure may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass under the pool yard enclosure. 
(d)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is at least forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere four (4) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(e)  If the pool yard enclosure is constructed with horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less that forty-five (45) inches, the openings may not allow a sphere one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in diameter to pass through the enclosure. 
(f)  The use of chain link fencing materials is prohibited entirely for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. The use of diagonal fencing members that are lower than forty-nine (49) inches above the ground is prohibited for a new pool yard enclosure that is constructed after January 1, 1994. 
(g)  Decorative designs or cutouts on or in the pool yard enclosure may not contain any openings greater than one and three-fourths (1¾) inches in any direction. 
(h)  Indentations or protrusions in a solid pool yard enclosure without any openings may not be greater than normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints [must be] on the side away from the pool. 
(i)  Permanent equipment or structures may not be constructed or placed in a manner that makes them readily available for climbing over the pool yard enclosure. 
(j)  The wall of a building may be part of the pool yard enclosure only if the doors and windows in the wall comply with sections 33-5.006 and 33-5.007. 
(k)  The owner of a public pool is not required to: 
(1)  Build a pool yard enclosure at specified locations or distances from the pool other than distances for minimum walkways around the pool; or 
(2)  Conform secondary pool yard enclosures, located inside or outside the primary pool yard enclosure, to the requirements of this chapter. 
(l)  The provisions of this article do not apply to a pool enclosed in a building capable of being secured from all outside entry or if all entrances are not locked it is constantly monitored by operational personnel of the owner or operator of the enterprise conducted within the building. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.004. - Gates. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by section 33-5.005, a gate in a fence or wall enclosing a pool yard as required by section 33-5.003 must: 
(1)  Have a self-closing and self-latching device; 
(2)  Have hardware enabling it to be locked, at the option of whoever controls the gate, by a padlock or built-in lock operated by key, card, or combination; and 
(3)  Open outward away from the pool yard. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by subsection (c) and section 33-5.005, a gate latch must be installed so that it is at least sixty (60) inches above the ground, except that it may be installed lower of: 
(1)  The latch is installed on the pool yard side of the gate only and is at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate; and 
(2)  The gate or enclosure has no opening greater than one-half (½) inch in any direction within eighteen (18) inches from the latch, including the space between the gate and the gate post to which the gate latches. 
(c)  A gate latch may be located forty-two (42) inches or higher above the ground if the gate cannot be opened except by key, card, or combination on both sides of the gate. 
(d)  A public pool may have vehicle access gates provided the gates are locked at all times except to admit vehicles and the gate is monitored by qualified pool personnel while open. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.005. - Existing pool yard enclosures. 
If a pool yard enclosure was constructed or modified before January 1, 1994, and if the enclosure was in compliance with chapter 33 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena existing on January 1, 1994, for pool yard enclosures, sections 33-5.003, 33-5.004 (a) (3), and 33-5.004(b) do not apply to the enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-4.006. - Door. 
(a)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door may not open directly into a pool yard if the date of electrical service for initial construction of the building or pool is on or after January 1, 1994. 
(b)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door may open directly into a pool yard if the date of electrical service for initial construction of the building or pool is before January 1, 1994, and the pool yard enclosure complies with subsection (c), (d), or (e) as applicable. 
(c)  If a door of a building, other than a sliding glass door or screen door, opens into the pool yard, the door must have a: 
(1)  Latch that automatically engages when the door is closed; 
(2)  Spring-loaded door-hinge pin, automatic door closer, or similar device to cause the door to close automatically; and 
(3)  Keyless bolting device that is installed not less than thirty-six (36) inches or more than forty-eight (48) inches above the interior floor. 
(d)  If French doors of a building open to the pool yard, one of the French doors must comply with subsection (c)(1) and the other door must have: 
(1)  A keyed dead bolt or keyless bolting device capable of insertion into the doorjamb above the door, and a keyless bolting device capable of insertion into the floor or threshold; or 
(2)  A bolt with at least a three-fourths-inch throw installed inside the door and operated for the edge of the door that is capable of insertion into the doorjamb above the door and another bolt with at least a three-fourths-inch throw installed inside the door and operated from the edge of the door that is capable of insertion into the floor or threshold. 
(e)  If a sliding glass door of a building opens into the pool yard, the sliding glass door must have: 
(1)  A sliding door handle latch or sliding door security bar that is installed not more than forty-eight (48) inches above the interior floor; and 
(2)  A sliding door pin lock that is installed not more than forty-eight (48) inches above the interior floor. 
(f)  A door, sliding glass door, or French door that opens into a pool yard from an area of a building that is not used by residents and that has no access to an area outside the pool yard is not required to have a lock, latch, dead bolt, or keyless bolting device. 
(g)  A keyed dead bolt, keyless bolting device, sliding door pin lock, or sliding door security bar installed before September 1, 1993, may be installed not more than fifty-four (54) inches from the floor. 
(h)  A keyed dead bolt or keyless dead bolt, as described by section 33-2.001(i), installed in a dwelling on or after September 1, 1993, must have a bolt with a throw of not less than one inch. 
(i)  A public pool may have a direct access to the pool through the enclosure provided that such access is: 
(1)  The normal usual entrance to the pool; and 
(2)  Monitored at all times while the pool is open and; 
(3)  Closed by a locked gate at all other times. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.007. - Window. 
A wall of a building constructed before January 1, 1994, may not be used as a part of a pool yard enclosure unless each window in the wall has a latch or similar means. A wall of a building constructed on or after January 1, 1994, may not be used as part of a pool yard enclosure unless each window in the wall is permanently closed and unable to be opened. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.008. - Building in pool yard. 
Each door, sliding glass door, window, and window screen of each dwelling unit in a residential building located in the enclosed pool yard must comply with sections 33-5.006 and 33-5.007. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.009. - Inspection, repair, and maintenance. 
(a)  An owner or operator of a public pool shall exercise ordinary and reasonable care to inspect, maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the pool yard enclosures, gates, and self-closing and self-latching devices required by this article and within the control of the owner or operator. 
(b)  An owner or operator of a public pool shall exercise ordinary and reasonable care to maintain, repair, and keep in good working order the window latches, sliding door handle latches, sliding door pin locks, and sliding door security bars required by this article and within the control of the owner or operator. After request or notice from the users of the pool that those devices are malfunctioning or in need of repair or replacement. A request or notice under this subsection must be given in writing. 
(c)  An owner or operator of a public pool shall inspect the pool yard enclosures, gates, and self-closing and self-latching devices on gates no less than once every thirty-one (31) days. A log of such inspections will be maintained in the same manner as all other logs and be open for inspection by the health department. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.010. - Compliance with chapter. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) and section 33-5.011, a person who constructs or modifies a pool yard enclosure to conform with this article will not be required to construct the enclosure differently by a local governmental entity, common law, or any other law. 
(b)  An owner or operator of a public pool may, at the option of the owner or operator, exceed the standards of this article or those adopted by the Texas Board of Health under section 33-5.011. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.011. - Authority of Texas Board of Health. 
The Texas Board of Health may adopt rules requiring standards for design and construction of pool yard enclosures that exceed the requirements of this article and that apply to all public pools. An owner or operator of a public pool shall comply with and shall be liable for failure to comply with those rules to the same extent as if they were part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.012. - Enforcement. 
The city or any person may maintain any action of enforcement provided for by law for failure to comply with the requirements of this article. In that action, the person may obtain any and all relief provided for by law. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.013. - Application to other bodies of water and related facilities. 
The owner of a public pool is not required to enclose a body of water or construct barriers between the owner's property and a body of water such as an ocean, bay, lake, pond, bayou, river, creek, stream, spring, reservoir, stock tank, culvert, drainage ditch, detention pond, or other flood or drainage facility. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.014. - Effect on other laws. 
The duties established by this article for the owner or operator of a public pool are in addition to all other laws now existing or as may be hereinafter enacted. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.015. - Nonexclusive remedies. 
The remedies contained in this chapter are not exclusive and are not intended to affect existing remedies allowed by law or other procedure. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-5.016. - Interpretation and application. 
The provision of this chapter shall be liberally construed to promote its underlying purpose which is to prevent swimming pool deaths and injuries in this city. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
ARTICLE VI. - SWIMMING POOL CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE OPERATIONS AND LICENSING  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 33-6.001. - Design standards. 
(a)  All nonprivate swimming pools constructed within the city after November 30, 1965, shall conform to the then current Design Standards for Public Swimming Pool Construction, as specified by the Texas State Department of Health, Division of Sanitary Engineering, and duly filed as a public record with the Secretary of the State of Texas, or as the same may hereafter be duly amended or revised by the Texas State Department of Health; provided, however, that such pools need not conform to Section 1.3 of such design standards in effect on November 30, 1965. 
(1)  The requirement of a phone to be available is met if there is a pay phone within one hundred (100) feet of the entrance to the pool. 
(b)  All private pools constructed in the city after August 1, 1994, shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the "Standard for Residential Swimming Pools" of the National Spa and Pool Institute as those standards now exist or as may hereinafter be revised and are in effect at the time of construction of the pool. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.002. - Filing and approval of plans and specifications prerequisite to issuance of building permit. 
(a)  Plans and specifications for the construction of a private or public swimming pool within the city shall be submitted to the building official and the director of public health prior to the issuance of a building permit for such pool. Such plans and specifications shall show compliance with section 33-6.001(b). 
(b)  No building permit for a private or public swimming pool shall be issued by the city, unless and until a certified true and correct copy of the plans and specifications for such pool has been duly approved by the director of public health or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  No private or public swimming pool plans and specifications shall be considered or approved unless made in conformity with the applicable provisions of the Texas Engineering Practice Act, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, Article 3271a. 
(d)  All pools constructed for public use and multiunit use will comply with section 33-6.001(a). 
(e)  All pools constructed for private use will comply with section 33-6.001(b).  
Sec. 33-6.003. - Reserved.  
Sec. 33-6.004. - Continuous operation of filtering and chlorinating equipment. 
Every public swimming pool within the city, when eighteen (18) inches or more of water lies above the deepest part of such pool, shall have all filtering and chlorinating equipment in continuous operation while such pool is in use. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.005. - Required chlorine residual. 
Every public swimming pool within the city, when eighteen (18) inches or more of water lies above the deepest part of such pool, shall have in the water therein a chlorine residual of 1.0 to 3.0 parts per million units of water while such pool is in use. 
No public swimming pool within the city, when eighteen (18) inches or more of water lies above the deepest part of such pool, shall ever show in the water therein an acid reaction to a standard pH test while such pool is in use. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.006. - Water clarity. 
Every public swimming pool within the city, when eighteen (18) inches or more of water lies above the deepest part of such pool, shall contain water of sufficient clarity that the main drain lying on the floor of such pool, in its deepest part, is clearly visible to an observing, 20/20 vision human eye at a horizontal distance of not more than ten (10) feet from the inside edge of such pool nearest to the deepest part in which such drain may lie. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.007. - Life-saving ring and lines; shepherd's hook. 
(a)  Every nonprivate swimming pool within the city shall be constantly equipped with at least one human life-saving ring and an attached line or rope of sufficient strength to hold freely suspended thereby a weight of two hundred (200) pounds for five (5) consecutive minutes, such line or rope to be of sufficient length to reach across the longest dimension of the pool on the inner edge of such pool. Facility for anchoring such line outside the pool after securing a swimmer within such life ring must be provided. Alternatively, every public swimming pool with the city shall be constantly equipped with at least one shepherd's hook or rod of metal, wood or plastic, curved at one end thereof to accommodate a human body within such curve and possessing the strength specified for rope herein, such hook or rod to be of sufficient length to reach from such pool's geometric center in a horizontal plane to the farthest point therefrom on the inner edge of such pool. 
(b)  Every private pool should be equipped with the same equipment required in section 33-6.007 and it is recommended but not required. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 
 
Sec. 33-6.008. - Required. 
Every owner or operator of a nonprivate swimming pool within the corporate limits of the city shall obtain a license therefor from the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.009. - Application generally. 
Application for a license required by this division shall be made to the director of public health of a standard form prepared by the director. A current facsimile of such form shall be at all times on file with the city secretary. The application form shall be furnished to the applicant at such time and in such quantities as the director of public health may prescribe. Such form shall provide for identifying data as to the applicant, a description of the subject swimming pool and its servicing equipment, the number, actual or projected, of bathers therein during a specified interval of time, and the location of such pool. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.010. - Inspection of pool; approval or disapproval or application. 
(a)  Within fourteen (14) days after the filing of a duly prepared and executed application for a license under this division, the director of public health, or his duly authorized agent, shall inspect the swimming pool covered by such application to determine its compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all applicable city health ordinances, rules and regulation. The director of public health shall then approve or disapprove the application for the license. Conclusive notice of such approval or disapproval shall be the posting of written notice thereof by the director of public health on any corridor bulletin board in the city hall and by sending such notice to the applicant at the address on the application by certified mail with return receipt requested within seven (7) days after the date of such inspection. 
(b)  In the event the application desires to appeal from the disapproval of his application for a license under this division, he must file written notice of appeal with the city council within ten (10) days after the posting of the notice of disapproval. The city council shall investigate and then sustain or overrule the appealed action within thirty (30) days, after receipt of the notice of appeal. Conclusive notice of city council action on such appeal shall be the posting of written notice thereof by the city secretary on any corridor bulletin board in the city hall and by letter to the licensee at the address on the licensee's application by certified mail, return receipt requested. Failure of the city council to thus act within thirty (30) days shall constitute a sustaining and affirmance of the action of the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.011. - Fee prescribed. 
The annual license for a nonprivate swimming pool shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, however, the director of public health may provide for the waiver of such fee for governmental or nonprofit charitable organizations. Such license fee shall be paid to the director of public health prior to the issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.012. - Fee not refundable; purpose of fee. 
No fee collected under this division shall be refundable, but shall remain the sole and exclusive property of the city. The purpose of eh license fee required by this division is to contribute to defraying the cost of inspection, application and plans processing and license issuance by the city. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.013. - Issuance; form; contents. 
Upon approval of an application for a license under this division and payment of the prescribed fee, the director of public health shall issue the license. Such license shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the director of public health and shall show, at least, the date of issuance and of expiration, the street address of the swimming pool, the mane and residential street address of the licensee, and affirmatively state payment of the current license fee and compliance, as of the date of issue, with all applicable city health ordinances, rules and regulations. All such license forms shall be uniform during any given calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.014. - Expiration and renewal. 
A license issued under this division shall expire on the fifteenth day of April next after its issuance. Such license shall be renewed on or before its expiration each year thereafter by payment of the fee prescribed by section 33-6.011 to the director of public health. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94; Ord. No. 00-110, § 3, 7-25-00)  
Sec. 33-6.015. - Suspension generally. 
(a)  The director of public health may suspend a license issued under this division for any public swimming pool for failure of the pool to comply with any applicable provision of this chapter or the city health ordinances, rules or regulations, or Article 4477-1, Section 15, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas. The minimum period of any such suspension shall be three (3) consecutive calendar days. The maximum initial or first suspension during any license period shall not exceed fifteen (15) days. Additional suspension may be for any length of time within the remaining license year as deemed necessary by the director of public health for the protection of the public health or for the prevention of nuisance. 
(b)  During any suspension period, the license is hereby declared to be null and void and of no effect, but after a suspension period, it shall be valid during the remainder of the license year, unless it is further suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.016. - Revocation generally. 
The director of public health may revoke a license issued under this division for a public swimming pool for failure of the licensee to pay the annual fee prescribed by this division or upon final judgment of conviction of the licensee for violation of this chapter or applicable provisions of city health ordinances or Article 4477-1, Section 15, Revised Civil Statutes of the State of Texas. Such revocation is hereby declared to render the license null and void for the remainder of the license year, unless the revocation is overruled by the council on appeal under section 33-6.019. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.017. - Notice of suspension or revocation; placarding affected pool. 
(a)  A suspension or revocation under section 33-6.015 or 33-6.016 shall be effective as of the date written notice thereof is posted on any corridor bulletin board within the city hall and by letter to the licensee at the address on the licensee's application by certified mail, return receipt requested. Unless the director of public health, or his duly authorized agent, is barred from the premises enclosing the swimming pool, a placard giving notice of such revocation or suspension and of the closing thereby of such pool shall be placed in a conspicuous location at or near the pool and within the premises enclosing the same. The form and language of such bulletin board notice and such placard notice may be prescribed, for each calendar year, by the director of public health to effect its notice and intent of closing pools covered thereby. Such notices shall specify the particular violation or violations for which suspension or revocation is made and contain a sworn declaration by the director of public health, or his duly authorized agent, of the truth of such specifications and of a finding of immediate hazard to the public safety or to the public health. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove a placard placed pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(c)  All notices of suspension or revocation and placards posted under this section shall be removed by the director of public health upon reinstatement of the license or the issuance of a new license for the swimming pool in accord with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.018. - Use of pool during period of suspension or revocation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to enter into any swimming pool while the same is placarded in accord with section 33-6.017. It shall likewise be unlawful for the owner, manager, operator, lifeguard or other attendant of any swimming pool to permit any person to enter into the same while so placarded. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.019. - Appeal from suspension or revocation. 
After the suspension or revocation of a license under this article has been in effect for three (3) consecutive days, the licensee may file written notice of appeal with the city council and the council shall investigate and sustain or overrule such suspension or revocation. Such notice shall be in writing and state the name of the owner and operator if any and give the mailing address of both and contain a brief statement as to the nature of the appeal and be filed within ten (10) days after the posting of notice of the suspension or revocation and the council shall sustain or overrule the appealed action within ten (10) days after receipt of the notice of appeal. Conclusive notice of the council's action on such appeal shall be the posting of written notice thereof by the city secretary on any corridor bulletin board in the city hall and mail notice of the council's action to the owner or operator at the address indicated in the appeal by certified mail return receipt requested. Failure of the council to act on the appeal within ten (10) days shall constitute a sustaining and affirmance of the suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.020. - Reinstatement after suspension. 
Every suspended public swimming pool license shall be reinstated promptly upon correction or removal of the violation or violations specified in the notice of suspension. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Sec. 33-6.021. - Issuance of new license after revocation. 
The director of public health may issue a new license to the holder of a license which has been revoked under this division at any time after the third day following the revocation, if he deems the public health not to be in further danger because of the swimming pool or that the nuisance has been abated, upon compliance with the applicable provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 94-153, § 2, 8-23-94)  
Chapter 34 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference— Taxation, Art. X. 
Cross reference— Tax levy ordinances not affected by Code, § 1-5(2); billiard halls and domino halls, § 5-77 et seq.; public dances, § 5-106 et seq.; dance halls, § 5-131 et seq.; coin-operated machines, § 5-175 et seq.; game rooms, § 5-206 et seq.; auto wreckers, § 7-14 et seq.; emergency auto wreckers, § 7-16 et seq.; house movers, § 9-131 et seq.; commercial garbage and trash haulers, § 14-18; junkyards and automobile wrecking yards, § 17-31 et seq.; massage establishments, § 19-22 et seq.; mobile home taxation, § 21-18 et seq.; mobile home parks, § 21-60; motor vehicle dealers, § 22-20 et seq.; motor vehicle salesmen, § 22-47 et seq.; itinerant merchants and vendors, § 25-17 et seq.; duty to render taxicabs and taxicab equipment for taxation, § 35-6. 
State Law reference— Taxation generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. Title 122, Vol. 20; Title 122A, Vol. 20A. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Tax assessor and collector generally. 
There is hereby established the office of city tax assessor and collector for the purpose of effecting assessments and collections of any and all taxes of every nature and character whatsoever that have been or may be charged by the city in accordance with the laws of the state and of effecting assessments and collections of any and all license fees or charges prescribed for his assessment and collection by city ordinance or to be assessed, collected or paid to the city where no other officer, official, department, division or agency of the city is designated to effect such assessment or collection. The tax assessor and collector shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to the confirmation and approval of the city council, for a term of one (1) year and until his successor has been appointed and qualified for office. The tax assessor and collector shall be the head of the department of taxation created by the Charter, and his duties shall be as prescribed by the general and special laws of the state and the Charter and ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 26-1; Ord. No. 1761, § 1, 2-1-66) 
Charter reference— Department of taxation created, Art. X, § 1. 
Cross reference— Bond of tax assessor and collector, § 2-5; registration, with tax assessor and collector, of peddlers and solicitors engaged in interstate commerce, § 25-1 et seq.  
Sec. 34-2. - When ad valorem taxes due and payable; delinquencies. 
All ad valorem taxes are hereby declared to be due and payable on October first of each year, and if not paid by the thirty-first day of January following, shall be deemed delinquent and a penalty of one (1) per cent upon the amount of the taxes due shall be added and paid, if paid during the month of February following such delinquency; two (2) per cent if paid during the month of March following such delinquency; three (3) per cent if paid during the month of April following such delinquency; four (4) per cent if paid during the month of May following such delinquency; five (5) per cent if paid during the month of June following such delinquency; and eight (8) per cent if paid thereafter. Interest shall be charged upon the gross amount of taxes due until paid at the rate of six (6) per cent per annum. 
(Code 1964, § 26-3) 
Charter reference— When taxes due and authority of council to provide for penalties and interest on delinquencies, Art. X, § 5.  
Sec. 34-2.1. - Tax exemption for aged. 
(a)  Seven thousand and no/100 dollars ($7,000.00) of the assessed taxable value of all residence homesteads, as now defined by law, of all persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older before the first day of January of each calendar year is hereby exempted from all ad valorem taxes levied by the City of Pasadena, Texas, after the 31st day of December, 1973. 
(b)  This section shall become effective the first day of January, 1976. 
(c)  The city tax assessor and collector of Pasadena is hereby authorized to require persons to make a timely claim, for those persons claiming a residence homestead exemption for persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older as permitted by Article VIII, Section I-b(b) of the Texas Constitution, by including in at least one written communication, mailed to its tax payers each year, that the exemption is available along with a form that the claimant may complete and file, in person or by mail, with the City of Pasadena tax office to claim said exemption. 
(Ord. No. 72-339, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-72; Ord. No. 73-282, §§ 1, 2, 11-13-73; Ord. No. 76-12, §§ 1, 2, 1-27-76; Ord. No. 76-180, §§ 1, 2, 9-21-76)  
Sec. 34-3. - Local sales and use tax. 
The majority of the qualified voters having voted for the adoption of a one (1) per cent local sales and use tax, at an election held on December 19, 1967, pursuant to the provisions of article 1066c, Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, such tax is hereby imposed in the city and it shall become effective as provided in said article 1066c. 
(Ord. No. 67-2077, 12-26-67)  
Sec. 34-4. - Fees for tax certificates and copies of tax records. 
(a)  The tax assessor and collector shall collect, for each tax certificate issued by him, his deputy, assistant or duly authorized representative, the sum of ten dollars ($10.00) from the person ordering the same. The tax assessor and collector shall collect, for each copy issued of an official document, map, assessment roll, tax roll, or other record of the department of taxation, the sum of fifty cents ($0.50) per reproduced sheet of such copy from the person ordering the same. All monies collected under this section shall be nonrefundable, promptly deposited in a city depository, and shall be the sole property of the city. 
(b)  The government of the United States of America, the State of Texas, the County of Harris, the Pasadena Independent School District, state agencies and departments, and departments, offices and agencies of the city shall not be charged for copies of records issued under authority of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1761, § 3, 2-1-66; Ord. No. 87-186, § 1, 9-22-87)  
Sec. 34-5. - Confidential tax records and working papers not subject to sale. 
Confidential records and working papers, as well as copies thereof, of the department of taxation shall not be subject to sale. 
(Ord. No. 1761, § 3, 2-1-66)  
Secs. 34-6—34-15. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - CLAIMS FOR TAX REFUNDS 
 
Sec. 34-16. - Assessor and collector authorized to provide for payment if article complied with. 
The tax assessor and collector is hereby authorized to provide for the payment of claims for the refund of the double payment of city taxes, claims for the refund of city taxes paid on exempt property or property outside the taxing jurisdiction, and claims for the refund of illegal city taxes paid under duress, express or implied, if all applicable provisions of this article are complied with. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, § 1, 6-10-69)  
Sec. 34-17. - Filing requirements. 
Every claim for a tax refund under this article must be by application made in writing and sworn to before a notary public. Such claim shall be on a form approved by the tax assessor and collector and the city attorney, and shall be filed with the tax assessor and collector within three (3) years after the date the taxes were paid. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-69; Ord. No. 86-172, § 1, 8-5-86)  
Sec. 34-18. - To be accompanied by proof of tax payment. 
Each claim for a tax refund under this article must be accompanied by a validated tax receipt or by other proof of payment of the tax satisfactory to the tax assessor and collector. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, § 2, 6-10-69)  
Sec. 34-19. - Approval of council and city attorney required in certain cases. 
Every claim for a tax refund for over five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be presented to the city council for allowance by placing the check for the refund on the finance resolution, and approval by city council of the payment of such refund shall operate as a finding by city council that payment was erroneous or excessive and that it approved the refund. No voucher or check shall ever be drawn and no claim shall ever be paid because of taxes paid on property that was exempt from taxation or because of illegal taxes paid under duress unless and until it has been approved by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, § 2, 6-10-69; Ord. No. 86-172, § 1, 8-5-86)  
Sec. 34-20. - Investigation; payment procedure. 
Prior to authorizing the payment of any claim for a tax refund, the tax assessor and collector shall investigate the circumstances, reduce such investigation to writing, and certify thereto. If the tax assessor and collector determines that the claim may be paid under the provisions of this article, he may authorize the payment thereof by drawing a voucher in favor of the claimant and forwarding the same to the city controller. Upon receipt of such voucher, the city controller shall issue a warrant, payable to the claimant, in the exact amount of the city tax payment and forward the same to the claimant. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, §§ 1, 2, 6-10-69)  
Sec. 34-21. - Register to be kept. 
A written, serially numbered register of all claims for a tax refund under this article shall be kept by the tax assessor and collector, showing all pertinent data and the disposition made of the claim. The register number shall be entered on the application, voucher and in the delinquent tax records. 
(Ord. No. 69-130, § 2, 6-10-69)  
Sec. 34-22. - Invalid city tax assessments. 
(a)  The tax assessor shall notify the city council of any city tax assessments on real or personal property that he shall discover to be invalid, as defined herein. An invalid assessment, within the meaning of this section, is one that is: 
(1)  On property outside the taxing jurisdiction, hereinafter referred to as "outside jurisdiction"; 
(2)  On property that is exempt from taxation, hereinafter referred to as "exempt"; 
(3)  A second or double assessment on property properly assessable, hereinafter referred to as "double"; 
(4)  Grossly excessive, for example, two (2) times or more, greater than it would have been if it had been based on fair market value, hereinafter referred to as "grossly excessive"; 
(5)  Discriminatory, for example, based on a one hundred per cent (100%) market value assessment figure instead of on the assessment ratio used on other property, hereinafter referred to as "discriminatory"; and 
(6)  An assessment that is illegal for any other reason, hereinafter referred to as "illegal". 
In notifying the council of such invalid city tax assessments, they shall be presented in the form of a list showing the name and address of the property owner, the account number, the property description, the amount of the assessment, the taxes, and the reason that the assessment is invalid. The reasons above, for an assessment being invalid may be indicated on such list by the words "outside jurisdiction", "exempt", "double", "grossly excessive", "discriminatory", and "illegal", respectively. Such list shall be certified to as follows: 
"This is a correct list of invalid assessments as provided for by the ordinances of the City of Pasadena." 
Every invalid assessment listed as "illegal" shall be accompanied by affidavits and an opinion from the city attorney, based upon the facts set out in such affidavits, stating it to be his opinion that the assessment could properly be found invalid by the council. 
(b)  Such list shall be forwarded to the city council attached to a form of ordinance providing for the city council: 
(1)  To find the city tax assessments invalid; and 
(2)  To order such assessments and the city taxes based thereon cancelled. 
(c)  The tax assessor and collector shall immediately reassess all taxable property on which the assessment has been cancelled under the terms hereof and place the same on the supplemental roll to be equalized prior to the next time the tax roll is approved by the board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 72-212, § 1, 8-15-72)  
Sec. 34-23. - Reassessment of assessments cancelled by court judgment. 
The tax assessor and collector shall immediately reassess all taxable property on which the assessment has theretofore been cancelled under the terms of any final court judgment and place the same on the supplemental roll to be equalized prior to the next time the tax roll is approved by the board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 72-212, § 1, 8-15-72)  
Sec. 34-24. - Separation of assessments. 
The assessor and collector of taxes and the board of equalization are authorized to divide and separate assessments made on property where mistakes have occurred in reference to the ownership of the same, or where such separation may be deemed by them convenient and equitable on account of such property having been divided by sales subsequently made or by reason of the death of the owner of the same. 
(Ord. No. 72-212, § 1, 8-15-72)  
Secs. 34-25—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases are, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, defined as follows: 
Assessor-collector shall mean the assessor-collector of taxes of the City of Pasadena. 
Consideration shall mean the cost of the room in such hotel only if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and shall not include the cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy. 
Extended stay facility means a hotel/motel where the facility is made available to the public for periods of one (1) week or more and may be rented by the week. 
Hotel shall mean any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging houses, inns, rooming houses, or other buildings where rooms are furnished for a consideration but "hotel" shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes. 
Hotel or motel means a building or structure, or any part thereof, with or without service facilities, kept, used, maintained, advertised as, or rented out to the public on a temporary basis to be an enclosure where sleeping accommodations and working sink, shower and toilet facilities are furnished to the public. Such term shall specifically include both extended stay and traditional facilities as the definition is not in conflict with the definitions hereafter. 
Major thoroughfare means any of the roadways regardless of functional classification listed in the Pasadena Major Thoroughfare Plan adopted by Ordinance No. 77-130 as amended. 
Occupancy shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping and if the occupant's use, possession, or right to use or possession extends for a period of less than thirty (30) days. 
Occupant shall mean anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel if the room is one ordinarily used for sleeping. 
Person shall mean any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel. 
Quarterly period shall mean the regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and March, the second quarter being the months of April, May and June, the third quarter being the months of July, August and September, and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. 
Residence means any permanent building or structure containing habitable rooms for non-transient occupancy, that is designed and used primarily for living, sleeping, cooking and eating, and is intended to be occupied as a dwelling place for residential purposes, whether or not attached, including single family homes, town homes, patio homes and duplexes. Hotels, motels, triplexes, quadplexes, condominiums, apartments, boarding houses, group homes, halfway houses, nursing homes, hospitals, nursery schools, schools and child care facilities are not considered residences for the purposes of this article. 
Residential means the use of land for a residence. 
Residential street means a street where thirty (30) per cent or more of the land frontage along both sides of the street within a distance of two hundred fifty (250) feet or the distance to the nearest four-way public street intersection, whichever is greater, from the tract on which a hotel/motel would be located consist, in each direction of residential uses. For purposes of this article, a major thoroughfare may also be classified as a residential street, in which case the residential street classification shall control. 
Traditional facility means a hotel/motel where the facility is made available to the public usually for periods of less than one (1) week and may be rented by the day. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 02-71, § 2, 3-5-02)  
Sec. 34-32. - Tax levied; amount; exceptions. 
There is hereby levied a tax upon the cost of occupancy of any sleeping room furnished by any hotel where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) per cent of the consideration paid by the occupant of such room to such hotel; provided, however, that no tax shall be hereby imposed on a corporation or association that is organized and operated exclusively for a religious, charitable or educational purpose if no part of the net earnings of the corporation or association inure to the benefit of a private shareholder or individual. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 83-220, § 1, 8-16-83)  
Sec. 34-33. - Collection of tax. 
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax imposed by section 34-32 hereof for the city. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 34-34. - Quarterly reports to tax assessor-collector. 
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required in section 34-33 hereof to collect the tax imposed herein, shall file a report with the assessor-collector of taxes showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies and any other information the assessor-collector of taxes may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 34-35. - Reimbursement for tax collection. 
The person required to file a report under this article may deduct and withhold from the taxes otherwise due to the city on the quarterly return, as reimbursement for the cost of collecting the tax, one per cent of the amount of the tax due as shown on the report. If taxes due under this article are not paid to the city within the time required or if the person required to file a report fails to file the report when due, the person forfeits the claim to reimbursement that could have been taken if the tax had been paid or the report filed when due. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 34-36. - Rules and regulations of tax assessor-collector; access to books and records. 
The assessor-collector of taxes shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied hereby. 
After the assessor-collector gives reasonable notice to a person that the assessor-collector intends to inspect the books or records of the person, the assessor-collector has access to the person's books or records necessary for the assessor-collector to determine the correctness of a report filed under this article or the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82)  
Sec. 34-37. - Penalties for delinquent reports and payments. 
(a)  If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay to the assessor-collector of taxes the tax imposed herein when said report or payment is due, the city attorney may bring suit against the person to collect such tax and to enjoin the person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report filed, as applicable, as provided by the court's order. In addition to the amount of any tax owed under this article, the person is liable to the city for the city's reasonable attorney's fees and a penalty equal to fifteen (15) per cent of the total amount of the tax owed. The first report and payment required by this article shall be on the last day of the month following the fourth quarterly period, as hereinabove defined, of 1982. 
(b)  Section 16.061, Civil Practice and Remedies Code, applies to the collection of a tax under this article. A limitation period provided by Title 2 relating to the time allowed to assess taxes and bring a suit to collect taxes does not apply to a tax imposed under this chapter or to a suit brought under this section. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 96-232, § 1, 12-17-96)  
Sec. 34-38. - Use of funds derived from levy of hotel occupancy tax. 
The revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be used for the following purposes and none other: 
(a)  The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation, and maintenance of convention center facilities including, but not limited to, civic center convention buildings, auditoriums, coliseums, civic theaters, museums, and parking areas or facilities for the parking or storage of motor vehicles or other conveyances located at or in the immediate vicinity of the convention center facilities; 
(b)  The furnishing of facilities, personnel and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants; 
(c)  For advertising for general promotional and tourist advertising of the city and its vicinity and conducting a solicitation and operating program to attract conventions and visitors either by the city or through contracts with persons or organizations selected by the city; 
(d)  The encouragement, promotion, improvement and application of the arts, including music (instrumental and vocal), dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, television, radio, tape and sound recording, and the arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms; 
(e)  Historical preservation and restoration projects or activities at or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or historical preservation and restoration projects or activities located elsewhere in the city that would be frequented by tourists and visitors to the city. 
Any revenues from the hotel occupancy tax in excess of four (4) per cent of the consideration paid by an occupant of the sleeping room to the hotel may only be used for the purposes specified in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section. No more than one (1) per cent of the consideration paid by an occupant of the sleeping room to a hotel may be used for the purposes specified in subsection (d) of this section. Provided that a portion of the said tax revenue equal to at least one (1) per cent of the cost of occupancy of hotel rooms shall be reserved for the purpose of advertising and conducting solicitation programs to acquaint potential users with public meeting and convention facilities, and for promotion of tourism and advertising of the city and its vicinity either by the city or through contract with organizations or persons selected by the city. 
Revenues derived from the hotel occupancy tax authorized by this chapter are to be expended in a manner directly enhancing and promoting tourism and the convention and hotel industry. Such revenues may be also used to retire bonds issued for the enumerated purposes. 
(Ord. No. 82-230, § 1, 10-12-82; Ord. No. 84-35, § 1, 2-21-84)  
Sec. 34-39. - Hotel/motel location and size requirements 
(a)  No hotel/motel shall be developed with less than sixty (60) separate, rentable units. 
(b)  A hotel/motel that has one hundred twenty (120) or fewer separate, rentable units may only be located on a tract that is contiguous to and abuts the right-of-way of a limited access highway or tollway and takes its access from the frontage road of said highway or tollway provided that the hotel/motel(s) shall not take secondary access from any residential street. 
(c)  A hotel/motel that has more than one hundred twenty (120) separate, rentable units may only be located on a tract that is contiguous to and abuts the right-of-way of a limited access highway, tollway or major thoroughfare and takes its access from the frontage road of said highway or tollway or from the major thoroughfare provided that the hotel/motel(s) shall not take secondary access from any residential street. 
(d)  No extended stay facility will have more than two hundred (200) rentable units nor shall they have more than eighteen (18) units per acre. 
(Ord. No. 02-71, § 3, 3-5-02)  
Sec. 34-40. - Hotel/motel registers. 
(a)  Every person operating a hotel/motel shall keep at all times a suitable record, to be known as the hotel/motel register, in which it shall be required that every person to whom a room is let or assigned shall have his, her or their name or names registered therein in ink, the date and the hour of the day at which the room was let or assigned, the license number of all vehicles associated with the hotel/motel stay, the correct number or other designation of the room and the number of occupants assigned to the unit as well as the date of birth for each and every person occupying the room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a hotel/motel under the provision of this chapter to let or assign any room for sleeping accommodations or otherwise more than once in any period of twenty-four (24) hours. 
(c)  All such registers shall be preserved for one (1) year after the last entry is made therein, and in case the register is in the form of a loose-leaf book, all of such sheets shall be preserved for one (1) year after the last entry on such sheets. All of the pages of said register or the loose-leaf sheets shall be dated and consecutively numbered. No person shall knowingly make or permit or allow others to make any false entries in said register, including entering the name or names of any person or persons not actually guests at such hotel/motel. Any person making any such false registry entries shall be guilty of violating this chapter. Making false entries in said register shall include registration under another name than the true name of the person registered or registering. A valid picture ID must be presented to verify identification at the time of registration. Anyone with care and control at the time of a false entry shall be held responsible under this Code. 
(d)  These hotel/motel registers must be immediately produced to any law enforcement agency requesting them and will contain the name and date of birth of each and every occupant as well as any vehicle or vehicles associated with the occupant. 
(Ord. No. 02-71, § 3, 3-5-02; Ord. No. 05-116, § 1, 4-26-05)  
Sec. 34-41. - Facility requirements. 
(a)  Tenure. A hotel/motel room shall not be used as a permanent or voting residence by any person, unless that person is the on site owner, or bonafide resident manager for the hotel/motel. 
(b)  Minimum unit size. 
Traditional facility: Each motel/hotel unit shall contain not less than two hundred (200) square feet habitable floor area enclosed by walls and roof. Any sleeping room shall not be less than twelve (12) by fifteen (15) feet horizontal dimensions, exclusive of the bath. 
Extended stay facility: Each motel/hotel unit shall contain not less than two hundred fifty (250) square feet habitable floor area enclosed by walls and roof. Any sleeping room shall not be less than twelve (12) by fifteen (15) feet horizontal dimensions, exclusive of the bath and cooking areas. 
(c)  Cooking facilities. 
Traditional facility: Cooking or eating facilities shall be permitted in any individual motel/hotel unit. 
Extended stay facility: All individual rentable units shall be required to have cooking and eating facilities including a kitchen sink, refrigerator, stove top system with burner(s), a convection oven or a microwave oven. 
(d)  Other facilities. All hotel/motel units shall have sleeping facilities and a separate enclosed bathroom containing a shower and toilet. A bathroom lavatory is required but may be placed separate from the other bathroom facilities. 
(e)  Density. 
Extended stay facility: FAR (floor area ratio) shall not exceed 0.4. 
Traditional facility: FAR (floor area ratio) shall not be regulated. 
(f)  Provision of parking. 
Traditional facilities. Shall provide a minimum of one (1) parking space per hotel/motel unit. 
Extended stay facilities. Shall provide a plan with the permit application delineating minimum of two (2) parking spaces on property per rentable unit, however, applicant is only required to construct a minimum of one (1) parking space per rentable unit prior to occupancy. Extended stay facilities shall not have multi-level parking. 
(g)  Open space. A minimum of ten (10) feet of open space shall be adjacent to perimeter edges of the development in addition to any required parking reserved for future development. The project must comply with the provisions of the landscape Ordinance No. 88-6 as amended. A minimum of thirty-five (35) per cent of the ground area shall be held in green space. 
(h)  Parking (operational requirements). All vehicles owned by guests or their visitors on property shall be registered with the hotel/motel management. Management shall issue a parking permit to any guests and visitors which shall be placed on the dashboard of the vehicle. Vehicles without said parking permit can be towed at the owners expense. 
(i)  Distance from residential uses. Hotel/motels shall be set back from any property lines abutting a residence, whether or not the residence is part of a residential subdivision. The distance of the set-back shall be dependent on the height of the hotel/motel. Hotel/motels of one (1) story shall be set back by a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet. Hotel/motels of two (2) stories shall be set back by a minimum of fifty (50) feet. Hotel/motels of three (3) or more stories shall be set back by a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from the residential property line. 
(j)  Utilities underground. All hotel/motels shall have all underground utilities. 
(k)  Complex design. Each hotel/motel unit shall be designed so that primary access is from a hallway that will be internal to the hotel/motel building. No units shall access directly from a parking area or the exterior of building unless that entrance is a secondary patio entrance which is incapable from being locked/unlocked from the exterior of the building. 
(l)  Illumination. All hotel/motels shall be designed so as to provide illumination along all drives, parking areas, open spaces, and pedestrian walkways to be lighted with a minimum intensity of two-tenths (0.2) foot candles illumination. All outdoor lighting shall be directed away from any residence or residential subdivision. 
(m)  Fence/wall. Where the hotel/motel development adjoins a residence or a residential subdivision, an opaque fence not less than eight (8) feet in height shall be required along the entire common property line and shall be constructed in accordance with subsection 9-4(c)(2) of this Code. 
(n)  Waste screening. All waste receptacles at a hotel/motel shall be screened from view from the street. All trash bins shall be placed a minimum of two hundred (200) feet from any residence or residential subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 02-71, § 3, 3-5-02)  
Sec. 34-42. - Pre-existing hotel/motels. 
(a)  Hotel/motels that have already been constructed or have received permit approval prior to final adoption of this ordinance shall be required to comply with all restrictions of section 34-40, hotel/motel registers. At such time as the project ceases to operate for business or the units are vacated for any purpose, the project shall be required to fully comply with these provisions. 
(Ord. No. 02-71, § 3, 3-5-02)  
Secs. 34-43—34-47. - Reserved.  
Sec. 34-48. - Penalties. 
(a)  Fines for violating this ordinance shall be in accordance with the Pasadena general penalty provisions as enumerated in section 1-7 of this Code. 
(b)  Each day shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 02-71, § 3, 3-5-02)  
Chapter 35 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 88-10, § 1, adopted April 26, 1988, repealed Ch. 35 in its entirety which pertained to taxicabs and derived from Code 1964, §§ 27-1—27-14, 27-23—27-30, 27-38—27-47; Ord. No. 67-1907, § 1, adopted Jan. 31, 1967; Ord. No. 74-190, § 1, adopted Sept. 10, 1974; Ord. No. 78-18, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 1978 and Ord. No. 80-274, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 1980. Section 2 of said Ord. No. 88-10 enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 35 to read as herein set out. See the Code Comparative Table for a detailed analysis of inclusion. 
Cross reference— Traffic, Ch. 36; designation of taxicab stands and limitation on parking of taxicabs outside such stands, § 36-179. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate persons owning, operating or controlling vehicles used for carrying passengers for hire, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(21). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 35-1. - Definition. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the term "taxicab" shall mean any automobile or other motor-propelled vehicle, other than vehicles specifically designed and exclusively used to transport wheelchair bound people in their wheelchairs, used for the transportation of passengers-for-hire over the public streets of the city and not over a defined or fixed route, such vehicle being routed under the directions of the passenger or person hiring the same. 
Attendant means a person who is accompanying a passenger because the passenger is not physically or mentally able to travel alone. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 95-64, § 1, 4-18-95; Ord. No. 11-128, § 1, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 35-2. - Application of chapter. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate or cause to be operated over the streets of the city, irrespective of whether or not the operation may extend beyond the limits of the city, any taxicab except under the terms and conditions set out in this chapter and any applicable franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-3. - Franchise required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab business within the city unless a written franchise therefor shall first have been obtained from the city council. A person desiring to operate a taxicab business within the city shall obtain such franchise from the city in addition to the license and permits required by the terms of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-4. - To be operated by licensee or his employee. 
No taxicab for which a license has been issued under this chapter shall be operated by anyone except the licensee thereof, an employee of the licensee, or a taxicab driver who may be operating such vehicle under a written agreement for use of a taxicab with the licensee specifically incorporating therein such rules, regulations and conditions as may be required by the city council. The operator of a taxicab licensed under this chapter shall be duly permitted pursuant to the terms of Article III of this chapter. The licensee shall be responsible for anyone operating under his license whether that person be an employee or another person operating under such written agreement. Any person driving or operating a taxicab upon the streets or other public property of the city shall have presumed to be an employee of the licensee or to have entered into such written agreement with the licensee. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-5. - Inspection. 
(a)  Every taxicab for which a license has been issued under this chapter shall be inspected at least once a year at the direction of the director of code enforcement of the city or his representative, or at any other time deemed advisable by city. The inspection shall be made to determine that the taxicab is in a reasonably good state of repair, clean, and equipped and being operated in compliance with all requirements of this article. The inspection shall be made at a place designated by the director of code enforcement or his representative, and the inspector shall make a written record of the inspection to be kept by the code enforcement department for a period of at least two (2) years. 
(b)  If the inspection reveals that a vehicle is not in a reasonably good operating condition, from the standpoint of the safety, health, and comfort of passengers, the taxicab shall be ordered out of service until remedial repairs and corrections have been made. When the repairs and corrections have been made, the vehicle shall be reinspected to determine whether or not proper repairs and corrections have been made and in no case shall the taxicab be permitted to resume its operation until the repairs and corrections have been made. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for a licensee to utilize any taxicab that has been ordered out of service until the vehicle has been reinspected and the director of code enforcement or his representative authorizes resumption of its use. 
(c)  Inspections may include, but not be limited to, the following items: vehicle identification number; taxicab number; date of purchase; foot brakes; emergency brake; head lamps; tail lamps; license plate lights; stool light; dome light; horn; windshield wipers; heating, ventilating, and air conditioning systems; current state inspection sticker; rearview mirror; all glasses; cleanliness; safety; condition of paint; color scheme; taximeter readings; rate card; signs; fumes; state license plates and registration sticker; speedometer readings; mileage; steering; tires; muffler and tail pipe; accuracy of taximeter; condition of the body of the vehicle and fenders; and vehicle age and mechanical condition. 
(d)  At the option of city, approved inspections by other cities may be accepted in lieu of the city's inspection of such vehicles. The licensee shall at all times be responsible for maintaining each taxicab in good mechanical condition and with full operational equipment. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 02-30, § 1, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-6. - Identification of vehicles. 
No licensee shall drive or cause to be driven, or operate or cause to be operated, a taxicab in the city unless such taxicab shall have affixed on at least one (1) door on each side thereof the telephone number and the name of the owner and/or operator of the taxicab, or the fictitious name under which the owner and/or operator operates, or the name of the corporation owning the taxicab, together with the taxicab number. The number of the taxicab and the telephone number shall also be affixed upon the rear of each taxicab. At the option of city council, numbers assigned to taxicabs by other cities may be accepted in lieu of numbers assigned by the city. All the lettering required by the terms of this section shall be not less than two and one-half (2½) inches in height and not less than five-sixteenths ( 5/16 ) inch stroke. Sign materials shall be of professional-quality outdoor vinyl marking materials, or the equivalent in terms of appearance and durability. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 02-30, § 2, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35-7. - Duty to render vehicles and equipment for taxation. 
It shall be the duty of the licensee of every taxicab operated within the city to render for ad valorem taxes to the city all vehicles or other equipment used in such business legally taxable under the laws of the State of Texas, and a failure to render for and to pay any ad valorem taxes legally owing the city before they become delinquent shall operate as a revocation of any license authorizing the operation of any taxicab over the public streets, alleys and ways of the city. Such revocation shall be subject to the hearing provisions set forth in section 35-32 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-8. - Maximum working hours for drivers. 
No person shall operate or drive any taxicab for more than twelve (12) hours in any twenty-four-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-9. - Drivers to use direct route. 
Any taxicab driver employed to carry passengers to a definite point shall take the most direct route possible that will carry the passengers safely and expeditiously to their destination. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-10. - Passenger's right of exclusive occupancy. 
When a taxicab is engaged, the passenger shall have the exclusive right to the full and free use of the passenger compartment and it shall be unlawful for the taxicab driver or licensee to solicit or carry additional passengers therein, except with the consent of the passenger who engaged the taxicab originally. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-11. - Meter required. 
(a)  No taxicab shall be operated in the city unless it is equipped with a meter in good condition to record the amount to be charged on each trip, which amount shall be shown by figures visible to the passenger. No taxicab driver shall carry a passenger unless the meter is in the recording position. All charges and collections for hire shall be based upon the meter reading. 
(b)  No licensee shall drive, cause to be driven or permit or allow to be driven, and no driver shall drive any taxicab on which any modification has been made to the meter or to any mechanical or electrical parts of the taxicab activating the meter which modification causes rates not authorized and established by city council under this chapter to be recorded and shown on such meter. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-12. - Fare—Maximum rate prescribed. 
(a)  The charge for taxicab service in the city shall not exceed two dollars and sixty cents ($2.60) for the first one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of a mile or less and thirty-two cents ($0.32) for each additional one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of a mile or less. The hourly rate for waiting time, including traffic delays, shall not exceed twenty dollars ($20.00) per hour. For trips that originate between the hours of 8:00 o'clock p.m. and 6:00 o'clock a.m., a late service fee of one dollar ($1.00) shall be added to the metered rate. 
(b)  In the event two (2) or more taxicab passengers are going to the same destination, the driver shall collect only one fare as recorded on the meter. If the passengers are going to different destinations, the driver shall clear his meter at the first destination and charge the first passenger the amount recorded on the meter, and proceed to the next destination as though it were a completely new trip. Other destinations shall be treated likewise. No extra charge shall be made for baggage or for parcels the size of which permits them to be carried in the taxicab. 
(c)  Any taxicab passenger sixty (60) years or older who provides to the taxicab driver proof of age by way of drivers license, ID, passport, or resident alien card, at the time the fare is collected shall receive a ten (10) percent discount of the fee otherwise applicable; provided, however, the reduced fare set out in this subsection shall not be applicable in the following situation: 
(1)  In the event the passenger has ridden in the taxicab to the same destination with another passenger who is not an attendant but is thirteen (13) years of age or older but less than sixty (60) years of age; 
(d)  The taxicab driver will accept fare tickets as payment from passengers receiving assistance from community development block grant funds or programs approved by the community development department. The senior discount will not apply when using fare tickets. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 91-26, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 95-235, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 02-30, § 3, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 05-223, § 1, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 11-128, § 2, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 35-13. - Same—Posting. 
There shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside each taxicab a card showing the rates charged and discounts for use of the taxicab. It shall be the duty of the driver of the taxicab to so post such card. If any owner, licensee or driver of any taxicab shall refuse to convey a passenger at the rate specified on the rate card so displayed, he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 11-128, § 3, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 35-14. - Same—Receipt for payment. 
Every taxicab driver, upon receiving payment for a fare and upon request of the passenger, shall give a receipt to the passenger showing the amount so paid, the name of the company or person operating the taxicab, and the vehicle number of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-15. - Same—Failure to pay. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the full fare of any taxicab after having hired the same, and any person who shall hire any taxicab with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-16. - Records to be kept by licensee. 
(a)  Each licensee shall maintain its records in accordance with the guidelines designated by city council or its designated representative. All such records shall be kept current and must be made available for inspection by designated city personnel during business hours. 
(b)  Each licensee shall keep complete records of all physical properties used and useful in recording taxicab service in the city, showing date of purchase, purchase price, terms of payments, and to the extent to which such property has been depreciated, by principal items of property. Such property records shall be kept in accordance with sound accounting principals and up-to-date at all times and available for inspection by designated city personnel during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Secs. 35-17—35-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE LICENSE 
 
Sec. 35-25. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or drive or permit the operation of any taxicab owned by him, unless a license for such taxicab has been issued by the city for the current year in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-26. - Application. 
Every person or entity desiring a license required by this article shall file with the city secretary a written application on forms to be furnished by the city, signed and sworn to by such applicant or a duly authorized officer or agent of the applicant, stating: 
(1)  The name and place of residence of the applicant, and if an individual or partnership, the age, and customary occupation of the applicant or applicants, and if a corporation, the name and addresses of the president and secretary thereof. 
(2)  A description of the equipment and the number of taxicabs to be used under the license. 
(3)  The location from which each such taxicab is to be dispatched or remain while not in active service. 
(4)  A schedule showing the make, model, type, license plate number and ownership of the vehicles that will be put into operation. 
Each such application shall have attached thereto an audited financial statement showing the assets and liabilities of the applicant, a certificate of inspection covering the taxicab to be licensed, which certificate shall conform to the requirements of section 35-4, and copies of all contracts between the licensee and any person or entity intending to operate a taxicab within the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-27. - Insurance required of applicant. 
(a)  Before any license shall be issued under this article, or before any renewal of such license shall be granted, the applicant shall file with the city secretary and thereafter keep in full force and effect a policy of public liability and property damage insurance covering all licensed taxicabs of the insured issued by a stock insurance company duly authorized to do business in the State of Texas and performable in Harris County, insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicle. The policy of insurance shall provide no less than the minimum coverage required by the state including the minimum coverage required to "show proof of financial responsibility" as that term is defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act as now in force or hereafter amended. The policy must contain a provision or endorsement requiring that the city be given thirty (30) days' notice before the policy can be canceled for any cause. 
(b)  In lieu of the policy of liability insurance prescribed by subsection (a), the applicant may file with the city secretary a certificate showing that the applicant has qualified as a self-insurer as that term is defined in the Texas Motor Vehicle Safety Responsibility Act as now in force or hereafter amended. 
(c)  The city council shall be the sole judge of the sufficiency of any policy or certificate tendered under this section. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-28. - License fee. 
(a)  The annual fee for each license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be the following: 
(1)  For one (1) to twenty (20) taxicabs to be licensed, the total sum of eight thousand dollars ($8,000.00); 
(2)  For twenty-one (21) to fifty (50) taxicabs to be licensed, the total sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00); 
(3)  For the fifty-first (51 st ) taxicab licensed and each additional taxicab licensed thereafter, licensee shall pay a one hundred dollar ($100.00) annual licensing fee in addition to the licensing fee stipulated above. 
(b)  The license shall be valid for the year issued and shall terminate December 31 of each year. The fees set forth herein shall be paid to the city finance department upon the issuance of the initial license and annually thereafter in advance on or before the fifteenth day of December of the year preceding the year for which the renewal is sought. If application for a taxicab license is made in the first six (6) months of a calendar year, the fees shall be pro-rated for the remaining portion of the year of first issuance, but in no case shall fees be pro-rated to less than half the full year amount. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 92-37, § 1, 2-25-92; Ord. No. 02-30, § 4, 1-22-02)  
Sec. 35-29. - Denial of license. 
(a)  An application for a license may be denied if the licensee makes a false or fraudulent representation in the application or the licensee or any one of the officers of the licensee (if a corporation or association) or any one of the partners (if a partnership) has been convicted of any of the designated offenses set forth in section 35-52(1) through (8) within the seven-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application. Additionally, a license shall be revoked or refused for renewal, as applicable, if the licensee is convicted of any offense involving fraud, theft or forgery subsequent to the city's approval of the licensee. A revocation of a license or refusal to renew a license on the grounds set forth herein shall effect an automatic termination of the franchise granted pursuant to the terms of section 35-3 of this chapter. A denial, revocation or refusal to renew a license shall be subject to the hearing provisions set forth in section 35-32 hereof. 
(b)  The city council shall have and hereby reserves the right to determine whether additional taxicab service is required for efficiently and properly meeting and serving public interests and necessity in the city, and without other cause existing, to refuse any application filed unless the council decides that the granting of same will serve public convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-30. - Expiration. 
All licenses issued under this article shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December thirty-first next following the issuance thereof. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-31. - Transfer. 
No licensee shall transfer, rent, lease, loan or assign a license issued pursuant to the terms of this article to any other person or allow its use by any other person or entity, nor shall the licensee permit such license to be used for the operation of any vehicle except the vehicle for which the license is issued; provided, however, that in the event a vehicle becomes disabled or is withdrawn from service for repairs, another vehicle may be substituted for such disabled vehicle only until same is repaired. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-32. - Cancellation. 
Any license granted under this article shall be subject to cancellation or revocation and all rights of the licensee may be forfeited at the will of the city council for failure of the licensee or its employees or drivers to observe any ordinance of the city, for the violation of any law of the State of Texas reasonably related to the safe operation of taxicabs in the city, or for the failure of the licensee to secure and file the certificate required by section 35-4. Additionally, any license may be canceled by the city council if the licensee or any one of its officers (if a corporation or association) or any partner (if a partnership) has been convicted of any one of the designated offenses set forth in section 35-52(1) through (8) since the filing of the application. Before canceling any such license, the council shall hold a public hearing, written notice of which shall be given the licensee at least three (3) days in advance of such hearing. If the cancellation is based on a criminal conviction, the notice shall inform the licensee of the following matters: 
(1)  That the city has information that the licensee or any one of its officers or partners, whichever is applicable, has been convicted of certain offenses, and a list of the specific offenses for which the city has such information. 
(2)  That the city is seeking to revoke or suspend the license on the grounds of a criminal conviction or convictions. 
(3)  The specific conviction or convictions upon which the city intends to rely in seeking revocation or suspension of the license. 
(4)  That a hearing will be held on the city's request for revocation or suspension of the license and the date, time and place of the hearing. 
(5)  That the licensee may appear at the hearing, give testimony and examine witnesses. 
(6)  That the licensee shall have the burden to present evidence concerning each of the matters set out in Section 4(c) of Article 6252-13c. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Secs. 35-33—35-42. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 
 
Sec. 35-43. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab unless he has a taxicab driver's permit issued by the city. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to permit any taxicab owned by him to be driven by any person who does not have such a permit. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-44. - Application generally. 
Every person who desires a permit to drive a taxicab shall file with the director of code enforcement of the city a written application, signed and sworn to by the applicant, giving the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, residence, place of residence for five (5) years previous to moving to his present address, age, race, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, place of birth, and length of time he has resided in the city; 
(2)  Whether the applicant is a citizen of the United States, and his record of employment for the past five (5) years, social security number and marital status; 
(3)  Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if so, the nature of the offense and the date and place of such conviction; 
(4)  Whether the applicant now stands charged with the commission of a felony or misdemeanor; 
(5)  Whether the applicant has previously been licensed as a taxicab driver; 
(6)  The amount of experience the applicant has had in the operation of public automobiles; 
(7)  Whether the applicant has ever been denied a taxicab driver's license or had one revoked or suspended; 
(8)  Whether the applicant has ever had a private passenger vehicle operator's license or a commercial vehicle driver's license or a chauffeur's license revoked; 
(9)  What taxicab firm the applicant intends to work for; 
(10)  Whether the applicant is addicted to the use of intoxicating liquors, morphine, cocaine, or any other kind of drugs calculated to affect the mental or physical condition of the applicant; and 
(11)  Any other relevant information that may be requested by the city council, the Director of Code Enforcement or other designated representative of the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-45. - Applicant to furnish character references and photographs and to be fingerprinted. 
Each applicant for a permit under this article shall provide two (2) personal character references and attach to the application two (2) passport size photographs of the applicant. Each applicant shall submit to a fingerprint and background check through the F.A.S.T. System as directed. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-46. - Qualifications of applicant. 
Each applicant for a permit must: 
(1)  Have a valid state chauffeur's license; 
(2)  Be eighteen (18) years of age or older; 
(3)  Be a person of good moral character; 
(4)  Be able to read and write the English language; 
(5)  Submit to medical examination by a licensed physician and submit the report of the physician, which must be signed by the physician; 
(6)  Complete a form entitled "Request for Information from Texas Driver Licensing Records" as part of his application and he shall pay the required fee therefor and submit such application to the Texas Department of Public Safety with a notation that the information is to be mailed to the director of code enforcement of the city. A taxicab driver's permit issued in advance of such request shall be subject to revocation in the event of the failure of the applicant to make such request and shall similarly be subject to revocation if the information received from the Texas Department of Public Safety discloses that the applicant's record disqualifies him from receiving a taxicab driver's permit; 
(7)  Submit an affidavit stating that he/she is a citizen of the United States of America by birth or naturalization, or if an alien, that the applicant is legally residing in the United States of America and that he/she has a legal right to engage in such employment; 
(8)  Be a person who has resided in the city for a period of six (6) months next preceding the date of application; provided, however, that the residency requirement will be waived if the applicant completes a training program conducted by the licensee and approved by the city that includes map training covering the city. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-47. - State license required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a taxicab within the city unless he is duly licensed by the state, having this license on his person at all times while operating a taxicab. No permit to drive a taxicab shall be issued in the absence of such a license. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-48. - Fee. 
The annual fee for a permit required by this article shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). If application for a permit required by this article is made in the first six (6) months of a calendar year, the fee shall be prorated for the remaining portion of the year of first issuance; but in no case shall the fee be prorated to less than ten dollars ($10.00). Such fee shall be paid to the city's code enforcement department and deposited in the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 02-30, § 5, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-49. - Denial of a permit application. 
An application for a permit under this article may be denied if the applicant fails to comply with any requirement of this article. In addition, such application may be denied if the applicant has been convicted of any of the designated offenses set forth in section 35-52(1) through (8) hereof within the seven-year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application or convicted of three (3) or more moving violations of the laws of this state within the year immediately preceding the date of filing the application for the permit. A denial of permit shall be subject to the hearing provisions set forth in section 35-52 of this chapter. Nonetheless, the city council may issue the permit if it determines that the issuance of the permit will serve the public convenience and necessity. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-50. - Issuance. 
If the application of any person for a taxicab driver's permit shall be granted, the code enforcement department shall issue such permit to the applicant upon the payment of the prescribed fee to the code enforcement department. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-51. - Expiration and renewal. 
Each permit issued under this article shall expire on the thirty-first day of December following its issuance and shall be renewed annually by making application to the city upon forms provided by the city for that purpose thirty (30) days prior to the date of expiration of the permit and by paying the fee prescribed in section 35-48. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-52. - Cancellation. 
Any permit granted under this article shall be subject to cancellation by the city council upon a finding that the permittee has been convicted of any one of the following offenses since the issuance of the permit: 
(1)  Any offense involving fraud or theft; 
(2)  Any offense involving forgery; 
(3)  Any offense involving unauthorized use of a motor vehicle; 
(4)  Any violation of state or federal laws regulating firearms; 
(5)  Any offense involving violence to any person except for conduct which is classified as no greater than a Class C misdemeanor under the laws of Texas; 
(6)  Any offense involving prostitution or the promotion of prostitution; 
(7)  Any offense involving rape, sexual abuse, sexual assault, rape of a child, sexual abuse of a child or indecency with a child; 
(8)  Any offense involving the use of or sale of drugs, including the offense of driving while intoxicated or driving under the influence of drugs. 
In addition, a permit shall be subject to cancellation by city council upon a finding that the permittee has been convicted of three (3) or more moving violations of the traffic laws of this state or any other state if such violation occurred within the year immediately preceding the notice of city council's intent to revoke or cancel the permit. 
Prior to revoking or canceling a permit the city shall comply with the notice and hearing provisions set forth in section 35-32. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-53. - Appearance. 
It shall be the duty of every taxicab driver to be hygienically clean, well groomed, neat, and suitably dressed in compliance with all applicable requirements of this section at all times while a taxicab is in his or her custody. 
Male drivers shall be clean shaven and hair shall be neatly trimmed. If a beard or moustache is worn, it shall be well groomed and neatly trimmed at all times in order not to present a ragged appearance. 
The term "suitably dressed" shall be interpreted to mean the driver, if male, shall wear trousers, a shirt with collar, with or without a tie, shoes, and, if desired, appropriate outer garments. 
The term "suitably dressed" shall be interpreted to mean the driver, if female, shall wear skirts, trousers, slacks, a shirt with collars or a blouse, shoes, and, if desired, appropriate outer garments. 
Clothing that is not considered appropriate and is not permitted when the driver, male or female, is in charge of a licensed taxicab includes: T-shirts, underwear, tank tops, body shirts, swim wear, jogging suits, or similar types of attire when worn as an outer garment, shorts or trunks (jogging or bathing), or sandals. 
(Ord. No. 88-10, § 2, 4-26-88)  
Sec. 35-54. - Vehicle age and mechanical condition. 
No driver or licensee shall drive or cause to be driven upon the streets of the city any taxicab vehicle that is more than ten (10) years old, provided that no vehicle may be placed in service for the first time as a taxicab if it has been driven more than one hundred and twenty thousand (120,000) actual miles, which shall be determined from the odometer and from title records. For purposes of this requirement, a taxicab will be considered to be ten (10) years old on March 31 of the tenth (10 th ) year following the manufacturer's model year of the vehicle, regardless of the purchase date or the date it was originally placed into service. 
Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, all new additions to the taxicab vehicle fleet shall meet all standards of this chapter at the time of introduction to the fleet. 
(Ord. No. 02-30, § 6, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 05-223, § 1, 9-13-05; Ord. No. 11-128, § 4, 8-9-11; Ord. No. 17-173, § 1, 12-5-17)  
Sec. 35-55. - Inspection prior to use after accident. 
A taxicab involved in an accident shall not thereafter be used in taxicab operations until it has been inspected by the director of code enforcement or his representative. If the inspection reveals that the taxicab has been damaged to an extent that it is not in compliance with city code, the taxicab shall be ordered out of service until the inspector has authorized the return of the taxicab to taxicab operations. The authorization shall not be given until proper repairs or corrections have been made. 
(Ord. No. 02-30, § 7, 1-22-02; Ord. No. 17-172, § 1(Exh. A), 12-5-17)  
Chapter 36 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Department of traffic and transportation, § 2-133 et seq.; ambulances, Ch. 4; auto wreckers, Ch. 7; bicycles, Ch. 8; application of traffic regulations to persons riding bicycles, § 8-2; buses, Ch. 9½; requirements for vehicles transporting explosives, § 13-68; spilling of garbage, trash and other refuse matter from vehicles, § 14-20; transportation of meat, § 15-43; automobile wrecking yards, § 17-16 et seq.; damaging, altering or removing traffic-control devices or traffic counters or other traffic-testing or measuring equipment, § 20-11; motor vehicle dealers, Ch. 22; operation of vehicles in parks, § 24-6.1; duty of planning director to make recommendations as to traffic flow, § 28-18; duties of planning and zoning commission relative to traffic, § 28-41; disposition of motor vehicles and auto accessories and tires in possession of police department, § 30-64; signs interfering with view of traffic at intersections, § 31-12(d); streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; taxicabs, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference— Uniform Traffic Act, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. All other words used in this chapter shall have their ordinary and commonly accepted meanings as set forth in dictionaries of recognized standing. 
Authorized emergency vehicle: Vehicles of the fire department (fire patrol), police vehicles, public and private ambulances for which permits have been issued by the state board of health, and other applicable authority, if any, such emergency vehicles of municipal departments or public service corporations as are designated or authorized by the city council, and private vehicles operated by volunteer firemen while answering a fire alarm. 
Bicycle: Every device propelled by human power which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels, either of which is over twenty (20) inches in diameter, and including any device generally recognized as a bicycle, though equipped with two (2) front or two (2) rear wheels. 
Business district: The territory contiguous to and including a roadway when, within any six hundred (600) feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for business or industrial purposes which occupy three hundred (300) feet of frontage on one side or three hundred (300) feet collectively on both sides of the roadway. 
Commercial vehicle: Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for the transportation of the property. 
Controlled-access highway: Every highway, street or roadway in respect to which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access to or from the same except at such points only and in such manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over such highway, street or roadway. 
Crosswalk: That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the street or highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of the traversable roadway, and any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface. 
Curb loading zone: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
Daytime and nighttime: "Daytime" means from one-half (½) hour before sunrise to one-half (½) hour after sunset, and "nighttime" means at any other hour. 
Driver: Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a vehicle. 
Freight curb loading zone: A space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of materials. 
Intersection: The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral curb lines or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two (2) streets which join one another at or approximately at right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different streets joining at any other angle may come in conflict. Where a street includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided street by an intersecting street shall be regarded as a separate intersection. In the event such intersecting street also includes two (2) roadways thirty (30) feet or more apart, then every crossing of two (2) roadways of such streets shall be regarded as a separate intersection. 
Laned street or roadway: A street or roadway which is divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic. 
Motor vehicle: Every vehicle which is self-propelled. 
Motorcycle: Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider, and designed to travel on not more than three (3) wheels in contact with the ground, but excluding a tractor. The term "motorcycle" shall include all forms of motorbikes. 
Official time standard: Whenever certain hours are named herein they shall mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in this city. 
Official traffic-control devices: All signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this chapter placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic. 
Park or parking: When prohibited, the term "park" or "parking" means the standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading. 
Passenger car: Every motor vehicle, except motorcycles and motor-driven cycles, designed for carrying ten (10) passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
Passenger loading zone: A place adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
Pedestrian: Any person afoot. 
Police officer: Every officer of the city police department or any officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
Private road or driveway: Every way or place in private ownership and used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied permission from the owner, but not by other persons. 
Right-of-way: The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such circumstances of direction, speed and proximity as to give rise to danger of collision unless one grants precedence to the other. 
Roadway: That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel. In the event a street includes two (2) or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" shall refer to any such roadway separately but not to all such roadways collectively. 
Safety zone: The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the exclusive use of pedestrians and which is protected or so marked or indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a safety zone. 
School bus: Every motor vehicle owned by a public or governmental agency and operated for the transportation of children to or from school, or privately owned and operated for compensation for the transportation of children to or from school. 
Sidewalk: That portion of the street between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
Stand or standing: The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers. 
Stop: When required, the word "stop" means complete cessation of movement. 
Stop or stopping: When prohibited means any halting even momentarily of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign or signal. 
Street or highway: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained, when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. 
Through street or highway: Every street or highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic is given preferential right-of-way, and at the extrances to which vehicular traffic from intersecting streets or highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way to vehicles on such through street or highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a yield sign, when such signs are erected as provided in this chapter. 
Traffic: Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other conveyances, either singly or together, while using any street for purposes of travel. 
Traffic-control signal: Any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to proceed. 
Urban district: The territory contiguous to and including any highway or street which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling houses, situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance of one-quarter (¼) of a mile or more on either side. 
Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rail or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-1), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 1—20.  
Sec. 36-2. - Traffic division created; control and general duties of traffic division. 
(a)  There is hereby established in the police department of this city a traffic division, to be under the control of a police officer appointed by and directly responsible to the chief of police, or under the control of the chief of police. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic division, with such aid as may be rendered by other members of the police department, to enforce the street traffic regulations of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city, to make arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents and to cooperate with the traffic director and other officers of the city in the administration of the traffic laws and in developing ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties specially imposed upon the division by this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-2, 28-3), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-3. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 83-32, § 1, enacted Jan. 25, 1983, repealed § 36-3. Said section, formerly relative to the traffic commission, derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-20), enacted March 15, 1966 and Ord. No. 80-79, § 3, adopted April 22, 1980.  
Secs. 36-4—36-6. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 80-79, § 1, enacted April 22, 1980, repealed §§ 36-4—36-6, concerning the traffic director and his authority to make regulations, orders, etc. Said sections derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-15—28-17, 28-19), adopted March 15, 1966.  
Sec. 36-7. - Duty of police to enforce traffic regulations. 
It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-21), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-8. - Authority of police officers to direct traffic. 
Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with this chapter and other traffic laws, provided that, in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter and other traffic laws. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-22), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of police officers, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(2).  
Sec. 36-9. - Authority of officers of fire department to direct traffic. 
Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-23), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-10. - Obedience to traffic officers; fleeing after order or signal to stop. 
(a)  No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer, or a fire department official invested by this chapter or other law with authority to direct, control or regulate traffic. 
(b)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-24), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 67-2061, § 1, 11-14-67; Ord. No. 90-127, §§ 1, 4, 7-24-90) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 23.  
Sec. 36-11. - Application of chapter to persons propelling pushcarts, riding animals, etc. 
Every person propelling any pushcart or riding an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal-drawn vehicle, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-28), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 25.  
Sec. 36-12. - Application of chapter to drivers of government vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States, this state or any county, city, town, district or other political subdivision of the state, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-30), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24(a).  
Sec. 36-13. - Application of chapter to authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated. 
(b)  The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may: 
(1)  Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this chapter; 
(2)  Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign; after slowing down as necessary for safety; 
(3)  Exceed the maximum speed limits, subject only to applicable conditions imposed by state law; [2] 
(4)  Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions. 
(c)  The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when the driver of the vehicle, while in motion, sounds an audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust whistle, capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of not less than five hundred (500) feet, as may be reasonably necessary, or when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such vehicle, except that an authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red light visible from in front of the vehicle. 
(d)  The foregoing provisions of this section shall not relieve the driver of any authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-31), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Exemption of authorized emergency vehicles from certain traffic regulations, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 24. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— See Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 172. 
 
Sec. 36-14. - Marking of school buses. 
Every bus used for the transportation of schoolchildren within the city shall bear upon the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus" in letters not less than eight (8) inches in height. When a school bus is being operated upon a street within the city for purposes other than the actual transportation of children either to or from schools all markings thereon indicating "School Bus" shall be covered or concealed. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-58), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 104(b).  
Sec. 36-15. - Limitation on use of flashing signals on school buses. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any school bus within the city to operate any flashing warning signal light on such bus except when the bus is being stopped or is stopped on a street or highway for the purpose of permitting school children to board or alight therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-59), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 105(b).  
Sec. 36-16. - Permit for parades. 
No procession or parade, other than a funeral procession, containing fifty (50) or more persons or ten (10) or more vehicles, excepting the armed forces of the United States and the military forces of the state, shall occupy, march or proceed along any public street, except in accordance with a permit issued by the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-57), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Authority to regulate or prohibit processions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(3).  
Sec. 36-17. - Identification of vehicles in funeral procession. 
The traffic division shall designate the dimensions, the shape and material of a white pennant to be displayed upon at least the first and last vehicles in funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-14), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-18. - Riding on portion of vehicle not intended for passengers. 
No person shall ride upon any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-44), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-19. - Boarding or alighting from moving vehicle. 
No person shall board or alight from any vehicle while such vehicle is in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-43), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-20. - Clinging to moving vehicle. 
It shall be unlawful for any person riding upon any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, sled, roller skates, tire, inner tube, hoop or any toy vehicle to attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-42), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Bicycles generally, Ch. 8.  
Sec. 36-21. - Use of roller skates, coasters, etc., on roadway. 
No person upon roller skates, or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk and, when so crossing, such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians. This section shall not apply upon any street while set aside as a play street as authorized by this chapter or other ordinance of this city. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-29), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-22. - Glass, nails, etc., not to be deposited in street; removal of same. 
(a)  No person shall throw or otherwise deposit any glass or glass bottle, nails, tacks, wire, cans or any substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon any street or highway in the city. 
(b)  Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any roadway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from the roadway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the roadway from such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-60), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Duty of auto wrecker drivers to remove debris from street after accident, § 7-12; street littering, § 14-19. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 102, 103.  
Sec. 36-22.1. - Trees, shrubs, fences, signs, structures, etc., obstructing view of traffic at intersections; defined; notice to remove; appeal; penalty. 
(a)  Adequate sight distances shall be maintained at the intersection of all public streets and from commercial driveways which intersect with major thoroughfares. 
(b)  The minimum sight distance that must be preserved or provided is based on the posted speed limit on each leg of the public street or major thoroughfare intersection. This sight distance is measured, at elevations between three (3) feet and eight (8) feet above the street grade, from the view of a motorist lawfully upon the roadway, or property exiting a commercial driveway, from a point fifteen (15) feet from the edge of the cross street and along the cross street a distance of ten (10) times the posted speed limit. See Exhibit A for sight distance illustrations. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to erect, plant, or maintain any fence, wall, screen, billboard, sign, structure, foliage of hedges, trees, bushes, or other view obstruction so as to obstruct the sight distance as described in subsection (a). Obstructions of this nature are found by the city council to be a nuisance. 
(d)  Any such fence, wall, screen, hedge, tree, bush, shrub, billboard, sign, structure, or other view obstruction erected, planted, or maintained in violation of this section shall be removed within ten (10) days upon written notice from the city traffic director to the adjacent property owner. 
(e)  In the event that the obstruction lies within the city's right-of-way and is not removed by the property owner within ten (10) days from the date the notice is received, the city will remove and dispose of the object. 
(f)  In the event that the obstruction lies within the city's right-of-way or upon private property and is not removed within ten (10) days from the date the notice is mailed or appeal is final, the owner shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day that such owner allows the obstructions to remain shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(g)  In the event any citizen desires to appeal from a notice received in subsection (d), he may, within the ten (10) days from the date the notice was mailed, file a notice of appeal to the traffic commission. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the traffic director. The notice of appeal shall state the name and address of the person appealing the notice, to which address the date of hearing shall be sent, the location of the alleged obstruction which the city desires to remove, and the reason for the appeal. In the event such a notice of appeal is received by the director of traffic, he shall not abate the alleged obstruction until and unless the traffic commission issues a ruling affirming his decision. The traffic commission shall hold a hearing and render a decision in writing within thirty (30) days after it receives said notice of appeal. When the meeting of the traffic commission is called to consider the appeal, the person requesting the appeal shall be given at least seven (7) days written notice of the hearing date. The traffic commission may affirm or reverse the finding of the traffic director and its decision shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-166), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 74-42, § 1, 2-26-74; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 01-52, § 1, 3-27-01) 
 
Exhibit A—Required Sight Distance  
Sec. 36-23. - Notice and reports of accidents generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice of such accident to the police department, if such accident occurs within this city. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any person or total damage to all property to an apparent extent of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more shall, within ten (10) days after such accident, forward a written report of such accident to the police department. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at the scene by a police officer while such driver was present thereat. 
(c)  Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report of an accident as required in subsection (b) and such driver is not the owner of the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle involved in such accident shall, within ten (10) days after learning of the accident, make such report not made by the driver. 
(d)  The traffic division shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by location. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the traffic director. 
(e)  All written reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting and shall be for the confidential use of the police department or other governmental agencies having use for the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the police department or other governmental agency may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at such accident. 
(f)  No written reports forwarded under the provisions of this section shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or criminal, arising out of an accident, except that the police department shall furnish, upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident report has or has not been made to the department in compliance with law, and if such report has been made, the date, time and location of the accident, the names and addresses of the drivers, the owners of the vehicles involved, and the investigating officers. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-5—28-8, 28-11), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Accident reports, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 43 et seq.; authority of city to require accident reports, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 49.  
Sec. 36-24. - Sale of accident reports filed by police officers and official accident photographs. 
(a)  Any traffic accident report filed by a city police officer may, after final disposition of any criminal offense charge arising from the accident report, and after such report has been duly classified for public release by the police department, be sold to any person at a total cost of six dollars ($6.00) per accident report. 
(b)  Any city official traffic accident photograph may, after final disposition of any criminal offense charged and arising from such accident, and after such photograph has been duly classified for release by the police department, be sold to any person at the total cost of ten dollars ($10.00) per print, subject to the agreement, as an express condition of sale by the city, of the person purchasing such photograph to pay, for the city officer taking such photograph, such officer's base pay per diem for each day such officer may be subpoenaed or required to attend court or other legal proceedings, for the purpose of establishing the authenticity of such photograph in evidence in any civil suit, the same to be payable prior to each day such attendance may be thus required. 
(c)  All monies received from sales made under this section shall be promptly paid into the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 1853, § 1, 8-30-66; Ord. No. 74-152, § 1, 7-23-74; Ord. No. 01-204, § 1, 11-27-01)  
Sec. 36-25. - Investigation of accidents and arrests resulting therefrom. 
It shall be the duty of the traffic division, assisted by other police officers of the department, to investigate traffic accidents, to arrest and to assist in the prosecution of those persons charged with violations of law causing or contributing to such accidents. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-9), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-26. - Accident studies. 
Whenever the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the traffic division shall cooperate with the traffic director in conducting studies of such accidents and determining remedial measures. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-10), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-27. - Records of traffic violations. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall keep a record of all violations of the traffic ordinances of this city or of the state vehicle laws of which any person has been charged, together with a record of the final disposition of all such alleged offenses. Such record shall be so maintained as to show all types of violations and the total of each. Such record shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period and from that time on the record shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period. 
(b)  All forms for records of violations and notices of violations shall be serially numbered. For each month and year a written record shall be kept available to the public showing the disposal of all such forms. 
(c)  All such records shall be public records. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-4), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-28. - Drivers' records. 
(a)  The police department or the traffic division thereof shall maintain a suitable record of all traffic accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints reported for each driver, which shall be filed alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned. 
(b)  The traffic division shall study the cases of all the drivers charged with frequent or serious violations of the traffic laws or involved in frequent traffic accidents or any serious accident, and shall attempt to discover the reasons therefor, and shall take whatever steps are lawful and reasonable to prevent the same or to have the licenses of such persons suspended or revoked. 
(c)  Such records shall accumulate during at least a five (5) year period and from that time on such records shall be maintained complete for at least the most recent five (5) year period. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-12), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-29. - Annual traffic report. 
The traffic division shall annually prepare a traffic report which shall be filed with the mayor. Such report shall contain information in traffic matters in this city as follows: 
(1)  The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed, the number of persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data; 
(2)  The number of traffic accidents investigated and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police; 
(3)  The plans and recommendations of the division for future traffic safety activities. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-13), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-30. - Giving false name or address upon arrest for violation of chapter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being arrested by a police officer for a violation of this chapter, to give such arresting officer, as his name, any other than his true and correct name. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person, upon being arrested by a police officer for a violation of this chapter, to give such officer, as his address, any other than his true and correct address. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-173, 28-174), 3-15-66)  
Secs. 36-31—36-39. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 36-40. - General limitations on driving on left side of roadway. 
(a)  No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway under the following conditions: 
(1)  When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in a street or highway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction. 
(2)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of, or traversing, any intersection or railroad grade crossing. 
(3)  When approaching within one hundred (100) feet of any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. 
(b)  The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-33), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 57.  
Sec. 36-41. - Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction—Generally. 
Except as provided in section 36-43, the driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction, unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to the right-hand side of the roadway before coming within one hundred (100) feet of any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-37), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 54, 56.  
Sec. 36-42. - Same—Duty of driver of overtaken vehicle. 
It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle, upon audible signal that he is about to be overtaken on the left, to give way to the right in favor of the overtaking vehicle and he shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-38), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 54(b).  
Sec. 36-43. - Same—On right side. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass to the right of a vehicle proceeding in the same direction only under the following conditions: 
(1)  When the overtaken vehicle is making or about to make a left turn. 
(2)  Upon a street or highway with unobstructed pavement, not occupied by parked vehicles, of sufficient width for two (2) or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction. 
(3)  Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is restricted to one direction of movement, when the roadway is free from obstructions and of sufficient width for two (2) or more lines of moving vehicles. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle on the right only under conditions permitting such movement with safety. In no event shall such movement be made by driving off the pavement or main-traveled portion of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-39), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 55.  
Sec. 36-44. - Same—In school zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to overtake and pass another motor vehicle going in the same direction on any two (2) lane street, avenue, drive or road within the limits of any school zone designated in section 36-144, and between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and between 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., of each day, Mondays through Fridays, both inclusive, from the first day of September, to the first day of June of each and every year. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-40), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-45. - Passing vehicle proceeding in opposite direction. 
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to the right and, upon streets having width for not more than one lane of traffic in each direction, each 
driver shall give to the other at least one-half (½) of the main-traveled portion of the roadway, as nearly as possible. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1, (28-41), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 53.  
Sec. 36-46. - Turning at intersections generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do so as follows: 
(1)  Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(2)  The approach for a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line of the roadway being entered. 
(3)  The approach for a left turn from a two-way street into a one-way street shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of such center line where it enters the intersection. A left turn from a one-way street into a two-way street shall be made by passing to the right of the center line of the street being entered upon leaving the intersection. 
(4)  Where both streets or roadways are one-way, both the approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway. 
(b)  The traffic director is authorized to place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and such course to be traveled may require one or more lines of traffic to turn in any direction upon such curvatures and angles and for such distances as he may deem advisable, other turning laws in this article to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(c)  When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-90, 28-91), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art 6701d, § 65; authority of city to regulate turning at intersections, art. 6701d, § 27(a)(8).  
Sec. 26-47. - Prohibited turns at intersections. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles are prohibited from turning right or left, or both, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(b)  Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left turn is permitted, or any combination of such turns, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-93), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-48. - U-turns prohibited; exception. 
The driver of any vehicle shall not turn such vehicle so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any street with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Turning circle in a cul-de-sac. 
(2)  Designated U-turn lane on a freeway service road. 
(3)  A median opening of an esplanade not at an intersection. 
(4)  At any location at which a sign permitting the maneuver has been installed at the direction of the director of the traffic and transportation department. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-94), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 94-12, § 1, 1-25-94)  
Sec. 36-49. - Stopping and turning signals—Generally. 
(a)  When any other traffic may be affected by such movement, no person shall turn any vehicle without giving a signal of his intention to turn right or left. Such signal shall be given continuously during not less than the last one hundred (100) feet traveled by the vehicle before turning. 
(b)  No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to give such signal. 
(c)  A stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given by means of the hand and arm or by a signal lamp or mechanical signal device of a type approved by the state department of public safety; provided, however, that when the body of a vehicle or the body and load of a vehicle projects twenty-four (24) inches or more to the left of the center of the steering wheel, or under any condition when a hand and arm signal would not be visible both to the front and rear of the vehicle, the vehicle must be equipped with and the signals must be given by such turn-indicating lamp or device. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-95), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 68, 69.  
Sec. 36-50. - Same—Manner of giving with hand and arm. 
All signals required by section 36-49, when given by hand and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner and such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Left turn: Hand and arm extended horizontally. 
(2)  Right turn: Hand and arm extended upward. 
(3)  Stop or decrease speed: Hand and arm extended downward. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-96); Ord. No. 1800, § 1, 4-5-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 70.  
Sec. 36-51. - Right-of-way at intersections generally. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection in obedience to any stop sign, yield right-of-way sign or traffic-control device erected by public authority, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle on a single lane street or roadway, or a street or roadway consisting of only two (2) traffic lanes, upon approaching the intersection, not otherwise controlled by traffic signs or signals, of a divided street or roadway, or of a street or roadway divided into three (3) or more marked traffic lanes, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to vehicles on such other street which are within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard and, after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(c)  The driver of a vehicle on an unpaved street or roadway approaching the intersection of a paved roadway shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any vehicle on such paved roadway which is within the intersection or approaching such intersection in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter the intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such paved street or roadway. 
(d)  The driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection of a different street or roadway, not otherwise regulated herein, or controlled by traffic-control signs or signals, shall stop, yield and grant the privilege of immediate use of such intersection to any other vehicle which has entered the intersection from such driver's right or is approaching such intersection from such driver's right in such proximity thereto as to constitute a hazard, and after so stopping, may only proceed thereafter when such driver may safely enter such intersection without interference or collision with traffic using such different street or roadway. 
(e)  A driver obligated to stop and yield the right-of-way in accord with this section, who is involved in a collision or interference with other traffic at such intersection, is presumed not to have yielded the right-of-way as required by this section. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-97), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 71.  
Sec. 36-52. - Right-of-way when turning left. 
The driver of a vehicle within an intersection intending to turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction, which is within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard, but such driver, having so yielded and having given a signal when and as required by this article, may make such left turn, and the drivers of all other vehicles approaching the intersection from the opposite direction shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle making the left turn. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 72.  
Sec. 36-53. - Through streets designated; stop or yield signs on streets intersecting through streets. 
(a)  The following streets and parts of streets are hereby declared to be through streets: 
(1)  Major Streets: 
Allen-Genoa Road. 
Beltway 8. 
Channel City Road. 
Fairmont Parkway. 
Genoa-Red Bluff Road. 
Main Street. 
Preston Road. 
Richey Street. 
Shaver Street. 
Southmore Avenue. 
Spencer Highway. 
State Highway 225. 
Strawberry Road. 
West State Highway 225 
(2)  Collector Streets: 
Allendale Road. 
Bearle Street. 
Bramley Drive. 
Burke Road. 
Cherrybrook Lane. 
Flamborough Drive. 
Fresa Road. 
Garner Road. 
Glenmore Drive. 
Harris Avenue. 
Jackson Avenue. 
Jana Lane. 
Lafferty Road. 
Oak Avenue. 
Oaks Drive. 
Pansy Street. 
Pasadena Boulevard. 
Pauline Avenue. 
Queens Road. 
San Jacinto Drive. 
South Houston Road. 
Sycamore Street. 
Tanglebriar Drive. 
Tatar Street. 
Thomas Avenue. 
Vista Road. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic director to place and maintain a stop sign, or on the basis of traffic investigation at any intersection a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting a through street designated in subsection (a) above, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. At the intersection of two (2) such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs or traffic-control signals shall be erected at the approaches of either of such streets as may be determined by the traffic director upon the basis of a traffic study. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-101, 28-102), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate through streets, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(6), 91(a).  
Sec. 36-54. - Designating and marking other stop and yield intersections. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized to determine and designate intersections where a particular hazard exists upon other than through streets and to determine: 
(1)  Whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances to any such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a stop sign at every such place where a stop is required, or 
(2)  Whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles on a different street at such intersection, in which event he shall cause to be erected a yield sign at every place where obedience thereto is required. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-103), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-55. - Stop required when emerging from alley, driveway or building. 
The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, driveway or building shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway or driveway, yielding the right-of-way to any pedestrian as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-107), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 92.  
Sec. 36-56. - Stop required at railroad crossings under certain circumstances. 
(a)  Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of such vehicle shall stop within fifty (50) feet but not less than fifteen (15) feet from the nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall apply when: 
(1)  A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train; 
(2)  A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives or continues to give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train; 
(3)  A railroad train approaching within approximately fifteen hundred (1,500) feet of the highway crossing emits a signal audible from such distance and such railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an immediate hazard; 
(4)  An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to such crossing. 
(b)  No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-109), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 86.  
Sec. 36-57. - Limitations on backing. 
No driver of a vehicle shall back the same unless such movement can be made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person angle-parked on private property to back the vehicle across the sidewalk or into a roadway; provided, however, this shall not apply to vehicles backing from a driveway in connection with a residence or backing from a regularly dedicated alley. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-49), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-58. - Driving on roadways laned for traffic. 
Whenever any roadway has been divided into two (2) or more clearly marked lanes for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all others consistent herewith, shall apply: 
(1)  The driver of a vehicle shall drive as nearly as practical entirely within a single lane and the vehicle shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first ascertained that such movement can be made with safety. 
(2)  Upon a roadway which is divided into three (3) lanes, the driver of a vehicle shall not drive in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly visible and such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or in preparation for a left turn or where such center lane is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding and is sign-posted to give notice of such allocation. 
(3)  Official signs may be erected directing slow moving traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of every such sign. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-36, 28-78), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 60.  
Sec. 36-59. - Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle. 
(a)  Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of audible or visual signals meeting the requirements of the laws of this state, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible signal only, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or curb of the roadway clear of any intersection and shall stop and remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons using the highway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-32), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 75.  
Sec. 36-60. - Procedure upon meeting or overtaking stopped school bus. 
(a)  The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway within the city, upon meeting or overtaking from either direction any school bus which has stopped on the street or highway for the purpose of receiving or discharging any schoolchildren, shall stop the vehicle immediately before passing the school bus and thereupon remain standing until all schoolchildren have boarded such school bus or, upon alighting, have reached a place of safety, but such driver may then proceed past such school bus at a speed which is reasonable and prudent, not exceeding ten (10) miles per hour, and with due caution for the safety of such children. 
(b)  The driver of a vehicle upon a street or highway with separate roadways need not stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway or when upon a controlled-access highway and the school bus is stopped in a loading zone which is a part of or adjacent to such highway and where pedestrians are not permitted to cross the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-110), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 104.  
Sec. 36-61. - Obstructing intersection or crosswalk. 
No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-45, 28-108), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-62. - Clearance when following another vehicle. 
The driver of a motor vehicle shall, when following another vehicle, maintain an assured clear distance between the two (2) vehicles, exercising due regard for the speed of such vehicles and traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway, so that such motor vehicle can be safely brought to a stop without colliding with the preceding vehicle, or veering into other vehicles, objects or persons on or near the street or highway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-64), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 61(a).  
Sec. 36-63. - Following fire apparatus or driving near scene of fire. 
No driver of a vehicle, other than one on official business, shall follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than five hundred (500) feet, or drive, operate, stand, stop or park such vehicle within two (2) blocks of any burning building or structure, except to drive away from the same, or, when within four (4) blocks of any burning building or structure, drive past, either to the left or to the right of any vehicle, except to drive away from such building. These provisions shall not apply to any member of the fire department or police department or any city official when actually engaged in an official duty, or to the owner or other person directly interested in the building or structure on fire, or to the operators of public utility service cars and ambulances in the case of an emergency, or to those persons who are assisting in extinguishing the fire, or in salvage. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-46), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 100.  
Sec. 36-64. - Driving over fire hose. 
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the fire department official in command. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-47), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 101.  
Sec. 36-65. - Driving in processions. 
Each driver of a vehicle comprising a funeral or other authorized procession shall maintain a distance of not more than sixteen (16) feet between the front bumper of such vehicle and the rear bumper of the vehicle, if any, preceding such vehicle. Such distance shall be greater if, having due regard for the speed of vehicles to the front, if any, and rear, if any, of such vehicle, and the traffic upon and the conditions of the highway, reason and prudence dictate such greater distance, and such greater distance shall be maintained whenever the speed of vehicle exceeds twenty (20) miles per hour, unless reason and prudence dictate otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-48), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-66. - Driving between vehicles in procession. 
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-48), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-67. - Driving around rotary traffic islands. 
The driver of a vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall drive only to the right of such island. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-35), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-68. - Driving in sidewalk area. 
The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area except at a permanent or temporary driveway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-55), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-68.1. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed § 36-68.1 which pertained to play streets designated and operation of vehicles thereon, and derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-172); adopted March 15, 1966.  
Sec. 36-69. - Operation of vehicle for advertising purposes. 
No person shall operate any vehicle on any street for the primary purpose of advertising, except where such operation is specifically permitted by the terms of some other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-51), 3-16-66)  
Sec. 36-70. - Operation of vehicle with cleats, studs, etc. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or run upon any public street in the city any vehicle which has on the periphery of its wheels any block, lug, stud, cleat, ridge, bead or any other protuberance of metal that projects beyond the tread or traction surface of the wheels or tires, unless the wheels are protected by bands, wooden blocks, skids, or some sufficient device to protect the streets against injury by reason thereof. Nothing herein shall prohibit the use of tractors with cleats on the driving wheels thereof on dirt or unimproved streets or the use of vehicles actually engaged at the time in construction or repair of that portion of the street on which the same are operating. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-52), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-71. - Operation of vehicles transporting concrete. 
Every owner or driver, or employee of such owner or driver, who shall drive, or have driven, any motor vehicle equipped for the transportation of concrete over any street within the city, without having attached thereto a receptacle in position to catch all concrete that might be spilled or splashed from such vehicle, and from which vehicle concrete is spilled, splashed or otherwise deposited upon any street in the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-53), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-72. - Cutting corners. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle over any sidewalk area and through any driveway, parking lot or any business entrance, in making either a right or left turn, whether in forward or reverse gear, except for the purpose of coming to a complete stop thereat to obtain or render some service, or a sale or purchase. It is the intention of this section to prohibit "corner cutting" by driving a vehicle from one public street into another, or from part of one public street into another part of such street, across any such sidewalk and driveway and through any driveway, parking lot or business entrance. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-56), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-73. - Driving on fresh pavement. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle upon any portion of any street in the city that has been freshly paved, unless all barriers or signal lights have been lawfully removed therefrom, thus indicating that the street is ready for travel. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-50), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-74. - "Dig out" or "tire squeal" prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any motor vehicle within the city to "dig out" or produce "tire squeal." For the purposes of this section, "dig out" means "tire squeal." "Tire squeal" means the sound produced by the friction of a motor vehicular tire turning against a dry pavement under sudden acceleration of the vehicle on which the tire is mounted, such tire then turning at a rate of revolution disproportionally greater than the length of distance then traveled on the pavement by the tire. 
Prima facie evidence of such disproportional revolution shall include skid marks or tire marks left by such tire upon the pavement, or smoke produced by such revolution. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-169), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-75. - Weaving in and out of traffic or cutting in from one line of traffic to another. 
(a)  No driver of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall weave in and out of traffic to the extent that such weaving unreasonably interferes with the right-of-way of other vehicles on the right or left. 
(b)  When traffic is traveling in parallel lanes, no driver or operator of any motor vehicle or any other vehicle shall cut from one lane of traffic to another so as to unreasonably interfere with the right-of-way of any other vehicle, except in sudden emergency. 
(c)  The fact that any adjacent vehicle, into the path of which the weave or cut is made, shall slacken its pace abruptly or swerves into any parallel lane or near to any obstruction in the street or object in the side thereof shall be prima facie evidence of unreasonable interference with the right-of-way of that vehicle by the driver of the vehicle weaving or cutting. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-61—28-63), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-76. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 90-127, § 1, adopted July 24, 1990, repealed § 36-76 which pertained to negligent collision and derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-54), adopted March 15, 1966 and Ord. No. 74-119, § 1, adopted June 4, 1974.  
Sec. 36-77. - Driving while view or control obstructed; passengers not to obstruct view or control. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle when it is loaded with material or passengers so as to obstruct the view of the driver to the front or to the sides of the vehicle or so as to interfere with the driver's control over the driving controls of the vehicle. 
(b)  No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in such position as to interfere with the driver's view forward, rearward, or to the sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with control over the driving controls of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-170, 28-171), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-78. - Permitted unauthorized minor to drive. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or person having legal custody of a child or ward under the age of eighteen (18) years to permit such child or ward to drive a motor vehicle, as herein defined, upon any public street, highway or sidewalk, within the city limits; or upon, over or across the grounds of any public park, playground or other recreational facility; or upon any esplanade within the city limits of the City of Pasadena, where such motor vehicle is not licensed by the State of Texas and/or the child or ward does not have a valid operator's commercial operator's or chauffeur's license issued by the State of Texas. A "motor vehicle", as used herein, shall mean any vehicle which is, or may be self-propelled. 
(b)  Penalty. 
(1)  It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to violate any of the provisions of this section unless such violation is by laws of the State of Texas declared to be a felony. 
(2)  In addition to any other penalties hereinbefore provided, and unless another penalty is by the laws of the State of Texas provided, every person convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of this section shall be punished by fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 71-157, §§ 1, 2, 6-1-71) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-157 did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 herein as § 36-78 was at the discretion of the editors.  
Sec. 36-79. - Use of communications devices in school zones while driving. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
Engage in a call shall mean talking into, dialing, listening on, entering or reading text messages or viewing images and/or text on a mobile communications device. 
Hands-free mobile telephone shall mean a mobile telephone that has an internal feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition, whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a user engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the case of a physically disabled person), whether or not the use of either hand {or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone. 
Immediate proximity shall mean the distance permitting the user of a mobile communications device to hear telecommunications transmitted over such device, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's ear. 
Mobile communications device shall mean a mobile telephone, "smart" phone, personal digital assistant, pager or other device by which the user communicates to another, or receives communication from another, by means of voice communications, text entry, text receipt or any other means of electronically transferred data. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided below, it shall be unlawful for a person to engage in a call or to create, send or read messages while operating a moving motor vehicle in a school zone, on an official school day, during the hours when school zones are in effect, and when school zone signs and signs prohibiting mobile communications device use are posted. 
(c)  The operator of a motor vehicle is presumed to engage in a call if such operator holds a mobile communications device to or in the immediate proximity of his ear while such vehicle is in motion. An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to create, send or read messages, including using the internet or accessing data bases while such vehicle is in motion is presumed to be engaging in a call within the meaning of this section. 
(d)  Subsection (b) shall not apply to: 
(1)  The use of a mobile communications device for the sole purpose of communicating with an emergency response operator, hospital, physician's office or health clinic, or the city's police or fire department during an emergency situation; 
(2)  Law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency services officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and personnel, or any fire safety officials when the specified use of a mobile communications device at issue occurred in the performance of duties arising out of and in the course of their employment as such; or 
(3)  The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a hands-free manner. 
(Ord. No. 09-067, § 1, 3-24-09)  
ARTICLE II½. - GOLF CARTS 
 
Sec. 36-80. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
Golf cart as referenced hereafter, shall have the meaning as defined in Texas Transportation Code Section 502.001. 
Operator shall mean the person operating and having physical control over the golf cart. An operator must have a Valid Texas Drivers' License in their possession. 
Public highway or roadway shall have the meaning as defined in Texas Transportation Code Section 502.001. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-81. - Operation of golf carts permitted. 
Pursuant to Texas Transportation Code Section 551.404, operators are allowed to operate a golf cart on all or part of a public highway that is in the corporate boundaries of the City of Pasadena, east of Toddville Road to Galveston Bay. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-82. - Required equipment. 
A golf cart operated under this article must have the following equipment: 
(a)  Headlamps; 
(b)  Taillamps; 
(c)  Reflectors; 
(d)  Parking brake; 
(e)  Mirrors; and 
(f)  A slow moving vehicle emblem as provided for in Texas Transportation Code Section 547.703. 
(g)  Brakes which will stop the vehicle in a reasonable distance. 
(h)  Two red brake lights or stop lamps shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle and display when brakes are applied, mounted at a height of fifteen (15) to seventy-two (72) inches, at the same height and spaced as widely apart as practicable. 
(i)  Rearview mirror shall be equipped and in good working order located to reflect to the operator a view for a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet to the rear of the vehicle. 
(j)  Audible warning device or horn in good working condition that emits a sound audible under normal conditions at a distance of at least two hundred (200) feet. 
(k)  Exhaust systems in good working order and within the noise ordinance of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-83. - Operation regulations. 
(a)  Any operator of a golf cart under this article, shall be licensed to operate a motor vehicle as provided for by the Texas Transportation Code and shall have in their possession a valid Texas Drivers' License and proof of financial responsibility covering the golf cart (as required for other motor vehicles under Texas Transportation Code Section 601.051), while operating the golf cart. 
(b)  All traffic regulations applicable to vehicular traffic must be followed. 
(c)  Golf carts shall not be operated on public sidewalks, running or walking paths, and places designed for pedestrians or bicycles, or any other place not expressly permitted. 
(d)  Golf carts shall not be operated on any major or secondary thoroughfares in the city. 
(e)  The operator and any passengers shall be limited to the seating capacity of the golf cart as designed by the manufacturer; all occupants shall remain seated in a seat designed to hold passengers at all times while the golf cart is in motion. 
(f)  Golf carts must yield right-of-way to bicycles, pedestrians, and faster moving vehicles. 
(g)  No child under the age of 10 may ride in a golf cart unless properly restrained by a seat belt. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-84. - Exceptions. 
Golf carts owned and/or operated for official government purposes and those used while evacuating persons during a declared emergency are exempt from these regulations. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-85. - Penalty. 
This article is hereby incorporated into and made a part of the Pasadena City Code. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense plus court costs. Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. 2012-141, § 2, 10-2-12)  
Sec. 36-86. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Damaging, altering or removing traffic-control devices, § 20-11. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate traffic by means of traffic-control devices and signals, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 27(a)(2), 31. 
 
Sec. 36-87. - Conformity with manual and specifications of state highway department; uniformity. 
All traffic-control signs, signals and devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved and adopted by the state highway department. 
All signs and signals required under this chapter for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic-control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-66, 28-67), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 31.  
Sec. 36-88. - General powers and duties of traffic and transportation director relative to devices. 
(a)  The traffic and transportation director shall place and maintain traffic-control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city to make effective the provisions of such chapter and ordinances, and he may place and maintain such additional traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate traffic thereunder or under state law or to guide or warn traffic. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the traffic and transportation director to determine the proper timing of traffic-control devices, and he may test traffic-control devices under actual conditions of traffic. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-15, 28-16, 28-65), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 80-79, § 3, 4-22-80) 
Cross reference— General authority of director of traffic and transportation, § 2-136.  
Sec. 36-89. - Marking of traffic lanes. 
The traffic and transportation director is hereby authorized to mark or make traffic lanes upon the roadway of any street or highway where a regular alignment of traffic is necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-78), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 80-79, § 3, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 36-90. - Warrant of permanency for devices initially installed on temporary or emergency basis. 
In the event the traffic and transportation director has, in the first instance, instituted a temporary or experimental traffic-control device, sign, signal, mark, marking or marker, or combination thereof, as authorized by section 2-137, and within ninety (90) days thereafter determines that such should be permanent, he shall file a writing captioned "WARRANT OF PERMANENCY" as to the same prior to the expiration of such ninety (90) day period, reciting that the same is made permanent and stating the effective date for the commencement of such permanency. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-17), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 80-79, § 3, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 36-91. - Presumptions as to devices. 
(a)  Whenever official traffic-control devices are placed in position substantially conforming to the requirements of this chapter, such devices shall be presumed to have been so placed by the official act or direction of lawful authority, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(b)  Any official traffic-control device placed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and purporting to conform to the lawful requirements pertaining to such devices shall be presumed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence. 
(c)  As to any given traffic-control device, signal, sign, marker or marking, it shall be initially presumed that such device, signal, sign, marker or marking independently erected by the traffic and transportation director has been installed pursuant to his observations and studies, based on generally used, accepted traffic-control principles and techniques. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-19, 28-70), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 80-79, § 3, 4-22-80)  
Sec. 36-92. - Obedience to devices. 
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of this city, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-69), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 32.  
Sec. 36-93. - Permit required to work within city right-of-way. 
Anytime a contractor performs any work within the street right-of-way of the City of Pasadena, the contractor shall be required to obtain written permission from the traffic director. This permit is in addition to any other permit required by the city. All routine submissions for permits shall be received a minimum of forty-eight (48) hours in advance of beginning of the work. At no time shall the contractor begin work without obtaining the required permit. The permit shall be kept on site and shall be presented on demand at all times for review by the police, fire, public works, permit, and traffic departments' personnel. 
In the event of an emergency, the contractor may take immediate action to correct the situation but shall also immediately and personally contact the office of the traffic and transportation department to make application for a permit. If the emergency occurs after normal working hours and the traffic and transportation department is closed, the contractor shall immediately contact the emergency dispatcher and make application for a permit in the morning of the next normal working day. 
When applying for the permit, the contractor or contractors' designated representative shall be required to submit all pertinent information including but not limited to the number of days required to complete the work, the times of day, area of work (including street names, block numbers, direction of travel affected), and reason for working in the city right-of-way. 
Depending of the complexity of the work, the traffic director or his designated representative may require plans to be submitted by a licensed traffic engineer and bear the appropriate seal, signature, and date of preparation. In all cases, the contractor, as a minimum, shall be required to install any and all signs and pavement markings required by the latest revision of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. Flagmen or other means of traffic control may be required upon the determination of the traffic director. 
In the interest of increasing public safety and reducing delay and inconvenience, no lane closures shall be allowed during the morning and evening peak periods of traffic from 7 to 9 a.m. and from 4 to 6 p.m., Monday through Friday. The traffic director may grant exceptions upon specific request. 
Upon issuance of the permit, the traffic director shall notify the police and fire dispatch, police operations, and public works department of the nature and terms of the permit. 
Failure to comply with any of the provisions of this section may result in immediate termination of work within the right-of-way and revocation of any other city permit. Any police officer or representative of the traffic and transportation department, permit department, or public works department may order immediate termination of work within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-76), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 01-53, § 1, 3-20-01)  
Sec. 36-94. - Traffic-control signal legend generally. 
Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting the words "Go," "Caution" or "Stop," or exhibiting different colored lights successively one at a time, or with arrows, the following colors only shall be used and such terms and lights shall indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows: 
(a)  Green alone or "Go": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either such turn. But vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is exhibited; 
(2)  Pedestrians facing the signal may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk. 
(b)  Yellow alone or "Caution" when following the green or "Go" signal: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal is thereby warned that the red or "Stop" signal will be exhibited immediately thereafter and such vehicular traffic shall not enter or be crossing the intersection when the red or "Stop" signal is exhibited; 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" signal is shown (unless authorized to do so by a pedestrian "Walk" signal). 
(c)  Red alone or "Stop": 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the intersection and shall remain standing until green or "Go" is shown alone. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone (unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal). 
(d)  Red with green arrow: 
(1)  Vehicular traffic facing such signal may cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow but shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within a crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection. 
(2)  No pedestrian facing such signal shall enter the roadway until the green or "Go" is shown alone (unless authorized so to do by a pedestrian "Walk" signal). 
In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-71), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 33.  
Sec. 36-95. - Flashing signals. 
Whenever flashing red or yellow signals are used they shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as follows: 
(1)  Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign. 
(2)  Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the intersection or past such signal only with caution. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-73), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 35.  
Sec. 36-96. - Pedestrian walk and wait signals. 
Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting words or symbols indicating that it is permissible to walk or that pedestrians should wait are in place, such signals shall indicate as follows: 
(1)  Signals indicating walking is permissible. Pedestrians facing such signal may proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles. 
(2)  Signals indicating it is necessary to wait. No pedestrian shall start to cross the roadway in the direction of such signal, but any pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the walk signal shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the wait signal is showing. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-72), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 34.  
Sec. 36-97. - Lane-direction-control signals. 
When lane-direction-control signals are placed over the individual lanes of a street or highway, vehicular traffic may travel in any lane over which a green signal is shown, but shall not enter or travel in any lane over which a red signal is shown. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-74), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-98. - Ratification of existing devices. 
All traffic-control signs, signals, devices and markings heretofore placed or erected by any officer or employee of the city and now in use for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic are hereby affirmed, ratified and declared to be official traffic-control devices, provided such traffic-control devices are not inconsistent with the provisions of street law or this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-68), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-99. - Unauthorized signs, signals, etc. 
(a)  No person shall place, maintain or display upon or in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which attempts to control parking or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain nor shall any officer of the city permit upon any highway or street any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection, upon private property adjacent to streets or highways, of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs. 
(b)  Every such prohibited sign or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and either the chief of police or the traffic director is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed without notice. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-75), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Removal of unlawful signs generally, § 31-18. 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 36.  
Secs. 36-100—36-109. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS 
 
Sec. 36-110. - Streets designated. 
The following streets or portions thereof are hereby designated as one-way streets: 
Cruse Drive, east, the 1000 block exclusive; 
Lee Street from Southmore Street, west to Davis Street; 
Main Street from Shaver Street, north to Pitts Street; 
North Shaver Street from Pitts Street, south to Shaw Avenue; 
Old Main Street (Queens Access) from Shaver Street, south to Queens Road; 
Prairie Avenue from South Street, west to Heights Street; 
Preston Avenue from South Street, south to Austin Avenue; 
Shaw Avenue from State Highway 225, west to Tatar Street; 
South Street from Austin Avenue, north to Preston Avenue; 
Shaver Street from Shaw Avenue, south to Main Street; 
State Highway 225 North Frontage Road from the east City Limits, west to Shaver Street; 
Strawberry Access from Southmore Avenue east to Strawberry Road; 
Tatar Street extension from Tatar Street, south to Southmore Street; 
West State Highway 225 North Frontage Road from Shaver Street, west to the west City Limits; 
West State Highway 225 South Frontage Road from Shaver Street, west to the west City Limits. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-99), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 75-113, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88) 
State Law reference— Authority to designate one-way streets, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27.  
Sec. 36-111. - Signs. 
Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the traffic director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-98), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— One-way signs required, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(c).  
Sec. 36-112. - Vehicles to move only in indicated direction. 
Upon those streets and parts of streets and in those alleys designated for one-way traffic, the driver of a vehicle shall drive only in the indicated direction when signs indicating the direction of traffic are erected and maintained at every intersection where movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-34, 28-99), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-113. - Restriction of direction of movement during certain periods. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized to determine and designate streets, parts of streets or specific lanes thereon upon which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction during one period and the opposite direction during another period of the day and shall place and maintain appropriate markings, signs, barriers or other devices to give notice thereof. The traffic director may erect signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center line of the roadway. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle in violation of such markings, signs, barriers or other devices so placed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-100), 3-15-66)  
Secs. 36-114—36-123. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - TRUCK ROUTES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, adopted July 5, 2005, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 36-124—36-135, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 67-2005, § 1, 8-22-67; Ord. No. 77-144, § 1, 8-2-77; Ord. No. 80-121, § 1, 7-8-80; Ord. No. 83-119, § 1, 5-10-83; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 91-119, § 1, 7-2-91. 
 
Sec. 36-124. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings given herein. 
Deviating heavy truck. A "deviating heavy truck" is a truck which leaves and departs from a truck route while traveling inside the city. 
Heavy truck. The phrase "heavy truck" means any motor vehicle or towed vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR), registered gross vehicle weight rating (RGVW), or an actual weight, whichever is greater, of twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more; or any combination of vehicles where the gross combined weight rating (GCWR), total registered gross vehicle weight (RGVW), or the actual weight of the combination is twenty-six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Truck route. The term "truck route" means a way over certain streets, as designated in this article, over and along which all heavy trucks coming into and going out of the city must operate. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 08-156, § 2, 7-15-08)  
Sec. 36-125. - Established. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating a heavy truck as defined herein to travel on any street except as designated as established truck routes. The following are hereby established as truck routes within the City of Pasadena: 
City of Pasadena Truck Routes (1) 
June 2009 
Allen-Genoa Road; 
Bay Area Boulevard north of Red Bluff Road; 
Bayport Road; 
Bearle: Pasadena Freeway to Jefferson; 
Channel City; 
Chemical Road; 
Choate Road; 
Crown Avenue; 
Greenshadow: East Sam Houston South Parkway to East City Limit; 
Jackson (Davidson); 
Jefferson Road; 
Lawndale; 
Light Company Road; 
Main, North Main Street; 
NASA Parkway, East; 
Old Highway 146; 
Pasadena Boulevard: East City Limit at Louisiana to East Sam Houston South Parkway; 
Pasadena Freeway and West Pasadena Freeway: Main Lanes and Service Roads; 
Pitts Avenue: Main Street to Shaver Street; 
Port Road; 
Preston Road, north of Pasadena Freeway; 
Red Bluff Access Road from SH225 to North City Limits; 
Richey Street, North Richey Street, North Richey Access Road; 
Sam Houston South Parkway, East: Main Lanes and Service Roads; 
Shaver Street and North Shaver Street; 
Spencer Highway; 
State Highway 146: Main Lanes and Service Roads; 
Underwood Road; and 
Witter Street: North of Red Bluff Road. 
(1) If no limits are specified, the roadway in its entirety, is considered designated a truck route. 
(b)  The following are hereby established as truck routes within the City of Pasadena between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.: 
Genoa Red Bluff from Red Bluff to the West City Limits; and Red Bluff from Bay Area Blvd. to Genoa Red Bluff. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 09-129, § 2, 6-16-09)  
Sec. 36-126. - Required use generally; exceptions. 
(a)  All heavy trucks within the city shall be operated only over and along established truck routes, except as otherwise specifically provided. The operator of such truck shall keep a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of his destination and point of origin. 
(b)  This article shall not prohibit: 
(1)  The operation of heavy trucks upon any street where necessary to the conduct of a commercial enterprise ("in commerce") at a destination point, provided streets upon which such traffic is permitted are used until reaching the intersection nearest the destination point. 
(2)  The operation of emergency vehicles upon any street in the city. 
(3)  The operation of heavy trucks owned or operated by the city, public utilities, any contractor or materialman while engaged in the repair, maintenance or construction of streets, street improvements, or street utilities within the city. 
(4)  The operation of heavy trucks upon any officially established detour in any case where such truck could lawfully be operated upon the street for which such detour is established. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 36-127. - Use by trucks originating outside city. 
(a)  All heavy trucks entering the city with a destination point within the city shall use a route that minimizes use of city and/or county roadways by entering via state maintained roadways, SH 225, BW 8 and/or SH 146, and not departing from these roadways until the state maintained roadway intersects the designated truck route providing the closest access to the destination; proceeding on the designated truck route, deviating only at major thoroughfare intersections in closest proximity to the destination point. Departing from the destination point, all heavy trucks shall return to the state maintained roadway by the shortest route via the designated truck route to the state maintained highway. 
(b)  All heavy trucks traveling through the city shall only use state maintained roadways, i.e. Pasadena Freeway, East Sam Houston South Parkway, and State Highway 146. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 08-156, § 3, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 09-129, § 3, 6-16-09)  
Sec. 36-128. - Use by trucks originating inside city. 
(a)  All heavy trucks with a destination point outside the city shall proceed from their point of origin to a major thoroughfare by the shortest route to a designated truck route proceeding to the state maintained roadway. 
(b)  All intra-city heavy trucks shall proceed from their point of origin to a major thoroughfare by the shortest route and then proceed to an established truck route by the shortest route and only depart at the intersection of a major thoroughfare and not leave the major thoroughfare system until the intersection nearest to the destination point. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05; Ord. No. 08-156, § 4, 7-15-08; Ord. No. 09-129, § 4, 6-16-09)  
Sec. 36-129. - Maps to be kept. 
The traffic director shall keep and maintain maps setting out truck routes and streets upon which heavy truck traffic is permitted. Copies of the maps shall be kept on file in the office of the city secretary and shall be available to the public. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 36-130. - Signs required. 
The traffic director shall cause all truck routes to be signposted to give notice that this article is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 36-131. - Deed restrictions. 
Nothing contained in this Code of Ordinances generally or this chapter specifically shall be construed to allow the violation of any residential deed restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Sec. 36-132. - Weight limits on specific streets. 
When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall operate any vehicle with a gross weight in excess of the amounts specified on such signs at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets so signed. Under this section, as vehicle weight is indicated by the number of axles supporting such vehicles, signs limiting the number of axles on through vehicles shall be official. 
(Ord. No. 05-170, § 2, 7-5-05)  
Secs. 36-133—36-135. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V½. - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ROUTES 
 
Sec. 36-136. - Definitions. 
The following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section when used in this article: 
Hazardous material. "Hazardous material" includes any type of material designated as hazardous under Title 49, U.S.C. Sections 1802(2) and 1803 and under Art. 6701d, Section 139, V.T.C.S., and any of the following types of materials: 
(1)  Compressed gas: Any material with a gauge pressure exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch at seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit, or any flammable material having a Reid vapor pressure exceeding forty (40) pounds per square inch absolute at one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(2)  Corrosive material: Any material which may cause severe damage to living tissue or to freight by chemical action when in contact therewith, or which may cause fire when in contact with organic matter or certain chemicals. 
(3)  Explosive material: Any material, the primary or common purpose of which is to function by explosion. 
(4)  Flammable material: Any material which is subject to ignition through friction, sparks, absorption of moisture, spontaneous chemical changes, or retained heat from the manufacturing, processing, or transporting the material. 
(5)  Oxidizing material: Any material that yields oxygen readily to stimulate the combustion of organic matter. 
(6)  Poisonous material: Any material that may cause irritation or damage to living tissue through mixture with air, external contact, contamination of food, water, or feeds, or emission of radiation. 
Hazardous material route. The term "hazardous material route" shall mean those routes designated by this Article. 
Shall. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
Truck. For the purposes of this Article every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property and every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles and not constructed as to carry a load other than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-137. - Intent and scope. 
It is the intent and purpose of this article to safeguard life, health and property from the hazards of fire, explosion or other emergencies and dangers arising from the transportation of hazardous materials in and through the city. 
This article shall apply to all hazardous materials which are transported into, through and out of the city and shall be in addition to all other provisions of this Code regarding hazardous substances or materials or the rules or regulations of any city department, board or commission pertaining thereto. For the purpose of this article, a point of origin or destination, including loading docks or terminals where hazardous cargos are handled, within the area bounded by the corporate limits of the city shall be considered to be a point of origin or destination within the city. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-138. - Authorized traffic routes. 
The movement of hazardous materials within the city shall occur only on the following designated routes, as shown below, and shall not deviate therefrom except as provided by this article. 
Street 	From 	To 
Beltway 8 	North city limits 	South city limits 
State Highway 225 	East city limits 	West side of Shaver Street 
West State Highway 225 	West side of Shaver Street 	West city limits 
 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-138.1. - Departure from routes; access to restricted areas. 
The operator of any truck restricted to hazardous materials routes set forth under this article may depart from such routes only under the following conditions: 
(1)  Such departure is necessary to reach a terminal or to load or unload materials at a location situated off of the applicable route; 
(2)  Such departure follows the shortest practical route consistent with the reasonable operation of the vehicle; and, 
(3)  The operator of such truck keeps in his possession a log book, delivery slip or other evidence of his destination and point of origin. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-138.2. - Truck route signs. 
Appropriate signs and markings shall be erected and maintained by the city traffic and transportation department advising the operators of vehicles of designated hazardous materials routes within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-139. - Alternate hazardous materials routes. 
When a street designated as a hazardous material route is under repair or otherwise temporarily out of use, the city traffic engineer is authorized to designate alternate hazardous materials routes. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-140. - Penalty. 
Unless otherwise permitted by this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to transport hazardous materials within or through the city on any road or highway not designated as a hazardous materials route in this article. An offense under this section is a Class "C" misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-141. - Conflicts. 
All city ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are hereby repealed. 
If any portion of this ordinance is held unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions hereof shall nevertheless be valid, the same as if the portion or portions held unconstitutional had not been adopted. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-141.1. - Publication. 
The city secretary shall publish the caption or a descriptive title of this ordinance one time within twenty (20) days after final passage of the ordinance in the official city newspaper of the City of Pasadena in accordance with Article II, Section 15 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
Sec. 36-141.2. - Effective date. 
The provisions of this ordinance shall become effective ten (10) days after publication. 
(Ord. No. 90-69, § 1, 4-10-90)  
ARTICLE VI. - SPEED REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 36-142. - Maximum limits generally. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motor vehicle within the city at a rate of speed greater than thirty (30) miles per hour. 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, no person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street or highway in the city at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then existing, having regard to the actual and potential hazards when approaching or crossing an intersection or a railway grade crossing, when approaching or going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon a narrow or winding street or highway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or street conditions. In every event, speed shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance on or entering the street or highway in compliance with legal requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-80), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Speed of vehicles in cities and towns and authority of local authorities to alter prima facie speed limits established by state law, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, §§ 166, 169.  
Sec. 36-143. - Finding with regard to maximum limits prescribed by article. 
The city council finds, upon traffic and engineering studies and having regard to all other elements and factors required by law, including, but not limited to, the widths and conditions of pavements and other circumstances, as well as the usual traffic thereon, that the maximum rates of speed as prescribed in this article are the maximum, reasonable and prudent, safe prima facie speeds for motor vehicles operating as described herein. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1, (28-80—28-82, 28-84—28-88), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 1822, §§ 1, 2, 6-21-66; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 8-2-66; Ord. No. 1850, § 1, 8-23-66; Ord. No. 6-1938, § 1, 5-7-67; Ord. No. 67-2019, § 1, 9-5-67)  
Sec. 36-144. - Maximum limits in school zones. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any of the school zones designated in Table 1. The speed limit established in this section shall be in effect between 6:45 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and between 2:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m., each and every school day, Monday through Friday, of each and every week from the first day of the school term, through the last day of the school term of each and every school year, when the school zone to which such limit applies is properly signed or posted as a school zone. Timed flashing lights, as well as fixed signs, may be used to sign or post a school zone. 
Table 1 

20 Mile per Hour School Zones School Days 

6:45—8:30 p.m. and 2:00—4:00 p.m. 
Street 	Section Limits 
Allendale Road 	from a point one hundred (100) feet east of the east roadway of Dade Street to a point one hundred (100) feet west of west roadway of Dade Street. 
Allendale Road 	from its intersection with Allen-Genoa Road to its intersection with John Street. 
Allen-Genoa Road 	from its intersection with Pecan Drive to the beginning of the 1700 block of Allen-Genoa Road. 
Allen-Genoa Road 	from its intersection with Queens Road to its intersection with Dorene Street. 
Bayshore Boulevard 	from its intersection with Dabney Drive to its intersection with Spencer Highway. 
Bearle Street 	from its intersection with Red Bluff Road to its intersection with Rosemead Drive. 
Bennett Drive 	from its intersection with Cedarcrest Drive to its intersection with Spooner Street. 
Burke Road 	from its intersection with Grand Street to its intersection with the south side of Jenkins Road. 
Burke Road 	from its intersection with Kenwick Place to a point eight hundred (800) feet south of Crenshaw Road. 
Burke Road 	from its intersection with Dallas Street to its intersection with Austin Avenue. 
Burke Road 	from its intersection with Spencer Highway to a point three hundred (300) feet north of Dabney Drive. 
Coldstream Drive 	from its intersection with Heathfield Drive to it intersection with Holly Terrace Court. 
Crenshaw Road 	from its intersection with Parkland Street to its intersection with Seminole Street. 
Crenshaw Road 	from its intersection with Holly Bay Court to its intersection with Double Eagle Drive. 
Dabney Drive 	from its intersection with South Palm Court to its intersection with Peach Lane. 
Dallas Street 	from its intersection with Cherry Lane to its intersection with Burke Road. 
Fairmont Parkway, eastbound 	from the intersection with Fox Meadow Lane to its intersection with Strawberry Road. 
Fairmont Parkway, westbound 	from a point three hundred (300) feet west of its intersection with Federal Street to a point one thousand forty (1,040) feet west of its intersection with Federal Street. 
Federal Street 	from its intersection with Llano Street to its intersection with Fairmont Parkway. 
Fox Meadow Lane 	from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway to its intersection with Allen-Genoa Road. 
Garner Road 	from its intersection with Shaver Street to its intersection with Judy Lane. 
Gleneagles Drive 	from a point two hundred seventy-eight (278) feet east of Doral Drive to a point two hundred seventy-three (273) feet west of Doral Drive. 
Glenmore Drive 	from its intersection with Flamborough Drive to its intersection with Washington Street. 
Grunewald Drive 	from its intersection with Dabney Drive to its intersection with Watters Road. 
Harris Avenue 	from its intersection with Burke Road to its intersection with Red Bluff Road. 
Harris Avenue 	from its intersection with Main Street to a point one thousand one hundred seventy (1,170) feet west of Shaver Street on the west side of Little Vince Bayou. 
Harris Avenue 	from its intersection with Pasadena Boulevard to its intersection with Lorraine Court. 
Heathfield Drive 	from its intersection with Coldstream Drive to its intersection with Redwood Falls Drive. 
Holly Bay Court 	from a point one thousand fifty-four (1,054) feet north of Crenshaw Road to a point one thousand two hundred eighty-four (1,284) feet north of Crenshaw Road. 
Holly Street 	from its intersection with Lily Street to its intersection with Lilac Street. 
Jackson Avenue 	from its intersection with Walters Street to its intersection with Spooner Street. 
Jana Lane, northbound 	from its intersection with St. Andrews Drive to its intersection with Gleneagles Drive. 
Jenkins Road 	from its intersection with Burke Road to its intersection with Willow Oak Circle. 
Lafferty Road 	from its intersection with Perla Road to its intersection with Belshire Road. 
Lilac Street 	from its intersection with Oak Avenue to a point five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Spencer Highway. 
Lily Street 	from its intersection with Fairdale Street to the south end of Lily Street right-of-way. 
Meadowlake 	from its intersection with Glenmore Drive to its intersection with Parkwood Drive. 
Pansy Street 	from its intersection with Oak Avenue to a point five hundred (500) feet north of its intersection with Spencer Highway. 
Parkside Drive 	from its intersection with Lafferty Road to its intersection with Strawberry Road. 
Parkwood Drive 	from its intersection with Sherman Avenue to its intersection with Dumbarton Road. 
Pasadena Boulevard 	from its intersection with Chestnut Lane to its intersection with the south side of Wichita Street. 
Preston Road 	from its intersection with Vista Road to a point three hundred (300) feet north of Crepe Myrtle Lane. 
Primrose Drive 	from its intersection with Grunewald Drive to a point five hundred thirty-two (532) feet north of Grunewald Drive. 
Queens Road 	from its intersection with Valley Forge Drive to its intersection with Halkies Road. 
Red Bluff Road 	from a point seven hundred seventeen (717) feet south of its intersection with Bearle Street to a point seven hundred nineteen (719) feet north of its intersection with Bearle Street. 
Richey Street 	from its intersection with Savannah Avenue to its intersection with West Jackson Avenue. 
Salvador Street 	from its intersection with Vista Road to a point six hundred (600) feet south of its intersection with Vista Road. 
Scarborough Lane 	from a point five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Southmore Avenue to its intersection with Allendale Road. 
Shaver Street 	from its intersection with Garner Road to its intersection with West Avenue. 
South Houston Road 	from its intersection with Gulf Street to its intersection with Allen-Genoa Road. 
South Street 	from its intersection with Austin Avenue to its intersection with San Augustine Avenue. 
Southmore Avenue 	from a point five hundred (500) feet west of Wichita Street to a point five hundred (500) feet east of Wichita Street. 
Sycamore Avenue 	from its intersection with Lily Street to its intersection with Lilac Street. 
Thomas Avenue 	from a point five hundred (500) feet east of its intersection with Pasadena Boulevard to its intersection with Kansas Street. 
Thomas Avenue 	from a point fifty (50) feet west of Tilden Drive to a point fifty (50) feet east of Bearle Street. 
Tulip Street 	from its intersection with Vista Road to a point fourteen hundred (1,400) feet north of Vista Road. 
Vista Road 	from its intersection with Preston Avenue to its intersection with Watters Road. 
Washington Street 	from its intersection with Sherman Avenue to its intersection with Dumbarton Road. 
Watters Road 	from its intersection with Grunewald Drive to its intersection with Grape Lane. 
West Avenue 	from its intersection with Vince Bayou to its intersection with Shaver Street. 
West Thomas Avenue 	from its intersection with Mobile Drive to its intersection with Richey Street. 
Williams Street 	from its intersection with Thomas Avenue to its intersection with Harris Avenue. 
Young Street 	from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway to a point five hundred (500) feet north of Tealway Drive. 
 
(b)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any of the school zones designated in Table 2. The speed limit established in this section shall be in effect between 7:30 a.m. and 8:15 a.m. and between 3:15 p.m. and 3:45 p.m., each and every school day, Monday through Friday, of each and every week from the first day of the school term, through the last day of the school term of each and every school year, when the school zone to which such limit applies properly signed or posted as a school zone. Timed flashing lights, as well as fixed signs, may be used to sign or post a school zone. 
Table 2 

20 Mile per Hour School Zones School Days 

7:30—8:15 a.m. and 3:15—3:45 p.m. 
Street 	Section Limits 
Soaring Forest Drive 	From its intersection with Walnut Pond Drive to a point four hundred forty seven feet (447') south 
Walnut Pond 	From its intersection with Middlebrook Drive to the east side of Soaring Forest Drive 
 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty (20) miles per hour in any of the school zones designated in Table 3. The speed limit established in this section shall be in effect between 6:45 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 2:30 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., each and every school day, Monday through Friday, of each and every week from the first day of the school term, through the last day of the school term of each and every school year, when the school zone to which such limit applies is properly signed or posted as a school zone. Timed flashing lights, as well as fixed signs, may be used to sign or post a school zone. 
Table 3 

20 Mile per Hour School Zones School Days 

6:45 a.m.—9:00 a.m. and 2:30—4:30 p.m. 
Street 	Section Limits 
Houston Avenue 	from its intersection with Taft Avenue to its intersection with Strawberry Road. 
Jasmine Drive 	from its intersection with San Augustine Avenue to its intersection with Pasadena Boulevard. 
Magnolia Drive 	from its intersection with San Augustine Avenue to its intersection with Pasadena Boulevard. 
Main Street 	from a point five hundred (500) feet south of its intersection with Jackson Avenue to its intersection with Broadway Avenue. 
Pasadena Boulevard 	from a point two hundred thirty-seven (237) feet west of Magnolia Drive extending five hundred (500) feet east of Jasmine Drive. 
Red Bluff Road 	from a point six hundred (600) feet north of its intersection with San Augustine Avenue to a point nine hundred (900) feet south of its intersection with San Augustine Avenue. 
San Augustine Avenue 	from its intersection with South Street to its intersection with Red Bluff Road. 
Shaver Street 	from its intersection with Eagle Avenue to its intersection with Jackson Avenue. 
Strawberry Road 	from its intersection with the south side of Southmore Avenue to its intersection with Greenbriar Avenue. 
 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour in any of the school zones designated in Table 4. The speed limit established in this section shall be in effect when flashing each and every school day, Monday through Friday, of each and every week from the first day of the school term, through the last day of the school term of each and every school year, when the school zone to which such limit applies is properly signed or posted as a school zone. Timed flashing lights, as well as fixed signs, may be used to sign or post a school zone. 
Table 4 
35 Mile Per Hour School Zone School Days When Flashing 
Old Highway 146 	from a point two thousand one hundred sixty one (2,161) feet north of Red Bluff Road to a point three thousand one hundred sixty one (3,161) feet north of Red Bluff Road. 
 
(e)  Reserved. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-82), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 1850, § 1, 8-23-66; Ord. No. 67-2019, § 1, 9-5-67; Ord. No. 72-86, § 1, 4-17-73; Ord. No. 75-114, §§ 1, 2, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 78-132, § 1, 8-29-78; Ord. No. 80-36, § 1, 3-11-80; Ord. No. 80-181, § 1, 8-19-80; Ord. No. 80-213, § 1, 9-9-80; Ord. No. 80-239, § 1, 9-30-80; Ord. No. 81-193, §§ 1, 2, 10-13-81; Ord. No. 81-194, § 1, 10-13-81; Ord. No. 83-221, § 1, 8-9-83; Ord. No. 84-172, § 1, 7-31-84; Ord. No. 84-264, § 1, 10-2-84; Ord. No. 85-180, § 1, 8-27-85; Ord. No. 85-207, §§ 1, 2, 10-29-85; Ord. No. 87-171, § 1, 4-1-87; Ord. No. 88-119, § 1, 7-19-88; Ord. No. 89-130, § 1, 8-8-89; Ord. No. 90-136, § 1, 7-31-90; Ord. No. 91-145, § 1, 8-20-91; Ord. No. 92-92, § 1, 5-26-92; Ord. No. 92-169, §§ 1, 2, 8-18-92; Ord. No. 94-48, § 1, 3-22-94; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 95-36, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 95-236, § 1, 11-21-95; Ord. No. 96-40, § 1, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 97-165, § 1, 9-9-97; Ord. No. 98-33, § 1, 3-3-98; Ord. No. 98-163, § 1, 9-29-98; Ord. No. 03-66, § 1, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 05-198, §§ 1, 2, 8-23-05; Ord. No. 09-033, § 1, 2-24-09; Ord. No. 18-042, §§ 1, 2, 4-17-18)  
Sec. 36-145. - Maximum limits in parks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle on any street or road within a city park at a rate of speed in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-81), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— General provisions relative to operation of vehicles in parks, § 24-6 et seq.  
Sec. 36-145.1. - Twenty-five m.p.h. zones. 
The following streets or portions thereof shall constitute special speed zones, and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any such zone. 
(1)  On Shirleen Drive from its intersection with NASA Road 1 to its intersection with Lakeview. 
(2)  On Lakeview from its intersection with NASA Road 1 to its intersection with Shirleen Drive. 
(3)  On Denton Street from its intersection with NASA Road 1 to its intersection with Shirleen Drive. 
(4)  On Wildwood Drive from its intersection with Denton Street to its intersection with Shirleen Drive. 
(Ord. No. 96-86, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98)  
Sec. 36-146. - Regular established speed zones. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any motor vehicle at a speed in excess of the speed limit indicated for the streets and highways as shown below in Table 3. 
Table I. 
Maximum Speed Limits 
February/2016 
Street and section limits 	Speed Limit 
Allen-Genoa Road from its intersection with the north side of Southmore Avenue to its intersection with the north side of Kolb Road. 	35 
Allen-Genoa Road from its intersection with the west side of Shaver Street to its intersection with the south side of Crenshaw Road. 	35 
Allen-Genoa Road from its intersection with the south side of Crenshaw Road to the south City Limits Line. 	40 
Bay Area Boulevard from the west City Limit Line to a point two thousand (2,000) feet east of Armand Bayou. 	40 
Bay Area Boulevard from a point two thousand (2,000) feet east of Armand Bayou to its intersection with the west side of Red Bluff Road. 	50 
Burke Road from its intersection with Fairmont to its intersection with Yellowstone 	40 
Burke Road from its intersection with Yellowstone to its intersection with the north side of Genoa-Red Bluff Road. 	45 
Burke Road from its intersection with the south side of Fresa Road to its intersection with the north side of Fairmont Parkway. 	35 
Center Street from the north city limits to its intersection with the south side of Spencer Highway 	40 
Cherrybrook Lane from its intersection with the west side of Preston Avenue to a point four hundred (400) feet west of the west roadway of Wichita Street. 	35 
Crenshaw Road from its intersection with the east side of Strawberry Road to its intersection with the west side of Space Center Boulevard 	45 
Crenshaw Road from its intersection with the east side of Strawberry Road to its intersection with the eastside of Allen Genoa 	40 
Davison Road from its intersection with the north side of State Highway 225 to the north city limits. 	35 
East Sam Houston Parkway South Northbound Service Road from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway Westbound Roadway to its intersection with the south side of Pasadena Freeway. 	50 
East Sam Houston Parkway South Northbound Service Road, from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway Eastbound Roadway to the south City Limit Line. 	50 
East Sam Houston Parkway South Southbound Service Road from its intersection with the south side of Pasadena Freeway to its intersection with Fairmont Parkway Westbound Roadway. 	45 
East Sam Houston Parkway South Southbound Service Road, from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway Eastbound Roadway to the south City Limit Line. 	55 
Fairmont Parkway from its intersection with the west side of Preston Road to the east City Limit Line. 	45 
Fairmont Parkway from its intersection with the east side of Shaver Street to its intersection with the east side of Preston Road. 	40 
Genoa-Red Bluff Road from its intersection with the west side of Red Bluff Road to the west City Limit Line. 	45 
Greenshadow Drive from its intersection with the east side of Beltway 8 to the east city limits. 	45 
Harris Avenue from its intersection with the east side of Shaver to its intersection with the west side of Pasadena Boulevard. 	35 
Harris Avenue, West from its intersection with the east side of Richey Street to its intersection with the east side of Shaver Street. 	35 
Jackson Avenue, West from its intersection with the east side of Richey Street to its intersection with the east side of Vince Street. 	35 
Jefferson Road from the north city limits to its intersection with the north side of Bearle Street. 	40 
Kirby Road from its intersection with the east side of Red Bluff to the south City Limit Line. 	45 
Main Street from the north side of Houston Avenue to its intersection with the south side of Pitts Avenue. 	35 
Middlebrook Drive from its intersection with the south side of Bay Area Boulevard to the south City Limit Line. 	45 
NASA Road 1 from its intersection with the east side of Kirby Road to the south City Limit Line. 	45 
Pansy Street from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway to its intersection with Crenshaw Road 	40 
Pansy Street from its intersection with Vista Road to its intersection with Fairmont Parkway 	35 
Pasadena Boulevard from its intersection with the south side of Shaw Ave. to its intersection with the west side of Jasmine Drive. 	35 
Pasadena Boulevard from its intersection with the west side of Jasmine Drive to the east city limits. 	40 
Pasadena Boulevard, N., North from its intersection with the south side of Shaw Street to its intersection with the south side of Red Bluff Road. 	35 
Pasadena Freeway Eastbound Service Road from its intersection with the east side of Red Bluff Road to the east City Limit Line approximately three thousand (3,000) feet east of the east right of way of Beltway 8. 	50 
Pasadena Freeway Eastbound Service Road from the west City Limit Line to the east side of Red Bluff Road. 	35 
Pasadena Freeway Westbound Service Road from the east city limit line approximately three thousand (3,000) feet east of the east right of way of Beltway 8 to its intersection with the east side of Red Bluff Road. 	50 
Pasadena Freeway Westbound Service Road from the west City Limit Line east side of Red Bluff Road. 	35 
Preston Road from its intersection with the east side of East Sam Houston Parkway South Northbound Service Road to its intersection with Genoa Red Bluff Road. 	40 
Preston Road from its intersection with the south side of Crenshaw Road to its intersection with East Sam Houston Parkway South Southbound Service Road. 	45 
Preston Road from its intersection with the south side of Spencer Highway to its intersection with the north side of Crenshaw Road, both directions. 	40 
Preston Road from its intersection with the south side of Spencer Highway to its intersection with Port Terminal Railroad. 	35 
Queens Road from its intersection with the west side of Shaver Street to its intersection with the east side of Perez Road. 	30 
Queens Road from its intersection with the west side of Perez Road to its intersection with the east side of Allen Genoa Road. 	35 
Queens Road from its intersection with the west side of Allen Genoa Road to the West City Limit Line. 	40 
Red Bluff Road from its intersection with the north side of Jackson Avenue to one thousand (1,000) feet south of Orrel Drive/San Augustine Avenue. 	40 
Red Bluff Road from its intersection with the north side of Kirby Road to the south City Limit Line. 	45 
Red Bluff Road from one thousand (1,000) feet south of Fairmont Parkway to a point one thousand (1,000) feet south of Orrel Drive/San Augustine Avenue, northbound only. 	40 
Red Bluff Road from one thousand (1,000) feet south of Orrel Drive/San Augustine Avenue to its intersection with the south side of Fairmont Parkway, southbound only. 	40 
Red Bluff Road from the north city limits to its intersection with the north side of Jackson Avenue. 	40 
Red Bluff Road Northbound Roadway from its intersection with the north side of Kirby Road to a point one thousand (1,000) feet south of Fairmont Parkway Eastbound Roadway. 	55 
Red Bluff Road Southbound Roadway from its intersection with Fairmont Parkway Westbound Roadway to its intersection with the east side of Kirby Road. 	55 
Richey Access Road, West from the north city limits to its intersection with the south side of Pasadena Freeway. 	35 
Richey Street from its intersection with the south side of Pasadena Freeway to its intersection with the west side of Allen-Genoa Road. 	35 
San Augustine Avenue from its intersection with the eastside of the East Sam Houston Parkway South frontage road to the east city limits. 	35 
Scarborough Lane from its intersection with the south side of Pasadena Freeway to its intersection with north side of West Southmore Avenue. 	35 
Shaver Street from the south side of W Shaw Ave. to the south city limits 	35 
North Shaver Street from the south side of W Shaw Ave. to the north city limits 	35 
South Street from its intersection with the south side of Pineswept Drive to its intersection with the north side of Briar Street. 	35 
Southmore Avenue from its intersection with the west side of Shaver Street to its intersection with the east side of Red Bluff Road. 	35 
Southmore Avenue, West from its intersection with the west side of Shaver Street to its intersection with the east side of Richey Street. 	35 
Southmore Avenue, West from its intersection with the west side of Richey Street to its intersection with the east side of Allen-Genoa Road. 	40 
Space Center Boulevard from its intersection with the south side of Spencer Highway to the south City Limit line on the north side of Genoa Red Bluff Road. 	45 
Spencer Highway from its intersection with the west side of Shaver Street to the east city limits. 	40 
Strawberry Road from its intersection with the south side of Spencer Hwy. to its intersection with the north side of Vista Road. 	35 
Strawberry Road from the south side of Vista Road to its intersection with the north side of Fairmont Parkway. 	40 
Strawberry Road from the south city limit line approximately 800 feet north Genoa-Red Bluff Road. 	35 
Toddville Road from its intersection with the north side of Park Drive (El Jardin) to the south city limits. 	35 
Vista Road from its intersection with the east side of Federal Street to its intersection with the east side of Watters Road. 	40 
Vista Road from its intersection with the east side of Watters Road to its intersection with the west side of Preston Road. 	35 
Vista Road from its intersection with the west side of Preston Road to its intersection with the west side of Beltway 8. 	40 
Watters Road from its intersection with the south side of Spencer Highway to its intersection with the north side of Vista Road. 	35 
 
(Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, 1-16-01; Ord. No. 01-95, § 1, 6-25-01; Ord. No. 03-66, § 1, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 05-10, § 1, 1-18-05; Ord. No. 06-207, § 1, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 16-030, § 2(Exh. A), 3-1-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 01-12, § 1, adopted January 16, 2001, deleted §§ 36-147—36-152, and amended § 36-146 as set out herein. Former § 36-146 pertained to thirty-five m.p.h. zones and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 1780, § 1, (28-24), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 1822, § 1, 6-21-66; Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71; Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 78-37, § 1, 3-21-78; Ord. No. 78-100, § 2, 7-5-78; Ord. No. 78-194, § 2, 12-5-78; Ord. No. 81-191, § 1, 10-13-81; Ord. No. 84-22, § 1, 1-31-84; Ord. No. 84-206, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 84-255, § 1, 10-9-84; Ord. No. 85-241, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 87-172, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-49, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 88-90, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-80, § 1, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 95-35, § 1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 96-86, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-120, § 1, 7-27-99.  
Sec. 36-147. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to forty m.p.h. zones and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-85), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 1822, § 2, 6-21-66; Ord. No. 67-1938, § 1, 5-7-67; Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71; Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 78-37, § 2, 3-21-78; Ord. No. 78-194, § 1, 12-5-78; Ord. No. 81-191, § 2, 10-13-81; Ord. No. 83-230, § 1, 8-23-83; Ord. No. 84-22, § 1, 1-31-84; Ord. No. 84-206, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 85-241, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 85-260, § 1, 12-31-85; Ord. No. 87-172, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 58-49, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 88-90, § 1, 5-23-58; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 90-11, § 1, 1-30-90; Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-80, § 1, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 96-86, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-120, § 1, 7-27-99.  
Sec. 36-148. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to forty-five m.p.h. zones and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-86), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71; Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 84-22, § 1, 1-31-84; Ord. No. 84-206, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 87-54, § 1, 4-7-87; Ord. No. 87-111, § 1, 7-7-87; Ord. No. 87-172, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-49, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 88-90, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 88-146, § 1, 8-16-88; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-80, § 1, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 96-86, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 97-31, § 1, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-120, § 1, 7-27-99.  
Sec. 36-149. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to fifty m.p.h. zones and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-87), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71; Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 78-100, § 1, 7-5-78; Ord. No. 84-206, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 87-172, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-49, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 88-90, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-80, § 1, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 97-31, § 1, 2-25-97; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-120, § 1, 7-27-99.  
Sec. 36-150. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to fifty-five m.p.h. zones and derived from the following: 
Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-88), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 8-2-66; Ord. No. 67-1938, § 1, 5-7-67; Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71; Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75; Ord. No. 84-206, § 1, 8-28-84; Ord. No. 85-241, § 1, 12-3-85; Ord. No. 87-172, § 1, 9-8-87; Ord. No. 88-49, § 1, 3-29-88; Ord. No. 88-90, § 1, 5-23-88; Ord. No. 88-194, § 1, 10-4-88; Ord. No. 91-21, § 1, 2-19-91; Ord. No. 92-19, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-80, § 1, 5-11-93; Ord. No. 94-141, § 1, 8-9-94; Ord. No. 96-86, § 1, 6-18-96; Ord. No. 97-188, § 1, 10-7-97; Ord. No. 98-69, § 1, 4-22-98; Ord. No. 99-14, § 1, 2-9-99; Ord. No. 99-120, § 1, 7-27-99.  
Sec. 36-151. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to sixty m.p.h. zones and derived from Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75.  
Sec. 36-152. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— See editor's note following § 36-146. This section pertained to sixty miles per hour maximum; forty-five miles per hour minimum, and derived from Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75.  
Sec. 36-153. - Speed limit signs. 
The traffic director is hereby authorized and directed to post signs at both ends of special speed zones created in this article, which signs shall reflect the speed limits of the respective zones. 
(Ord. No. 72-87, § 1, 4-4-72; Ord. No. 75-111, § 1, 7-1-75) 
Editor's note— Former § 36-153 enumerated streets with a maximum speed limit of 60 m.p.h. and minimum of 45 m.p.h., as derived from Ord. No. 71-200, § 1, 7-6-71 and Ord. No. 71-206, § 1, 7-13-71. Ord. No. 72-87 amended the section to read as herein set out.  
Secs. 36-154—36-162. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference— Stopping or parking vehicles used for transportation of flammable liquids, gas or chemicals, § 13-3; leaving motor vehicle on premises of drive-in restaurant, § 20-57; parking of mobile homes, § 21-2. 
State Law reference— Authority of city to regulate standing and parking of vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 27(a)(7). 
 
Sec. 36-163. - Unattended vehicles. 
No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine and effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the roadway. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-112), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 97.  
Sec. 36-164. - Prohibited in specified places. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device or marking, at any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk. 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway. 
(3)  Within an intersection. 
(4)  Within fifteen (15) feet of a fire hydrant. 
(5)  On a crosswalk. 
(6)  Within thirty (30) feet of any flashing beacon, stop sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway, unless otherwise designated. 
(7)  Within twenty (20) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection, unless otherwise designated. 
(8)  Between a safety zone or safety island and the adjacent curb, or within thirty (30) feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless otherwise designated. 
(9)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing, unless otherwise designated. 
(10)  Within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within seventy-five (75) feet of such entrance (when properly sign-posted). 
(11)  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic. 
(12)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street, to the end that "double parking" be hereby prohibited. 
(13)  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a roadway, or within a roadway tunnel. 
(14)  In front of the entrance or exit of any theatre, hotel, inn or depot for a space of thirty (30) feet immediately in front of such theatre, hotel, inn or depot and ten (10) feet immediately in front of all other exits thereof. 
(15)  At any place where official signs or curb markings prohibit stopping, standing or parking. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-112), 3-15-66) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 95.  
Sec. 36-164.1. - Stopping, standing, or parking outside of business or residence districts. 
A person may not stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the main-traveled part of a highway outside of a business or residence district unless: 
(a)  It is not practicable to stop, park or so leave such vehicle off such part of said highway; 
(b)  An unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing vehicle is left for the free passage of other vehicles; and 
(c)  A clear view of such stopped vehicle is available from a distance of two hundred (200) feet in each direction upon such highway. 
(Ord. No. 84-59, § 1, 3-27-84) 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 84-59, § 1, adopted March 27, 1984, amended Ch. 36 by adding a new § 36-164½. The editor, in his discretion, and in order to preserve the numbering format of the Code, has renumbered the new § 36-164½ as § 36-164.1.  
Sec. 36-165. - Prohibited for certain purposes. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any street or highway (including esplanades, medians, shoulders, etc., between the boundary lines) for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, repairing or dismantling such vehicle, except for making such repairs necessitated by the physical impossibility of removing such vehicle until such repairs have been made. 
(3)  Advertising. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-130), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 92-124, § 1, 6-30-92)  
Sec. 36-166. - Method of parking. 
Every vehicle parked on any street in the city shall be parked parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curb-side wheels of the vehicle within eighteen (18) inches of the curb or edge of the roadway, except where streets are appropriately marked for perpendicular or for angle parking, in which case the vehicle shall be parked entirely within the lines designating the parking space, with the front of the vehicle headed in the direction of the curb. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-129), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-167. - Parking in prohibited areas; overtime parking. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, allow, let, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name or owned or operated by him or in his possession or under his control to be or remain in any no parking area designated according to the provisions of this chapter, or in a time limit parking area for a longer period of time than that designated by the markings on the street or by signs clearly visible. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-128), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-168. - Parking in alleys. 
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-113), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-169. - Authority of traffic director to prohibit parking on narrow streets. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized to erect signs or pavement markings indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway does not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
(b)  When official signs or markings prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-114), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-170. - Parking for the sale of merchandise or other products near schools. 
To the extent that the sale of merchandise or other products is authorized pursuant to this Code, it shall nonetheless be unlawful for any person to park a motor vehicle in any school zone or any street adjacent to any school for the purpose of selling merchandise or other products between the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:15 p.m. on school days. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-131), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 89-93, § 1, 6-13-89)  
Sec. 36-171. - Parking for more than twenty-four hours prohibited. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing in any public street, alley or other public place any vehicle for a longer continuous period of time than twenty-four (24) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-132), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-172. - Parking of trucks, trailers, tractors, etc., between sunset and sunrise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any heavy truck, dump truck, truck trailer, farm trailer, road tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, pole-trailer or mobile home on any roadway in the city at any time from sunset to sunrise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or haul any heavy truck, bus, semi-trailer, or pole-trailer on any street not established as a truck route as enumerated in section 36-125 of this chapter in order to park same on any residential property within subdivisions with deed restrictions recorded with Harris County that restrict land development to single family residential use. The fact a heavy truck is parked on residential property shall be prima facie evidence that such heavy truck was operated on the street immediately adjacent to such residential property in violation of this subsection, if not a truck route as designated and established by this chapter. For the purposes of this section, residential property shall mean property at which a person or persons reside. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any person operating any vehicle of the fire department, police department, public or private ambulance in the performance of his duty, or to any person parking or standing such a vehicle in obedience to a traffic-control device or a police officer, or to any person loading or unloading such a vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-133), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 05-170, § 3, 7-5-05) 
Cross reference— Four-hour limit on parking of mobile homes, § 21-2.  
Sec. 36-173. - Parking of trailer for more than two hours. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, stand or park a trailer, either attached or unattached to a motor vehicle, on the public streets of the city for a period of time in excess of two (2) hours. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1 (28-134), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Four-hour limit on parking of mobile homes, § 21-2.  
Secs. 36-174, 36-175. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-170, § 4, adopted July 5, 2005, repealed §§ 36-174 and 36-175, which pertained to delivery vehicles blocking traffic and backing to curb for loading or unloading and derived from Ord. No. 1780, §§ 1(28-123, 28-124, 28-135), 3-15-66.  
Sec. 36-176. - Parking spaces for disabled persons—Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section. All other words used in this chapter shall have their ordinary and commonly accepted meanings as set forth in dictionaries of recognized standing: 
Disabled parking placard means a placard issued under Sec. 681.002 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
Disabled person means a person who is permanently or temporarily disabled within the meaning of Sec. 681.001(2) of the Texas Transportation Code and who has applied for and received a registration insignia or identification card from the state. 
Identification card means the identification card issued by the state to a temporarily disabled person for purposes of Sec. 681.003 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
Registration insignia means the specially designed symbol, tab, or other device to be attached to the license plate of a vehicle, issued by the state to a temporarily or permanently disabled person for purposes of Sec. 681.006 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 82-141, § 1, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 95-159, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 02-297, § 1, 1-7-03)  
Sec. 36-176.1. - Same—Signs available from city. 
(a)  A person who owns or controls property used for parking may designate one (1) or more parking spaces or a parking area for the exclusive use of vehicles transporting disabled persons in accordance with Sec. 681.009 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(b)  The owner or operator of a parking facility may obtain from the city a sign for designating a parking space for vehicles transporting disabled persons at a charge equal to the city's cost in preparing the sign. 
(c)  A disabled person may obtain disabled parking identification from the county tax assessor-collector as provided in Sec. 681.003 of the Texas Transportation Code. 
(Ord. No. 82-141, § 1, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 95-159, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 02-297, § 1, 1-7-03)  
Sec. 36-176.2. - Same—Sign requirements. 
Each such sign provided or installed shall conform to the requirements of Section 5(i), Article 9102, Revised Statutes, as adopted by the Texas Commission of Licensing and Regulation (Exhibit A).  
Exhibit A 
(Ord. No. 82-141, § 1, 6-29-82; Ord. No. 95-159, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 02-297, § 1, 1-7-03)  
Sec. 36-176.3. - Same—Offenses. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if the person: 
(1)  Is neither a disabled person nor transporting a disabled person and stops, stands, or parks a vehicle displaying a registration insignia or identification card in a parking space or area designated specifically for the disabled; or 
(2)  Stops, stands, or parks a vehicle displaying neither a registration insignia nor an identification card in a parking space or area designated specifically for the disabled; or 
(3)  Stops, stands or parks a vehicle in such a manner that the vehicle blocks an access or curb ramp or any other architectural improvement designed to aid the disabled. 
(b)  Except as provided by subsections (c)—(f) of this section, an offense under subsection (a) is punishable by a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(c)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted one (1) time of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more than six hundred dollars ($600.00). 
(d)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted two (2) times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or more than six hundred dollars ($600.00), and not less than ten (10) or more than twenty (20) hours of community service. 
(e)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted three (3) times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and not less than twenty (20) hours or more than fifty (50) hours of community service. 
(f)  If it is shown on the trial of an offense under this section that the person has been previously convicted four (4) times of an offense under this section, the offense is punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and fifty (50) hours of community service. 
(Ord. No. 95-159, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 02-297, § 1, 1-7-03)  
Sec. 36-176.4. - Appointment of person with authority to file charges. 
The mayor may appoint a disabled person or a nondisabled person to have the authority to file charges against a person who commits an offense under this chapter. A person appointed under this subsection must be a United States citizen of good moral character who has not been convicted of a felony. The person must take and subscribe to an oath of office that the city prescribes and must complete a training program developed by the city. The person is not a peace officer, has no authority other than the authority applicable to a citizen to enforce a law other than this chapter, and may not carry a weapon while performing duties under this subsection. The person is not entitled to compensation for performing duties under this subsection or to indemnification from the city or the State of Texas for injury or property damage the person sustains or liability the person incurs in performing duties under this subsection. The city and the state are not liable for any damages arising from an act or omission of the person in performing duties under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 95-159, § 1, 9-5-95; Ord. No. 02-297, § 1, 1-7-03)  
Sec. 36-177. - Loading zones generally. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same. These zones shall be operative from 7:00 a.m. to 6:30 p.m., on each day, except Sundays and legal holidays. 
(b)  A curb loading zone shall be designated by upright signs or painted curb markings of a distinctive color imprinted with the wording "Loading Zone." However, if the zone lies within a section of curb at which parking is normally prohibited, such zone shall be designated by red curb markings imprinted with the wording "Delivery Only." 
(c)  Every person desiring or requiring a loading zone shall make application on appropriate forms to the traffic director. No loading zone shall be granted where the flow of traffic would be impeded or traffic hazards created by such zone. 
(d)  For the purpose of regulating and supervising curb loading zones and to provide a fund to cover all costs involved in installing adequate signs or curb markings designating loading zones and to pay the cost of periodic maintenance thereof, there is hereby imposed against the applicant for a loading zone and against any person who desires the maintenance of a loading zone abutting their property, a charge of one dollar per lineal foot per year for such space reserved. The traffic director shall not establish any such zone until the tax assessor and collector has certified that the applicant has paid such annual charge. The tax assessor and collector shall collect the renewal fee on the same basis for subsequent years, and in the event the same is not promptly paid, he shall advise the traffic director who will remove the signs or curb markings designating such loading zones. 
(e)  All loading zones shall be available to anyone who may have loading or unloading to do in the immediate vicinity. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-115—28-119), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-178. - Unlawful use of loading zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period of not to exceed two (2) minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed fifteen (15) minutes, except on written permission from the traffic director, which shall be a designated time, for a period necessary to complete only the one undertaking. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting the use of passenger type vehicles for the purpose of loading or unloading freight in a freight curb loading zone, but no person shall use a passenger type vehicle to load or unload freight in a freight curb loading zone unless he places an appropriate legible, printed, English language sign at least six (6) inches by eleven (11) inches on his windshield advising that he is parked for loading or unloading freight. Absence of an appropriate sign on the windshield of a passenger type vehicle in a freight curb loading zone shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle is illegally parked. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-120—28-122), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-179. - Bus stops and taxicab stands; parking of buses or taxicabs outside such stands. 
(a)  The traffic director is hereby authorized and required to establish bus stops and taxicab stands on such public streets in such places and in such number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop or taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs or curb markings. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when any such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers, when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. 
(c)  The driver of a bus or taxicab shall not park upon any street in any business district or urban district at any place other than at a bus stop or a taxicab stand, respectively, except that this provision shall not prevent the driver of any such vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-125—28-127), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Taxicabs, Ch. 35.  
Sec. 36-180. - Owner not to permit parking or standing violations. 
No person shall knowingly allow, permit or suffer any vehicle registered in his name to stand or be parked in any street in this city in violation of any provision of this article or other ordinances regulating the standing or parking of vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-136), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-181. - Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked same. 
In any prosecution charging a violation of any regulation governing the parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of such regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. The owner shall have the right to introduce evidence to show that such vehicle was not parked or placed by him as charged in the complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-137), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-182. - Removal or impoundment of parked or standing vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a street in violation of this chapter, such officer is hereby authorized to move such vehicle, or require the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved or main-traveled part of such street. 
(b)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of a vehicle from a street to the nearest garage or other place of safety, or to a garage designated or maintained by the city council, under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or causeway, or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic. 
(2)  When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to move such vehicle from in front of the driveway to another point on the highway. 
(3)  When any vehicle is found upon a street and report has previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been embezzled. 
(4)  When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned. 
(5)  When a vehicle upon a street is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person or persons in charge of the vehicle are incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or are not in the immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle. 
(6)  When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for an alleged offense and such officer is, by law, required to take the person arrested immediately before the municipal court judge. 
(7)  When any vehicle is illegally parked in violation of any ordinance of the city or law of the state not provided for in this section. 
(c)  Any police officer is hereby authorized to provide for the removal of any vehicle parked or standing in or on any portion of a highway when, in the opinion of such officer, the vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstances the safety of the vehicle is imperiled. 
(d)  No vehicle impounded in an authorized garage as herein provided shall be released therefrom until the charges for towing such vehicle into the garage and storage charges have been paid. The charge for towing or removal of any such vehicle and storage charges shall be fixed by the city council, such charges to be based upon a computation of all actual expenses entering into the current cost of such services. Such charge or charges shall be maintained for public inspection in the office of the city secretary and in each authorized garage. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-27), 3-15-66) 
Cross reference— Authorized garages designated for purpose of impoundment and storage under above section, and charges prescribed for such storage, § 7-13(b)(5); general provisions relative to removal and impounding of inoperable vehicle or vehicles constituting a safety hazard, § 20-12.  
Secs. 36-183—36-192. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - PEDESTRIANS 
 
Sec. 36-193. - Picketing residential dwelling prohibited. 
(a)  Definitions. 
Picketing means the posting of a person or group for a demonstration or protest. 
Targeted picketing means activity that is targeted at a particular residential dwelling and proceeds on a definite course or route in front of or around that particular residential dwelling. 
Residential dwelling means any permanent building being used by its occupants solely for nontransient residential uses. 
This section does not and shall not be interpreted to preclude picketing in a residential area that is not targeted at a particular residential dwelling. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person to engage in targeted picketing before or about the residential dwelling of any individual in the city. 
(Ord. No. 07-361, § 2, 12-18-07)  
Secs. 36-194, 36-195. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-69, § 1, adopted March 15, 2005, repealed §§ 36-193—36-195, which pertained to application of article; designation of crosswalks and safety zones for protection of pedestrians; right-of-way in crosswalks and derived from Ord. No. 1780, §§ 1(28-157, 28-158), 3-15-66.  
Sec. 36-196. - Prohibited crossings generally. 
Pedestrians are prohibited from crossing, under certain conditions, those streets designated by the traffic director, as evidenced by the erection of appropriate signs or pavement markings. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-160), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-197. - When use of crosswalk required. 
(a)  Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a crosswalk. 
(b)  No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than in a crosswalk in any business district or in any portion of a roadway within six hundred (600) feet of the property line of any school or building being used for school purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-160), 3-15-66; Ord. No. 05-69, § 2, 3-15-05) 
State Law reference— Provisions similar to subsection (a) above, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 78(c); authority of city to enact subsection (b), Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d, § 76(b).  
Secs. 36-198—36-201. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-69, § 1, adopted March 15, 2005, repealed §§ 36-198—36-201, which pertained to duty to yield right-of-way to vehicles; crossing at right angles or by shortest route; walking on roadways; soliciting by pedestrians and derived from Ord. No. 1780, §§ 1(28-159, 28-161, 28-162, 28-165), 3-15-66.  
Sec. 36-202. - Receiving and discharging of passengers. 
The driver or operator of any motor vehicle shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway of any street in the city, but shall drive to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible, or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road, and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged or received at either right-hand or left-hand sidewalk or roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-164), 3-15-66)  
Sec. 36-203. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 05-69, § 1, adopted March 15, 2005, repealed § 36-203, which pertained to duty to duty of drivers with regard to pedestrians and derived from Ord. No. 1780, § 1(28-163), 3-15-66.  
Secs. 36-204, 36-205. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IX. - TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference— Administration, Ch. 2; department of traffic and transportation, § 2-133 et seq. 
 
Sec. 36-206. - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the term "commission" shall mean the City of Pasadena Traffic and Transportation Commission created by section 36-207. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-207. - Created; composition. 
There is hereby created, re-created and established, within and for the city, the City of Pasadena Traffic and Transportation Commission composed of thirteen (13) members, whose positions are hereby created and established. This membership shall consist of a member of city council, the chief of police, the deputy chief of police in charge of the patrol bureau, the city engineer, an assistant city attorney, a municipal court judge, the traffic and transportation director and six (6) citizens. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-208. - Qualifications of members. 
Each member of the commission who is not a city employee shall be a resident citizen and qualified voter of the city. Any member who ceases to hold such qualifications shall, ipso facto, upon such cessation, terminate his membership, subject only to written approval by the mayor filed with the city secretary. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-209. - Appointment and terms of members; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  All members of the commission shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. Each member shall serve for a term of one year or until September 30, whichever first occurs, unless sooner terminated. 
(b)  All vacancies in membership of the commission shall be filled as soon as practicable after the occurrence of such vacancies by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council. The term of a member appointed and confirmed to fill a vacancy shall be for the balance of the original term. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-210. - Members to serve without compensation. 
The members of the commission, in the performance of their official duties, shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-211. - Officers designated. 
The officers of the commission shall consist of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary. The director of traffic and transportation shall serve as the secretary of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-212. - Election and term of vice-chairman. 
The vice-chairman of the commission shall be a noncity employee nominated by the members of the commission in such a manner as the commission shall prescribe at its first meeting as a committee of the whole, and he shall be elected by a majority vote of the qualified and serving members of the commission. The term of the vice-chairman shall be limited within the term of his commission membership appointment. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-213. - General powers and duties of officers. 
(a)  The chairman shall serve as presiding officer of the commission and appoint such other commission officers and committees as he deems fit, subject to such rules, regulations and bylaws as may be enacted by the commission under the supervision of the mayor. 
(b)  The vice-chairman of the commission shall serve in the performance of the duties and exercise of the powers of the chairman in the event of his absence or disability. In all cases, the mayor shall have the sole power of determining and declaring the disability of the chairman. 
(c)  The secretary of the commission shall write and have custody of the minutes of all meetings of the commission and shall have charge of all records of the commission. Commission correspondence shall be handled under the supervision of the secretary. 
(d)  The traffic and transportation director shall advise and consult with the commission in all its research projects, studies, tests and experiments and shall prepare recommendations and proposals, cost estimates and reports as to such projects, studies, tests and experiments. Unless otherwise provided by the commission, the traffic and transportation director will superintend the work ordered by the commission in the discharge of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-214. - Monthly meetings required; termination of membership for failure to attend meetings. 
The commission shall hold regular monthly meetings. Any member having three (3) consecutive absences from regular monthly meetings, without good cause shown, shall have his membership terminated, subject only to the mayor's approval. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-215. - Procedure. 
The procedure of the commission, except as prescribed in this article, shall be fixed by rules and regulations of the city council and by rules, regulations and bylaws of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-216. - Quorum. 
Fifty-one (51) per cent of the qualified and serving members of the commission shall constitute a quorum. The majority vote of a quorum of the commission shall be the act of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-217. - General powers and duties of commission. 
The commission shall have the power and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Coordinate traffic activities, carry on educational activities in traffic matters, supervise the preparation and publication of traffic reports, receive complaints having to do with traffic matters, and recommend to the city council and to the traffic and transportation director, the chief of police and other city officials ways and means for improving traffic conditions and the administration and enforcement of traffic regulations. 
(2)  Conduct hearings in response to appeals filed under the provisions of section 36-22.1 of this Code regarding obstructions of view of traffic at intersections. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Sec. 36-218. - Rules, regulations and bylaws for government of commission. 
(a)  The city council may prescribe rules and regulations for the government of the commission or may, by resolution, adopt rules and regulations promulgated by the commission. The commission may adopt bylaws for its respective government. 
(b)  All rules and regulations promulgated by the commission and bylaws adopted by the commission shall become effective only after approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 83-32, § 2, 1-25-83)  
Chapter 36½ - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Cutting of trees and branches during house moving operations, § 9-118; preparation of tree limbs and shrubbery for collection, § 14-8; trees, shrubs, etc. obstructing view of traffic at intersections, § 36-22.1. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 36½-1—36½-10. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PISTILLATE COTTONWOOD TREES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 71-178, adopted June 22, 1971, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1—9 herein as Art. II, §§ 36½-11—36½-19, was at the discretion of the editors. Catchlines were added by the editors to facilitate indexing, reference and use; and § 10, validity provisions, was omitted from codification. 
 
Sec. 36½-11. - Definitions. 
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article: 
Person includes one or more persons of either sex, natural persons, corporations, partnerships, associations, joint stock companies, societies, organizations and all other entities of any kind capable of being sued. 
Property owner shall mean and include every person who owns, occupies or exerts control over any real property within the city limits of the City of Pasadena. 
Public property shall mean and include that portion of the street right-of-way situated between the street curb and property line along all public streets and highways within the City of Pasadena. 
Pistillate cottonwood tree is defined as any female tree of the genus populus including all poplar and cottonwood bearing tatones in which cottonwood cotton is formed. 
Tatones are defined as the pods which grow on pistillate cottonwood trees and which produce a cottonwood cotton. 
Cottonwood cotton is defined as a fleecy white material closely resembling true cotton which, when released from the tatone, carries cottonwood tree seeds through the air. 
Prune shall mean the removal of cotton and cotton producing parts of trees as herein required. 
When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural number. 
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. 
(Ord. No. 71-178, § 1, 6-22-71)  
Secs. 36½-12—36½-17. - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 85-175, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 1985, repealed in their entirety §§ 36½-12—36½-17, pertaining to pruning and removal of pistillate cottonwood trees, derived from Ord. No. 71-178, §§ 2—7, adopted June 22, 1971.  
Sec. 36½-18. - Sale, etc., of pistillate cottonwood trees prohibited. 
No person, firm, corporation or association shall sell, display for sale, distribute, exchange, barter or trade, within the city limits of the City of Pasadena, a pistillate cottonwood tree as contemplated by this article; provided, however, this section shall not be construed to prevent the transportation of pistillate cottonwood trees through the City of Pasadena for distribution or use at some location other than within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena. 
(Ord. No. 71-178, § 8, 6-22-71)  
Sec. 36½-19. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 71-178, § 9, 6-22-71)  
Chapter 37 - WATER, SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference— Bond for clerks employed in water division of department of public works, § 2-5; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; water and sewer connections for mobile homes located outside mobile home park, § 21-48; water lines and sewer connections in mobile home parks, § 21-68; payment of taxes prerequisite to obtaining license or permit, § 26-1 et seq.; duty of planning director to make recommendations as to water procurement, storage and distribution, § 28-18; plumbing, Ch. 29; street openings for water and sewer connections, § 32-31; swimming pools, Ch. 33; subdivisions, App. A, App. B. 
State Law reference— General authority of city relative to water and sewer systems, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(11), (13). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 37-1. - Water control and improvement districts. 
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance abolishing any water control and improvement district and assigning the property, facilities, functions and services of such district to the city, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.  
Sec. 37-2. - Water taps and meters generally; application for water service. 
(a)  All water taps shall be made by the city, after application is made for a meter and the same is fully paid for by the applicant. Whether the applicant is the property owner or the property owner's agent, the meter shall remain the property of the city but the owner shall be responsible for its protection. The city shall, in all cases, decide on the size of the meter which can be set and the location of same. 
(b)  In case any person shall move into any premises such person shall file an application for water service before using any water from the service connections for such premises. 
(c)  Where an application is accepted for water service, it shall be deemed that the place of service and the name of the applicant shown upon such application is the bona fide place of service and name of the applicant, and should water services be discontinued for nonpayment of bills or for other infractions of this chapter, no new application will be accepted from the owner, agent or any other person to continue service in such place under any other name, so long as such place is occupied by the original applicant as the bona fide place of service, whether as a business or a residence, until after all bills, penalties, damage costs to city water equipment and other service charges have been paid in full or a payment, settlement or release agreement reached. Should water services be furnished by anyone to a tenant, it shall be considered additional service to the applicant and the provisions of this subsection shall apply in the same manner. 
(d)  Where a contractor applies for the use of water for construction purposes, the meter shall remain the property of the city, but the contractor shall be responsible for its protection during the tenure of its use. When the contractor or contractor's representative agent makes an application, a deposit shall be made as provided in section 37-37 or shall be an amount equal to twice the price of the estimated monthly usage as payment guarantee for water to be supplied and protection of the meter. The deposit will not be refunded until all water and any damage bills are paid in full. If water usage estimates prove to be seriously out of line, an adjustment of the amount shall be made up or down as the case may be. 
(e)  Water meters shall not be set unless the correct street name and correct number are given by the applicant. When the application is made, it will also be necessary to give the correct name of the owner, or if the application is for a tenant, the tenant's correct name, street and house number. 
(f)  If any person shall give any false statement in any application for water service such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(g)  An application for temporary services shall be submitted to the water billing office. A fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) shall be paid in advance for temporary water service for activities such as cleaning, plumbing checks, remodeling and so forth. The following temporary water rates are hereby established and shall be collected for water services furnished by the city: 
(1)  The thirty-five dollar ($35.00) fee is for fifteen (15) days and two thousand (2,000) gallons of water; 
(2)  Two dollars seventy-five cents ($2.75) per one thousand (1,000) gallons thereafter; 
(3)  Service will be terminated after fifteen (15) days and if additional service time is required, customer must pay an additional twenty dollars ($20.00) for another 15 days of service and two thousand (2,000) gallons of water except that all usage thereafter will be charged as indicated in subsection (2) above; and 
(4)  Customer can request additional days by paying twenty dollars ($20.00) for another fifteen (15) days of service and two thousand (2,000) gallons of water except that all usage thereafter will be charged as indicated in subsection (2) above provided however that after sixty (60) days, it will be considered a regular account and assessed the deposit requirement as indicated in section 37-37. 
(h)  Water customers in good standing shall be allowed a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days when transferring from one residence to another. Before the expiration of that fifteen-day period, either a new deposit or a cosigner must be in place, or the original water service will be disconnected. A transfer fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be paid when a customer moves water service from one (1) location in the city to another location within the city. 
(i)  In accordance with TAC 30 Chapter 290 of the TCEQ Rules each private residence with a single water meter must have a water distribution system within the home that meets the following standards: 
(1)  No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of contamination. Potential sources of contamination may be isolated from the public water system by an air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly in accordance with state plumbing regulations. Additionally, all pressure relief valves and thermal expansion devices may be in compliance with state plumbing codes. 
(2)  No cross-connection between the public drinking water supply and a private water system. Where an actual air gap is not maintained between the public water supply and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly must be properly installed and in place. A service agreement for annual inspection and testing by a certified backflow prevention device tester is required. 
(3)  No connection which would allow the return of water used for condensing, cooling or industrial processes back to the public water supply. 
(4)  No pipe or pipe fitting installed on or after July 1, 1998 which contains more than 8.0 per cent lead. 
(5)  No private plumbing facilities installed on or after July 1, 1998 which contain solder or flux with more than 0.2 per cent lead. 
(6)  No installed plumbing fixture which is not in compliance with state approved plumbing code. 
(j)  To ensure compliance with TCEQ standards each residential unit must be inspected by a plumber, approved by the city, or plumbing inspector and each must be licensed by the State Board of Plumbing Examiners. Such inspection may also be performed by a water supply protection specialist licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners or certain others who are approved by the TCEQ. 
(k)  A certificate of inspection, as described herein, completed by a registered inspector, must be on file with the water department before water service will be provided to any single-family dwelling with a single water meter. This requirement applies to both initial connections and re-connects. 
(l)  A service agreement, as described herein, must be executed by each new applicant for water service. This requirement applies to new construction and re-connects. 
(m)  Commercial establishments and multifamily dwellings served by one (1) meter must meet the same criteria as set out above but the inspection must be done by those listed above. 
(n)  Copies of the service agreement and inspection form are prescribed by 30 TAC chapter 290 and may be obtained from the water department. 
(Code 1964, § 29-3; Ord. No. 1805, §§ 1, 4, 12, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 86-98, § 1, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 00-36, § 1, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 10-074, §§ 1—6, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-3. - Water meters required. 
All water supplied by the city shall be metered by a self-contained encoder water meter which registers the water supplied in gallons and registers the current odometer reading through a remote radio frequency into the city billing system. All meters shall need approval by the Director of Public Works and be installed with removable strainers. 
(Code 1964, § 29-33; Ord. No. 1805, § 6, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 99-193, § 1, 10-12-99)  
Sec. 37-4. - Installation for water meter and taps; boring/tunneling. 
There shall be collected by the city the following fees for water meters and their installation within the city. 
Meter Size (inches) 	Price of Meter 	Meter Vault 	Price of Tap 	Total 
5/8 ×¾" 	$220.00 	Included 	$500.00 	$720.00 
1" 	$240.00 	Included 	$500.00 	$740.00 
1½ 	$350.00 	Included 	$600.00 	$950.00 
2" 	$460.00 	Included 	$800.00 	$1,260.00 
3" Compound 	$1,900.00 	By Owner 	$1,900.00 	$3,800.00 
4" Compound 	$2,640.00 	By Owner 	$2,000.00 	$4,640.00 
6" Compound 	$4,580.00 	By Owner 	$2,200.00 	$6,780.00 
8" Compound 	$5,370.00 	By Owner 	$2,700.00 	$8,070.00 
10" Compound 	$8,800.00 	By Owner 	$3,500.00 	$12,300.00 
 
The contractor shall bear all costs incurred for any road tunneling and boring necessary for sewer lines and water taps. 
The minimum street boring charge shall be one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00), standard fifty-foot road bore length, each additional foot to be charged for at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per foot. 
The city will furnish all bores for two-inch and smaller water meters. The owner/contractor shall bear all boring costs on three-inch and larger water meter installations. 
All meters three (3) inches through ten (10) inches shall be a compound meter and shall be installed with a permanent by-pass for field testing purposes. Permanent by-passes for compound meters, three (3) inches and larger, installed by the city shall cost two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
All meters shall be installed by the property line or at a location specified by the city engineer or his duly authorized representative. 
All additional items have to be approved by the director of public works. 
Damages to water meters, due to tampering or negligence, will be assessed to include all labor and materials to repair or replace. 
Fees for additional items: 
Extra pipe $1.00 per foot beyond forty (40) feet. 
Thirty-five (35) sacks of ready mix concrete, $90.00. 
The meter fee for the exchange of a one (1) inch or larger meter for a standard five-eighths ( 5/8 ) meter is waived. 
(Code 1964, § 29-5; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 83-336, § 1, 11-15-83; Ord. No. 92-21, § 1, 2-11-92; Ord. No. 93-135, § 1, 8-24-93; Ord. No. 99-193, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 08-107, § 1, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 08-223, § 1, 9-23-08)  
Sec. 37-5. - Fee for sewer taps, permit and inspection. 
(a)  All taps into a city sewer trunk or tap to connect to any city sewer shall be made by employee of the city of Pasadena (taps made by other than city personnel shall result in a double fee); provided, however, a sewer tap permit will be issued to a master plumber licensed by the State of Texas, who is bonded with the city, upon application to the building official. Such master plumber shall make application to the building official for a permit to tap a city sewer trunk or tap or connect to any city sewer. 
(b)  No person shall replace, repair or otherwise renew a service line without first making application for and obtaining a permit from the building official. 
(c)  Whenever a service line is replaced or renewed, such replacement work shall extend to and connect to the sewer main with a tapping saddle, and shall be inspected by the building official or his authorized representative prior to cover-up. If such cover-up occurs prior to inspection, the contractor shall be required to uncover at his expense the tapping saddle for inspection. 
(d)  The building official shall exercise care in giving the location land depth of city sewer mains belonging to the city, but the city shall not, in any case, guarantee such location and depth. All streets under which sewer lines shall be placed in making the sewer tap shall be bored. No open cuts in the street shall be permitted. Provided, however, upon application to the director of public works upon good cause shown and the written consent of the mayor, an open cut may be made. 
(e)  There shall be collected by the city the following fees for sewer tap, permit and inspection within the city: 
(1)  For one-family residential dwellings: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and or each additional sewer tap a fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) each. 
(2)  For commercial users: One thousand three hundred dollars ($1,300.00) each and for each additional sewer tap five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00). 
(3)  For the permit and inspection fee for replacement of existing service sewer lines: Twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(4)  No permit shall be issued to replace or renew a service line unless such replacement provides for the renewal of such service line so as to extend and connect into the existing sewer main line with a tapping saddle and until the fee therefor is fully paid. 
(5)  The minimum street boring charge shall be one thousand six hundred dollars ($1,600.00), standard fifty-foot road bore length, each additional foot to be charged for at the rate of twenty dollars ($20.00) per foot. 
(f)  There shall be collected by the city the following fees for commercial site work, permit and inspection within the city: 
(1)  Storm sewer permit & inspections only: 
Manhole, each ..... $25.00 
Area drain .....  20.00 
Tie-in to public system .....  25.00 
(2)  Sanitary sewer permit & inspections only: 
Manhole, each ..... $25.00 
First one hundred (100) linear feet of sewer line .....  25.00 
Each additional one hundred (100) linear feet .....  15.00 
(3)  Water line permit & inspections only: 
First one hundred (100) linear feet ..... $25.00 
Each additional one hundred (100) linear feet .....  15.00 
As used in this subsection, commercial means all buildings or structures other than single-family or duplex dwellings. 
This provision shall apply on private property from five (5) feet of the building, structure or work to the availability of public utilities. 
Fees for additional items: 
Four (4) foot manhole ..... $ 500.00 
Six (6) foot manhole .....   600.00 
Eight (8) foot manhole .....   750.00 
Twelve (12) foot manhole .....  1,100.00 
Extra pipe: 
Four (4) inches, per foot ..... $2.00 
Six (6) inches, per foot .....  3.00 
Eight (8) inches, per foot .....  3.00 
Extra couplings: 
Four (4) inches ..... $ 5.00 
Six (6) inches .....   10.00 
Eight (8) inches .....   12.00 
(Code 1964, § 29-6; Ord. No. 1751, § 2, 1-11-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 93-135, § 1 8-24-93; Ord. No. 99-193, § 1, 10-12-99; Ord. No. 02-122, § 4, 7-9-02; Ord. No. 08-107, § 2, 7-1-08)  
Sec. 37-6. - Reserved. 
This section reserved at the request of the City.  
Sec. 37-7. - Testing water meters. 
Any consumer may at any time request that his water meter be tested for accuracy. The procedure shall be as follows: an application for a test shall be accompanied by a special deposit of fifty dollars ($50.00). A test will be scheduled. The customer shall be notified by the city of the time and place of the test. Whether the customer appears or not, the test shall be performed and witnessed. If the test shows the meter to be more than two (2) per cent fast, the meter shall be replaced with an accurate one and the fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit returned to the customer, together with a written statement of the test findings. If the test shows the meter to be any less than two (2) per cent fast, the fifty dollar ($50.00) deposit shall be forfeited to the city. A brief written statement of the test findings will be mailed to the customer. Field testing of one-inch meters, when requested by the owner and made by the city, shall cost seventy-five dollars ($75.00); testing of one and one-half-inch meters shall cost one hundred dollars ($100.00); testing of two-inch and three-inch meters shall cost one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00); testing of four-inch meters shall cost two hundred dollars ($200.00); and testing of six-inch, eight-inch, and ten-inch meters shall cost three hundred dollars ($300.00), respectively. 
(Ord. No. 01-183, § 1, 10-30-01)  
Sec. 37-8. - Material and size of house piping for water. 
All house piping for water shall be galvanized wrought iron, galvanized steel or copper, and no lead shall be permitted. The pipe shall be of a size as best suits the owner, except that the connection for the water meter shall be of such size as will take the size of meter connections which are to be used. 
(Code 1964, § 29-8)  
Sec. 37-9. - Cross connections with water supply prohibited. 
No cross connections of other water supplies shall exist or ever be made to or with the water system of the city, either within or without the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-9)  
Sec. 37-10. - Water customers to give notice of change of address. 
In case any person subscribing to city water services shall change his place of business or residence he shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after such change, give notice thereof to the water division of the department of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 12, 5-3-66)  
Sec. 37-11. - Prohibited deposits in sewers generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to blow, sweep, throw or deposit into any sewer manhole, catch basin, or into any private drain connecting with a city sewer or city street, any straw, hay, grass, grass clippings, trees, limbs, trimmings, weeds, branches, leaf litter, dirt and other fill material, construction/demolition material, garbage, debris or any other substance which would be liable to cause stoppage in the sewers or be injurious to the disposal plant. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence violate any provision of this section and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this section for which no specific penalty is provided shall be fined in a sum of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Code 1964, § 29-10; Ord. No. 99-146, § 1, 8-31-99)  
Sec. 37-12. - Discharge of industrial waste into storm sewers. 
(a)  The discharge of industrial waste into any of the city's storm sewers or storm water drainage system is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, "industrial wastes" are hereby defined as being the liquid or other character of waste resulting from any commercial manufacturing or industrial operations or processes, other than sanitary sewage. "Sanitary sewage" is hereby defined as the waste from water closets, urinals, lavatories, sinks, bathtubs, showers, household laundries, cellar floor drains, garage floor drains, storerooms, drinking fountains, soda fountains, refrigerator drips and stable floor drains. 
(Code 1964, §§ 29-1, 29-11)  
Sec. 37-13. - Sanitary sewers not be used for roof, storm or surface drainage or commercial waste. 
It shall be unlawful for any person renting, owning, leasing or controlling, in whole or in part, any premises within the city to use the sanitary sewer line for roof drainage, storm drainage, surface drainage or commercial waste. 
(Code 1964, § 29-12; Ord. No. 1671, § 1, 2-16-65)  
Sec. 37-14. - Connection of sanitary drain lines to storm sewers, creeks, rivers or lakes. 
No sanitary drain lines shall ever be connected to any storm sewer, creek, river or lake, unless the drainage is first purified to such extent that the approval of the state health department and the city health officer can be and is first obtained in writing. 
(Code 1964, § 29-13)  
Sec. 37-15. - Unauthorized opening of sewer manhole covers, lampholes or cleanouts. 
No person, except an authorized employee of the city, shall open any manhole cover, lamphole or cleanout of the city sewer system. 
(Code 1964, § 29-14)  
Sec. 37-16. - Unauthorized turning on of water service. 
No person who is not specifically authorized by the city shall turn water on for any premises, and where the water has been turned off for vacancy, nonpayment of water and sewer service charges, or for any other reason, any unauthorized person turning on such water shall be held guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1964, § 29-15)  
Sec. 37-17. - Damaging meters, service lines, mains, laterals, etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or otherwise injure any water meter, water tap, service line, water or sewer main, lateral trunk line, fire hydrant, valve or other property used in connection with the city's water and sewer system. In addition to any penalty imposed upon conviction for a violation of this section, the person responsible for any such damage shall fully reimburse the city for any expenses incurred in repairing the damage, and general contractors will be held fully accountable for any damages by their subcontractors or their agents during any service being performed for the contact, any of his subcontractors or their agents. 
(b)  If a customer service line is so deteriorated or in such a state of disrepair that city personnel cannot service or replace the water meter attached thereto, the city shall notify customer of such condition. Customer shall have seven (7) days to correct the problem and notify the city of said correction. If customer fails to make necessary corrections, then city may either discontinue water service until such corrections are made or make the necessary corrections and charge customer for same. 
(Code 1964, § 29-18; Ord. No. 99-220, § 1, 12-7-99)  
Sec. 37-18. - Right of entry for meter readers and inspectors; meter accessibility. 
(a)  City water meter readers or inspectors shall have access to all premises where water or sewer service exists at all reasonable business hours, which are normally from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on all days, except Sundays. Consent to enter private property shall be obtained. 
(b)  The owner of the property must keep the meter exposed and accessible for repair at all times. Should the meter be inaccessible or covered with concrete, black topping, dirt, rocks, lumber, or other materials, the owner shall immediately uncover it. Should he fail to do so, the city shall uncover the meter and charge the owner two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for such service. 
(Code 1964, § 29-19; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 86-98, § 3, 5-20-86)  
Sec. 37-19. - Vicious dogs and other animals not to interfere with meter readers and inspectors. 
Vicious dogs or other animals of vicious nature shall not be allowed to be where they can or may be a menace or danger to any authorized water meter reader or inspector. Any violation of this section shall be cause for discontinuance of the water service, and whenever it is necessary to so handle a case, the water service shall not be restored until a proper assurance is furnished the city that the danger and menace has been permanently removed, and a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the city to repay the city's expense of restoring the service. 
(Code 1964, § 29-20; Ord. No. 86-98, § 4, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 01-183, § 2, 10-30-01) 
Cross reference— Animals generally, Ch. 6.  
Sec. 37-20. - Shutting off water for repairs, etc. 
The department of public works may, at any time, order the water cut off from any premises connected with the city mains for repairs, extensions or other necessary purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 2, 5-3-66)  
Sec. 37-21. - City not liable for damages caused by change in water pressure or shutting off water. 
The city shall not be liable for any damage which may occur due to any change in pressure in its water mains or in any connections or laterals or to water meters or on account of water being cut off for any purpose or on account of the bursting of any pipe or fixture by pressure of the water from city mains or appurtenances thereto. 
(Code 1964, § 29-17; Ord. No. 1805, § 3, 5-3-66)  
Sec. 37-22. - Chapter not to interfere or conflict with plumbing ordinances. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed or understood to interfere or conflict in any way with any part of the plumbing ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-21) 
Cross reference— Plumbing, Ch. 29.  
Secs. 37-23—37-33. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER AND SEWER SERVICE CHARGES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority of city to prescribe charges for water and sewer services, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 1175(11), (13). 
 
Sec. 37-34. - Water rates prescribed. 
(a)  The following words and terms shall have the following meanings when used in this section: 
City's water, distribution systems. All water distribution systems and extensions or enlargements thereof owned or operated by the City of Pasadena, or in which the city has an equity of ownership, and there is specifically included the systems that have been constructed by the city and those systems constructed by persons, as that term is defined herein, and which have heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the city, and those systems constructed by or acquired by reclamation and conservation districts organized under Article XVI, Section 59, of the Texas Constitution, and which have heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the city by operation of, or as authorized by, law. 
Designated unit. An area established for either (1) human habitation including single-family type residences, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums, multifamily projects and mobile home park spaces or (2) any commercial establishment containing fixture units. For the purposes of this section a designated unit shall not include a hospital room, a continuing care nursing home room, a hotel/motel room, or a recreational vehicle park space for rent on a daily basis. 
(b)  The following monthly rates are hereby established and shall be collected for water services furnished by the city through its properties and facilities: 
(1)  Residential, single family unit: 
Minimum charge per unit or meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $10.75 
Next 6,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.00 
Next 2,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
Next 2,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
Next 18,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.00 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.50 
(2)  Residential, single family unit, for those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over: 
Minimum charge per unit or meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $6.59 
Next 5,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.50 
Next 5,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
Next 18,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.00 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.50 
Proof of age is to be submitted to the water billing office. 
(3)  Residential, multifamily units: 
Minimum charge per unit or meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $9.50 
Next 3,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.25 
Next 5,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
Next 2,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.25 
Next 18,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.00 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.50 
(4)  Commercial customers: 
Minimum charge per meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $12.59 
Next 8,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.25 
Next 10,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.75 
Next 10,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.50 
(5)  Irrigation sprinklers, residential and commercial: 
Minimum charge per unit or meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $14.00 
Next 8,000 gallons consumption, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
Next 18,000 gallons consumption, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.00 
All consumption over 28,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 6.00 
(6)  Fire hydrant meter to provide temporary commercial water service: 
Minimum charge per unit or meter served, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $265.59 
Next 10,000 gallons consumption, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.25 
Next 18,000 gallons consumption, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.50 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 5.00 
(7)  Rates outside city limits: Regardless of the location of the meter, the charges and rates for all water and sanitary sewer service furnished to premises outside the city limits shall be at the rate of one hundred fifty (150) per cent of the rate for water and sanitary sewer service furnished to customers within the city limits, unless the user has a valid contract in place. The city shall be under no obligation to extend its lines or service outside the city, or to continue the service once begun, and may terminate the service at any time for any reason upon one hundred twenty (120) days' written notice. For failure to pay charges, or for violation of its rules and regulations of service; the city may disconnect or turn off either or both services as specified in section 37-41. 
(8)  Fire line minimum charge, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $55.25 
Next 8,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.75 
Next 10,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.00 
Next 10,000 gallons of water, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.25 
All consumption over 30,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.50 
Exemptions: Churches, public schools, and religious or charitable organizations are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. This exemption will be phased out over a four-year period beginning October 1, 2008 in four equal reductions. 
Residential, single family unit, for those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over, are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. 
(9)  In addition to other charges, each residential, commercial, irrigation, and industrial user must pay a service charge based on the water meter size as follows: 
Meter Size 	Additional Water Charge Per Meter 
1" 	$   16.25 
1.5" 	    39.00 
2" 	    52.00 
3" Compound 	   104.00 
4" Compound 	   162.50 
6" Compound 	   325.00 
6" Turbine 	   455.00 
8" Compound 	   520.00 
8" Turbine 	   780.00 
10" HP Protectus 	   910.00 
10" Turbine 	 1,235.00 
 
Exemptions: Churches, public schools, and religious or charitable organizations are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. This exemption will be phased out over a four-year period beginning October 1, 2008 in four equal reductions. 
Residential, single family unit, for those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over, are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 5, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 72-227, § 1, 9-26-72; Ord. No. 79-149, § 1, 10-23-79; Ord. No. 82-82, § 1, 4-20-82; Ord. No. 82-86, § 1, 4-27-82; Ord. No. 84-159, § 1, 7-24-84; Ord. No. 86-98, § 5, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 01-183, § 3, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 05-233, § 1, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 08-107, § 4, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 10-074, § 7, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 11-157, § 1, 10-4-11; Ord. No. 12-135, § 1, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 16-040, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Sec. 37-35. - Sewer charges prescribed. 
(a)  The following words and terms shall have the following meanings when used in this section: 
City's sanitary sewer systems. All sanitary sewer systems and extensions or enlargements thereof owned or operated by the City of Pasadena, or in which the city has an equity of ownership, and there is specifically included the systems that have been constructed by the city and those systems constructed by persons, as that term is defined herein, and which have heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the city, and those systems constructed by or acquired by reclamation and conservation districts organized under Article XVI, Section 59, of the Texas Constitution, and which have heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the city by operation of, or as authorized by law. 
Designated unit. An area established for either (1) human habitation including single-family type residences, duplexes, townhouses, condominiums, multifamily projects and mobile home park spaces or (2) any commercial establishment containing fixture units. For the purposes of this section, a designated unit shall not include a hospital room, a continuing care nursing home room, a hotel/motel room, or a recreational vehicle park space for rent on a daily basis. 
(b)  The following sanitary sewer service charges shall apply only to sewer discharged, based upon such conversion factors and measured by any city water meter serving a building located within the city limits: 
(1)  Residential, single family unit: 
Minimum charge, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $10.75 
Next 5,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.00 
Next 2,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
All consumption over 9,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
(2)  Residential, single family unit, for those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over: 
Minimum charge, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $4.99 
Next 4,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 2.50 
Next 4,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
All consumption over 10,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
(3)  Residential, multifamily units: 
Minimum charge per unit, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $9.50 
Next 3,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.00 
Next 5,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.50 
All consumption over 10,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.00 
(4)  Commercial customers: 
Minimum charge, 2,000 gallons or less ..... $12.00 
Next 8,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.00 
Next 8,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.30 
Next 8,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.55 
Next 8,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 3.80 
Next 10,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.05 
All consumption over 44,000 gallons of sewage, per 1,000 gallons ..... 4.15 
(5)  Conversion factor. 
Residential/Multi-family: 90 per cent of water used. 
Commercial: 95 per cent of water used. 
(6)  In addition to other charges, each residential, commercial, irrigation, and industrial user must pay a service charge based on the water meter size as follows: 
Meter Size 	Additional Sewer Charge Per Meter 
1" 	$   22.50 
1.5" 	    54.00 
2" 	    72.00 
3" Compound 	   144.00 
4" Compound 	   225.00 
6" Compound 	   450.00 
6" Turbine 	   630.00 
8" Compound 	   720.00 
8" Turbine 	 1,080.00 
10" HP Protectus 	 1,260.00 
10" Turbine 	 1,710.00 
 
Exemptions: Churches, public schools, and religious or charitable organizations are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. This exemption will be phased out over a four-year period beginning October 1, 2008 in four equal reductions. 
Residential, single family unit, for those residential customers sixty-five (65) years of age or over, are hereby exempted from the service charge based on water meter size. 
(Code 1964, § 29-31; Ord. No. 70-76, § 1, 4-7-70; Ord. No. 75-159, § 1, 9-23-75; Ord. No. 76-179, §§ 1—4, 9-21-76; Ord. No. 82-82, § 2, 4-20-82; Ord. No. 82-86, §§ 2—4, 4-27-82; Ord. No. 86-98, § 6, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 93-168, § 1, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 05-233, § 1, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 08-107, § 4, 7-1-08; Ord. No. 12-135, § 2, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 16-040, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Sec. 37-36. - Against whom levied. 
(a)  The charges for water, garbage and sewer service rendered by the city shall be levied and assessed against the person in whose name the water meter is listed in the city water department record, or as otherwise provided by this chapter, whether or not such meter is owned by the user or the city water department. In the event any person is connected to or is using the sanitary sewer system or garbage service of the city and is not connected to the city's water system, the charges for said services shall be levied and assessed in the name of the person connected with and using the sewer system or garbage service. 
(b)  Residential and commercial users of the city sewer system who have a private source of water supply or who receive water from a source other than the city's water system shall be billed as follows, for premises served within the city limits: 
(1)  Single-family residential, per month ..... $11.00 
(2)  Duplex residence, per month ..... 22.00 
(3)  Multiple dwelling units or, at option of owner, from metered water supply, per unit ..... 9.50 
(4)  Commercial, per month ..... 12.00 
(c)  For sewer service to property located outside the limits of the city, where there is no existing contract with the city precluding the application of the charges established by this article during the term thereof, the charges to be made by the city for such service shall be twice the amount of the minimum charge and one and one-half (1½) times the amount of all charges above the minimum charge for like service within the city limits. 
(d)  All persons owning, renting, leasing or having management or control of property or premises that produce waste that is discharged into the sanitary sewers of the city, including domestic waste, and subject to the provisions of this article, shall be charged the rates established in this section, and no reduced rates or free sanitary sewer service shall be furnished to any such person, property or premises. 
(e)  In those instances where water meters are provided on the sources of water providing water to the facilities discharging into the sanitary sewer system of the city, water usage will be determined from the water meter readings, for the purpose of determining the sewer service charge. As to such water sources that are not metered, estimates of water usage will be made by the city and sewer service charges based upon such estimates will be in addition to those determined from water meter readings. 
(f)  Any person discharging waste from any property or premises into the sanitary sewers of the city who has a private source of water supply or who receives his water supply from a source other than the city may choose to install a water meter of the type and standard approved by the department of public works for the purpose of measuring the amount of water taken into such facilities. Such meter shall be installed in a location approved by the department of public works and accessible to the water meter readers of the city at all times during the hours from 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday of each week of each year. The water consumption indicated by such meter shall be the basis of determining the sewer charge provided for in this article. 
(Code 1964, § 29-34; Ord. No. 1805, § 7, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 75-159, § 1, 9-23-75; Ord. No. 86-98, § 7, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 93-168, § 2, 10-12-93; Ord. No. 16-040, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Sec. 37-37. - Deposit for water, sewer and garbage services—Generally; residential, multi-family dwellings and commercial. 
(a)  Service to user. Whenever application is made for water, garbage, and/or sewer service by a person, such application shall be accompanied by a deposit payable to the city to guarantee payment of all such service charges. The amount of such deposit shall be determined as specifically listed below or, if not specifically listed, then by estimating monthly usage and doubling that amount. The water department may classify and list businesses according to the hereinbefore stated formula and require payment of the deposit listed. The deposit shall be held by the city during the entire occupation of the premises by each customer and until all bills due for such services thereto are paid. Except that: 
(1)  No person of the age of sixty-five (65) years or older shall be required to make or maintain a deposit for water, sewer, and/or garbage services to his residence if he submits to the water department satisfactory proof of age. A customer shall lose his exemption by reason of terminating for nonpayment and again be required to make a deposit as herein provided as a condition of restoration of service. 
(2)  Any account requiring a minimum deposit in excess of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) may, in lieu of other deposit and with approval of the water department, provide a corporate surety bond in a form acceptable to the city attorney, in the amount of the required deposit. 
(b)  Deposit/connect fee. Deposits for service are as follows: 
(1)  Residential: 
a.  Owner of single-family dwelling ..... $125.00 
b.  Renter (non-owner) of single-family dwelling ..... 150.00 
(2)  Commercial deposits shall be determined by the water billing office. This deposit is to be generally comparable to two (2) months' service of a commercial business similar to the applicant. 
(3)  Deposits for apartment houses, mobile parks or other multi-family dwelling shall be determined as follows: 
a.  Small apartment, mobile home park, or townhouse complex (3—5 units) per unit ..... 75.00; 
b.  Medium apartment, mobile home park, or townhouse complex (6—15 units) per unit ..... 75.00 
c.  Large apartment, mobile home park, or townhouse complex (over fifteen (15) units) per meter shall be twice the monthly rate. This will be calculated by averaging the last twelve (12) months' billing for this property. If water usage estimates prove to be seriously out of line, an adjustment of the amount shall be made up or down as the case may be. 
(c)  Sprinkler (irrigation) meters ..... 25.00 to 500.00 
(based on size of meter) 
(d)  Swimming pool deposits: 
Single-family dwellings and duplexes ..... 50.00 
All others, per pool ..... 75.00 
(e)  Sewer or garbage deposits. Should any resident not be serviced by city water but by sewer and/or garbage service only the following deposits shall apply: 
Single-family dwelling for garbage only ..... 35.00 
Single-family dwelling for sewer only ..... 16.00 
Duplex for garbage only ..... 70.00 
Duplex for sewer only ..... 35.00 
(f)  In addition to the deposit, a fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be charged for the connection of new water service. A transfer fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) shall be paid when a customer moves water service from one (1) location in the city to another location within the city. 
(Code 1964, § 29-35; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 2-15-66; Ord. No. 1835, § 1, 7-5-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 80-299, § 1, 1-6-81; Ord. No. 86-98, §§ 8—10, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 86-214, § 1, 9-16-87; Ord. No. 01-183, § 4, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 10-074, §§ 8, 9, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 12-135, § 3, 9-25-12)  
Sec. 37-38. - Same—By contractors. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "contractor" shall mean any person, natural or artificial, engaging in the construction, erection, installation of buildings or structures for hire, according to plans and specifications approved for a city building permit. 
(b)  Deposits for water service at construction sites shall be as follows: 
Single-family dwelling (one (1) house) ..... $100.00 
Single-family dwellings (for each five (5) houses) ..... 400.00 
Commercial buildings (small) ..... 100.00 
Apartment or townhouse complexes, per meter ..... 500.00 
Commercial buildings (large), per meter ..... 500.00 
Fire hydrant meter, affixed to hydrant, per meter ..... 400.00 
Fire hydrant meter, movable, per meter ..... 1,000.00 
For fire hydrant meters, water readings must be provided in writing to the city water billing office on a monthly basis or a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) penalty may result. Failure to comply with the monthly reading schedule shall entitle the city to take back the meter and discontinue the person's use of the meter. Additionally, the city may apply all or part of the utility deposit to the payment of a delinquent utility bill. In such cases, the amount shall be determined by the preceding month's usage. 
(1)  The deposits required by this section shall be required only during construction. Construction shall be conclusively deemed completed as of the approval of the city permit department upon final inspection thereof. The deposit shall be refundable only after all city service charges assessable to any water meter connected in the name of such building contractor, whether corporate, assumed, or true, have been fully paid. 
(2)  A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged to move a fire hydrant meter from one location to another for the same customer. Any outstanding bill on the current amount must be paid prior to transfer even if it is not yet past due. In addition, a two hundred dollar ($200.00) fee will be assessed the builders, contractors, and subcontractors who intentionally move meters from one location to another to avoid the cost of setting up service at each location where they are working. Water service will not be restored until this fee has been paid. 
(c)  Lost or stolen meter. There will be a charge of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to replace any meter that is lost or stolen. Water service will not be restored until this fee has been paid. 
(d)  Interest and transferability. Interest shall not be allowed on said deposits and they shall be nontransferable. 
(e)  Exemptions. Churches, public schools, religious or charitable organizations, and governmental bodies are hereby exempted from the payment of deposits. 
(Code 1964, § 29-35; Ord. No. 1770, § 1, 12-14-66; Ord. No. 1835, § 1, 7-5-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 86-98, § 11, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 01-183, § 5, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 10-074, §§ 10—13, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-39. - Meter reading; billing procedures. 
All water meters, as nearly as possible, shall be read once a month and bills shall be rendered therefor to each customer not less than once during an equivalent of one (1) calendar month. Billings shall be arranged to issue on approximately the same date or dates of each month. All bills shall be considered rendered when sent to the customer by the city. If the meter reader is unable to procure a reading of the meter because ingress thereto is obstructed in any manner, or entrance to premises is made hazardous by a vicious dog or otherwise, a charge shall be made based on an estimate of the amount of water consumed since the last reading. 
(Code 1964, § 29-36; Ord. No. 1805, § 8, 5-3-66) 
Cross reference— Garbage and trash collection charges to be billed with water and sewer charges, § 14-11.  
Sec. 37-40. - Collection agents. 
The director of the department of public works shall have authority to designate such person, partnership, association or corporation as he may deem to be qualified for the conduct of the business of the City of Pasadena, as agents of the City of Pasadena for the sole purpose of collecting such sums as may be due to the City of Pasadena for water, sewer and garbage charges subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  No fee or salary shall be paid to any such person or corporation for the services performed as such agent. 
(b)  Each such agent shall keep records of collections on forms provided by the City of Pasadena and approved by the city controller. 
(c)  Each such agent shall make a daily accounting of collections to the City of Pasadena and pay over each day's collection to the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  Each such agent shall deposit with the city secretary a surety bond in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) in such form as may be acceptable to the city attorney. 
(e)  No agent herein provided for shall be authorized to accept any payment except that it be made by an individual presenting a City of Pasadena water bill and payment be in the exact amount of said bill. 
(f)  No agent herein provided for shall be authorized to collect any delinquent bill. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 10, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 79-166, § 1, 12-4-79)  
Sec. 37-41. - Due date; delinquencies; disputed charges. 
(a)  All bills for water, garbage, and sewer charges rendered by the city are due and payable within eighteen (18) days from the date of the bill, and if not paid within such period, the amount of the bill shall be increased by ten (10) per cent. Provided, however, that the water department shall waive the late penalty for governmental bodies. 
(b)  All customers with delinquent amounts will be notified in writing on their monthly statement of the date services will be terminated if said delinquent amounts are not paid in full. A customer with questions concerning a delinquent account may request a date for hearing with the City of Pasadena Water Billing Manager or designated representative. Nonpayment of all water, garbage, and sewer bills which remain due and owing after the due date shall be cause for the water to be cut off for delinquency as the city water department finds necessary, according to the purposes and terms of this chapter. In order to avoid service disconnection for a delinquent account, the customer must contact the water billing office prior to the service being disconnected and make arrangements to pay the charges. Water service which has been scheduled for disconnection or cut off for delinquency shall not be restored until all past due water, garbage, and sewer service bills, charges, fees, and penalties, if any, are paid in full by cash, money order, or credit card and until an additional or new deposit is paid bringing the deposit up to the present schedule, except that a water customer who has not had a delinquent bill during the preceding twelve (12) months shall not be required to place a new deposit. A fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be collected by the city if a customer's account is listed on the final disconnect for non-payment listing. This fee will be assessed even if the customer's services are not physically interrupted. No service shall be furnished to any person who is delinquent in the payment of any bill for water furnished on the premises to which water service is requested or to any other premises in the city. 
(c)  Disputed charges. A customer may advise the water billing office that a bill is in dispute by written notice or in person during normal business hours. A dispute must be registered with the city and a payment equal to the customer's average monthly usage at current rates must be received by the water billing office prior to the date of proposed discontinuance for a customer to avoid discontinuance of service. 
(Code 1964, § 29-37; Ord. No. 1805, § 9, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 1814, § 1, 5-31-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 81-208, § 2, 11-10-81; Ord. No. 83-222, § 1, 8-16-83; Ord. No. 84-222, § 2, 9-11-84; Ord. No. 86-98, § 12, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 93-138, § 1, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 00-36, § 2, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-183, § 6, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 05-85, § 1, 3-29-05; Ord. No. 07-269, § 2, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 10-074, §§ 14—17, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 12-135, § 4, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 16-041, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Sec. 37-42. - Payment extensions; deferred payments. 
(a)  Partial payments/extensions of service. An extension of service for up to thirty (30) days will be granted if the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The request is made in writing, on a form provided by the city; 
(2)  The written request is made prior to disconnection; 
(3)  The account has not been disconnected for nonpayment more than three times in the previous twelve (12) months; 
(4)  The customer pays twenty-five (25) per cent of the bill at the time of the extension request; 
(5)  In order to process such installment basis there shall be a fee of five dollars ($5.00) per extension of payment request, and such fee shall be payable as part of the extension payments; 
(6)  In addition, the city may waive the penalty amount on a delinquent bill if the customer meets the terms of the extension. 
The city may refuse to accept the payment for a part of such service unless the entire amount is paid in full or an extension agreement as described above is executed. 
(b)  Deferred payment plan. A deferred payment plan is any arrangement or agreement between the city and a customer in which an outstanding bill will be paid in installments. The water billing office may offer a deferred payment plan to any current customer with a previous balance owed the city for water, sewer and/or garbage service, except for a back billing resulting from diversion of service, unlawful use of service, or customer damage to city equipment. Under other circumstances in which the city determines are reasonable, the city may, but is not required to, enter into a deferred payment agreement with a customer. The following is required for a deferred payment plan: 
(1)  The agreement must be in writing and signed by the applicant and an authorized representative of the water billing office. 
(2)  The agreement shall require payment of the current bill plus twenty (20) per cent of the delinquent bill each month until the delinquent bill is paid. 
(3)  If a customer fails to meet the terms of a deferred payment agreement, the city may terminate service and is not required to offer another deferred payment agreement prior to termination. 
(4)  An administrative arrangement fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be added to an account whenever a payment arrangement agreement, providing for extension of payment amounts due on the account, is made. No account may obtain more than one (1) payment arrangement agreement per quarter and a payment arrangement agreement must be paid in full prior to requesting a new payment arrangement agreement. An account that is currently in a payment arrangement agreement status that becomes delinquent and is disconnected may not be reconnected until the account is paid in full. 
(5)  In addition, the city may waive the penalty amount on a deferred payment plan if customer meets the terms of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 10-074, § 18, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-43. - Over billing/under billing. 
(a)  If the city determines an account is over billed, the city will refund or credit the account up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months. 
(b)  If any account is found to be on the wrong rate, the account will be adjusted back to the date when the account was set up with the wrong rate, up to a maximum of eighteen (18) months. 
(c)  If the city determines any account is undercharged, the city will back bill the customer for the amount that was undercharged. The back billing will not exceed eighteen (18) months, unless the undercharge is the result of meter tampering, bypassing, or an unmetered connection, or diversion by the customer. 
(d)  If the amount of the back billing is $50.00 or more, the city will offer the customer a deferred payment plan for the same length of time as that of the under billing. If the back billing is a result of utility service diversion, unlawful use of service, or damage to city equipment, the city may, but is not required to, offer the customer a deferred payment agreement. 
(e)  Wastewater charges will be adjusted in the same manner and for the same time period as water. 
(f)  All reimbursements or collections will be made at the rates in effect at the time of each over billing or under billing. No refund is required from the city except to the customer last served by the meter. 
(Ord. No. 10-074, § 19, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-44. - Failure to receive bill does not excuse nonpayment. 
The failure of any customer to receive a bill for water, garbage and sewer services shall not relieve him from the obligation to pay the amount due the city for such services nor waive penalty for failure to pay when due. 
(Code 1964, § 29-38; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 86-98, § 13, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 10-074, § 18, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-45. - Necessity of notice to discontinue levy. 
All rates and charges for water and sewer service to a customer's premises shall accrue and be levied against such customer until such time as written notice, given by the customer or by his duly authorized agent, to discontinue all service to the customer's premises is filed with the water division of the department of public works. Where service is supplied through more than one meter to a customer at the same premises, the customer may, upon written notice to the water division, permanently discontinue the service through one of the meters and thereafter be billed on the basis of the remaining services and meters. Upon receipt of written notice of such permanent discontinuance, the water division will disconnect the meter and service. Any service thus discontinued will be restored only at the total expense of the consumer. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 11, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 10-074, § 19, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-46. - Miscellaneous water service charges. 
(a)  The following miscellaneous service charges shall be assessed and collected by the city water department for such services as are herein below described: 
(1)  The city will charge a returned payment fee, plus any direct charges assessed against the city by any financial institution, for each returned check, returned ACH draft, credit card or other form of payment that is dishonored or returned to the city ..... $30.00 
Payment of such water service shall then be made by cash, credit card, money order or cashier's check. 
(2)  Replacement of broken meter lock by the city ..... 25.00 
(3)  Repair by city of damage to meter locking device ..... 25.00 
(4)  Replacement by city of damage to meter cut-off ..... 35.00 
(5)  Reset by city of pulled meter: 
Not over 1 inch ..... 35.00 
1½ to 2 inches ..... 75.00 
All over 2 inches ..... 200.00 
(6)  Connection/transfer of new water service ..... 30.00 
Connection of service is done by the end of the following day. 
(7)  Same day service fee ..... 25.00 
If requested by the customer and upon payment in advance of a twenty-five dollars ($25.00) special service fee, service will be connected, transferred and/or closed by the end of the same working day. 
(8)  Collection/tagging fee ..... $20.00 
(9)  Delinquent service charge fee. If a customer's account is scheduled for disconnection for nonpayment, a charge of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be assessed if a customer's account is listed on the final disconnect for non-payment listing. This fee will be assessed even if the customer's services are not physically interrupted. 
(10)  After hour fee. If city personnel are called out within twenty (20) minutes of closing from the water billing's normal business hours or after normal business hours, to set a water meter or turn water on, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) after-hour fee will be charged to the customer's account. The timing used will be a clock at the city's billing office as opposed to customer's watch. 
(11)  Multiple tenant notification for possible service discontinuance. When it is necessary to notify tenants of possible service discontinuance due to the delinquent payment(s) of a customer having a master meter serving four or more units, the customer will be assessed a charge of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) per unit for posting the cutoff alerts. 
(12)  Processing of request by customer to keep information confidential or to rescind confidentiality ..... 2.00 
(13)  Re-read. The city will reread any customer's water meter at the customer's request. The first recheck will be at no charge to the customer. If another re-read is requested within a twelve-month period, a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee will be assessed if the meter was correctly read and there was no error on the part of the city. 
(14)  Damaged meters. If a meter is damaged as a result of vandalism, foul play or inadvertence, customer shall immediately notify the city of same so that repairs may be made. If the same customer experiences repeated manifestations of the preceding, then said customer may be subject to charges for meter repair. In the alternative, water service may be discontinued. 
(15)  Credit/debit card payment processing fees. Payments by credit card or electronic means (payment by "electronic means" means payment by telephone or computer but does not include payment in person or by mail - from § 132.001 of the Local Government Code), can be assessed a fee for processing the payment. At no time will such fee be more than five (5) per cent of the amount of the charge being paid. This processing fee will apply to recurring payments as well. 
(16)  Customer service inspection certification fee, required by TCEQ ..... 25.00 
a.  Any multi-unit premises will require the $25.00 fee plus an additional $20.00 per unit; and 
(17)  Re-inspection fee per failed unit ..... 20.00 
If the property does not pass the initial customer service inspection or for any non-unit related violations. 
(18)  If the designated representative does not keep the scheduled appointment or cancels the appointment before the inspector leaves for the appointment, a twenty dollar ($20.00) service charge shall apply. 
(b)  Any or all of the foregoing charges and fees may be included in a regular or special billing of the city water department and shall be in addition to all other charges, fees or penalties provided by this chapter. 
(c)  Provided, however, this section shall not apply to industrial district customers utilizing a one (1) inch or smaller water meter. Such industrial district customers shall meet all city requirements including the requirements of city commercial customers and shall be charged for water at the same rate as commercial customers within the city limits or at such rate as may be determined by the city. Furthermore, such customers shall not sell or transfer potable water received from the city to any other persons or entities and shall, within sixty (60) days of being offered a contract by the city, execute such water supply contract with the city. 
(d)  Water supplied to industrial users under the provisions of this section, whether or not provided by contract, may be terminated at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1805, § 13, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 1814, § 2, 5-31-66; Ord. No. 72-110, § 1, 5-16-72; Ord. No. 78-5, § 1, 2-21-78; Ord. No. 83-336, § 2, 11-15-83; Ord. No. 86-98, § 14, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 94-1, § 10, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 93-138, § 2, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 00-36, § 3, 3-7-00; Ord. No. 01-183, § 7, 10-30-01; Ord. No. 04-156, § 2, 7-27-04; Ord. No. 10-074, §§ 20—25, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 12-135, § 5, 9-25-12; Ord. No. 16-041, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Sec. 37-47. - Sale of water to industrial users. 
(a)  Sales of potable water for industrial uses for a monthly quantity for periods of time of at least five (5) years shall be made by special contracts authorized by city council. The sale of such potable water by special contracts shall be made in consideration of payment for a minimum monthly quantity of water during each month (called "minimum monthly quantity") and payment for water taken in excess of such minimum monthly quantity at the prices set forth in the block schedule below. The block schedule prescribes a minimum monthly quantity of water for which a customer must take and pay for during each month at the prices set forth in the block schedule. "MGM" is an abbreviation for "million gallons of water per month" and refers to a quantity of water during a calendar month. The unit of measure and sales unit for water shall be one thousand (1,000) gallons, U.S. Standard Liquid Measure. 
(b)  Base rates. The base rates for potable water delivered or contracted for in section 37-45 are as follows: 
Allocation-gal./mo. 	Max. 	Joining Fee 	Rate/1,000 gal. 
2,000 	10,000 	$17,500 	$3.15 
10,001 	50,000 	$20,500 	$3.32 
50,001 	100,000 	$20,500 	$3.43 
100,001 	200,000 	$20,500 	$3.54 
200,001 	300,000 	$22,500 	$3.65 
300,001 	400,000 	$22,500 	$3.76 
400,001 	500,000 	$27,500 	$3.87 
500,001 	1,000,000 	$32,500 	$4.05 
1,000,001 	2,000,000 	$37,500 	$4.49 
2,000,001 	3,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.49 
3,000,001 	4,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.59 
4,000,001 	5,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.59 
5,000,001 	6,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.59 
6,000,001 	7,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.64 
7,000,001 	8,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.64 
8,000,001 	9,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.64 
9,000,001 	10,000,000 	$42,500 	$4.69 
10,000,001 	And over 	$42,500 	$6.34 
 
Billing Formula (for spreadsheet calculation) 
Monthly Billing = (Rate+(IF (U-max.) < = 0.0. (U)) * Pr/min.) * IF (U>=min., min., U)/1,000 
Example: (assume min. of 200,001 and max. of 300,000 gallons per month) 
U = Usage for the month 	275,000 gal. 
Min. = Minimum within allocation bracket 	200,001 gal. 
Max. = Maximum within allocation bracket 	300,000 gal. 
Rate = Allocation rate/1,000 gal. 	$2.70/1,000 gal. 
PR (Penalty Ratio) = 	1.05 
Monthly Billing 	$742.50 
 
(c)  Provided, however, this section shall not apply to industrial district customers utilizing a one (1) inch or smaller water meter. Such industrial district customers shall meet all city requirements including the requirements of city commercial customers and shall be charged for water at the same rate as commercial customers within the city limits or at such rate as may be determined by the city. Furthermore, such customers shall not sell or transfer potable water received from the city to any other persons or entities and shall, within sixty (60) days of being offered a contract by the city, execute such water supply contract with the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  Water supplied to industrial users under the provisions of this section, whether or not provided by contract, may be terminated at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 76-119, § 1, 7-13-76; Ord. No. 83-346, § 1, 11-22-83; Ord. No. 84-159, § 2, 7-24-84; Ord. No. 86-98, § 15, 5-20-86; Ord. No. 98-211, § 1, 12-15-98; Ord. No. 01-94, 5-29-01; Ord. No. 02-81, § 1 3-12-02; Ord. No. 05-233, § 1, 9-20-05; Ord. No. 06-252, § 1, 10-17-06; Ord. No. 10-074, § 26, 4-20-10; Ord. No. 16-205, § 1(Exh. A), 1-3-17)  
Sec. 37-48. - Confidentiality of certain information of a customer. 
Upon written request of a customer, the address, telephone number or social security number of a customer will be kept confidential. This provision does not prohibit disclosing the personal information in a customer's account records to: 
(1)  An official or employee of the state or a political subdivision of the state, or the federal government acting in an official capacity; 
(2)  An employee of a utility acting in connection with the employee's duties; 
(3)  A consumer reporting agency; 
(4)  A contractor or subcontractor approved by and providing services to the utility or to the state, a political subdivision of the state, the federal government, or an agency of the state or federal government; 
(5)  A person for whom the customer has contractually waived confidentiality for personal information; or 
(6)  Another entity that provides water, wastewater, sewer, gas, garbage, electricity, or drainage service for compensation. 
(Ord. No. 93-99, § 1, 6-8-93; Ord. No. 93-138, § 3, 9-7-93; Ord. No. 10-074, § 27, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-49. - Annual adjustment of water and sewer rates. 
The rates to which this section applies shall be adjusted according to this provision and automatically increased each year on October 1 using the U.S. Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all Urban Consumers for the Houston-Galveston-Brazoria Texas Metropolitan Area published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The year over year percent change in the April index will be used as the basis for this charge. If there is a decrease in the CPI, or if there is no increase in the period measured, the rates then existing shall remain unchanged. 
(Ord. No. 16-040, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 16-040, § 1(Exh. A), adopted March 15, 2016, repealed the former § 37-49, and enacted a new § 37-49 as set out herein. The former § 37-49 pertained to sanitary sewer rehabilitation charge. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  
Sec. 37-50. - Liens on delinquent accounts. 
All delinquent accounts for water, garbage, and sewer services, as defined in section 37-41 of this Code, create a lien in favor of the city in the amount of the delinquency and all penalties and fees. The city may file, in the real property records of the county clerk's office, notice of lien on the property receiving the utility services, except in the case of a homestead protected by the Texas Constitution. A lien shall not apply to bills for service connected in a tenant's name after notice by the property owner. 
(Ord. No. 95-95, § 1, 3-28-95; Ord. No. 10-074, § 28, 4-20-10)  
Sec. 37-51. - Establishment and funding of a water/sewer reserve; permitted withdrawals. 
(a)  A reserve is hereby established, to be maintained by the city controller's office and to be designated as the water/sewer reserve (the reserve). 
(1)  The water/sewer reserve shall be accounted for in the water and sewer fund (system fund); 
(2)  Reserve should be maintained at ninety (90) days' worth of the prior fiscal year's expenditures; 
(3)  Contributions may vary from year to year when the water and sewer fund has produced a surplus after payment of all operation and maintenance expenses and debt service. 
(b)  Expenditures/withdrawals from the reserve: 
(1)  Withdrawals from the fund should be restricted to: 
a.  Make up for a severe shortfall in funds where projected revenues are not met, typically because of unusually wet weather or other unexpected negative influence on revenue stream; 
b.  Pay for catastrophic repair events of such magnitude that the cost of such would initiate an unplanned rate increase or a greater than planned rate increase (i.e. increases that would not have been needed if such event had not occurred); 
c.  Lessen a sharp rate increase necessitated by sudden increase in an uncontrollable, ongoing expense; or 
d.  To pay for capital improvement projects as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 16-041, § 1(Exh. A), 3-15-16)  
Secs. 37-52—37-55. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWER MAIN EXTENSIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference— Permit not to issue for erection of sign on land on which water and sewer pro rata charges are past due, § 31-33. 
 
Sec. 37-56. - Definitions. 
Whenever the words, terms or phrases defined herein or pronouns used in their place occur in this article, the intent and meaning shall be interpreted as follows: 
Applicant: The owner of a lot or tract of land, or his agent, requesting water or sanitary sewer service. 
Consumer: The actual user of water or sanitary sewer service from a city connection. 
Developer: The owner or agent of the owner subdividing lots or tracts for sale or lease as homes, apartments, commercial shopping centers or industrial sites. 
Engineer: The director of public works, or his duly authorized assistants, agents, engineers or superintendents, acting within the scope of the particular duties entrusted to them. 
Evaluated cost: The cost of a water or sewer main as established by unit values for the size of main and appurtenances as established in this article. 
Individual owner: A person requesting extension of water or sewer service to a property which will be used as his own residence or business, or an individual commercial or industrial concern requesting extension of water or sewer service to property to be used for its own operation, which property or portion thereof will not be sold, leased or rented in connection with its intended function. 
Off-site main: Water or sewer mains totally outside of a tract of land to be subdivided and developed for resale. 
On-site main: Water or sanitary sewer mains which lie within a subdivision or along one or more sides of a subdivision and serve that subdivision exclusively. 
Over-size cost: The difference between the evaluated cost of the main as built and the evaluated cost of the size of main determined to be the minimum size required to serve the subdivision. The minimum size main upon which over-size cost shall be determined shall not be less than the standard main defined herein. 
Programmed extension: A water or sanitary sewer extension included in a master plan of the system design for which funds have been specifically provided in a properly authorized program of capital fund expenditures. 
Property owner: The record title holder of premises served or to be served with a connection to a city water or sanitary sewer main. 
Pro rata connection charge: A portion of the cost of water or sanitary sewer main extensions to serve the owner's property based upon the front footage to be served. The amount of these charges per front foot are stated in this article. 
Side main: Water or sanitary sewer mains which lie along one or more sides of a subdivision and serve adjacent property other than that for which the extension was made. 
Standard size sewer main: A sanitary sewer main eight (8) inches or larger in diameter. 
Standard size water main: A water main six (6) inches or larger in diameter, adequately supported by eight (8) inch or larger water mains to provide standard fire protection as recognized by the American Insurance Association, successor to the National Board of Fire Underwriters. 
Water division: The water division of the department of public works of the city. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 1-19, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-57. - Purpose of article; variation of method of determining charges. 
The intent and purpose of this article is to provide an equitable charge for water and sanitary sewer connections in the city on a front foot basis as a proportionable distribution of the cost of water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve property not previously served with standard mains. In case property or a tract of land is so situated or shaped that the front foot rule creates an inequitable basis, as between it and other tracts of land in the city, then in that event the director of public works shall determine the proper charges in accord with the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 1-18, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-58. - Article does not grant vested rights. 
No person shall acquire any vested rights under the terms and provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 1-18, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-59. - Authority to make extensions. 
The department of public works may extend water and sanitary sewer mains in the streets, alleys and easements, within the city limits, in order to permit connection by persons desiring and seeking water service and sanitary sewer service. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 2-1, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-60. - Pro rata charge established. 
(a)  A charge, which shall be known as the "pro rata", shall be made against each lot or tract of land and the owner thereof, whose water or sewer line is connected with any water main or sanitary sewer main in the city, and the charge shall be at the following rates, which rates are a portion of the total cost of such water and sanitary sewer mains: 
(1)  One dollar and seventy-five cents ($1.75) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which water connections may be made. 
(2)  Two dollars ($2.00) per front foot of the lot or tract of land to which sanitary sewer connections may be made. 
The above front foot rates shall apply to property fronting on streets in areas platted into the usual rectangular lots or tracts of land, with a depth not to exceed one hundred fifty (150) feet. (See Table 1) 
(b)  Where lots or tracts have greater depth than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front street line, and are occupied or are to be occupied exclusively as single residential or duplex dwelling places, then additional depth shall not be assessed. If the property in question or adjacent property is later subdivided, requiring an extension of mains to serve the same and application is made for additional service to the property, then the terms of this article shall govern and apply to such property frontage as is created. (See Table 2) 
(c)  On lots or tracts of land which extend through from one street to another, with frontage on both streets, and where the distance between street lines is two hundred sixty (260) feet or more, then the pro rata charges herein provided for shall be paid on both frontages when a connection is secured to the lot or tract. (See Table 3) 
(d)  Where lots or tracts are irregular in size or shape, the pro rata charges shall be based upon equivalent rectangular lots or tracts, using one (1) front foot for each one hundred fifty (150) square feet of area, or the pro rata charges provided herein on the average frontage of such tracts, whichever is least. (See Table 4) 
(e)  Where lots or tracts are intended to be used for other than single residential or duplex purposes and have a depth greater than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the front street lines, then the pro rata herein provided shall be paid on the frontage on all streets which the property may abut, minus one hundred fifty (150) feet frontage for each corner of the property abutting a street intersection. Should such property be resubdivided whereby main extensions are required to serve same, the terms of this article shall apply. 
(f)  Where unsubdivided tracts of land are to be developed as a unit for shopping centers, apartment sites, industrial sites or other similar uses, the applicant will pay pro rata charges on street frontages as outlined for business properties. Any mains extended through or into such tracts for service to individual buildings or leased spaces will be built at the applicant's expense in accordance with section 37-62. In the case of standard mains being built in city streets or utility easements at the request of the city, refunds on such mains will be made to the applicant as outlined in sections 37-62 and 37-64. (See Table 5) 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 2-1, 11-19-68) 
 
 
 
 
Irregular Lots—Frontage would be figured: 
1.  + 50';2?> = 100', or 
2.  25,200 sq. ft. / 159 sq. ft. = 168' 
Use method No. 1 since it is the least. 
 
Pro rata charges would be based on the following frontages: 
Apple Street frontage ..... 600' 
Peach Street frontage ..... 400' 
Pear Street frontage ..... 600' 
Plum Street frontage ..... 400' 
Less allowable side frontage 
4 × 150' = 600' 
Use 25% exemption maximum .....  500' 
Pro rata frontage ..... 1500' 
 
Pro rata would be charged on the Street "A" & "B" frontages - 600' + 450' - 150' = 900' - Water and sewer mains in alley would be built at the owner's expense to facilitate service connection to each unit. Exemption not to exceed 25% of total frontage.  
Sec. 37-61. - Extensions for individual owners. 
(a)  Upon request of an applicant, and receipt of payment of the charges due, the department of public works shall extend, lay or construct all necessary sanitary sewer and water mains, including valves and hydrants, a distance of one hundred (100) feet, excluding streets, alleys, and the like, plus the distance across the frontage necessary to provide the service for which application has been made. The owners of all intervening property served by the given main extension will be required to pay the charges provided for in this article at such time as their property is connected to the mains thus laid. Where an applicant for service secures an extension and service under this particular option for main extension, he will pay the pro rata charges on all property owned by him and which is served by the extension requested. In applying the one hundred (100) foot rule, the required extension of the main shall be figured in such manner as to leave out of the calculations that portion of any main adjacent to property already having other than a temporary water service, and for which the pro rata charges thereon have been paid or credited under the terms of this article. (See Tables 6 and 7) 
(b)  An exception to the above one hundred (100) foot rule shall be made where two (2) or more individual applicants desire water or sanitary sewer service and the nearest applicant is more than one hundred (100) feet from existing mains. In such case, the city shall extend their mains upon receipt of payment of the charges due under this article, provided there is one (1) customer for every one hundred (100) feet of such extension, excluding street intersections and that portion of the extension adjacent to property already having other than temporary water or sanitary sewer service. (See Table 8) 
(c)  At the option of the city, the following method for extending water and sanitary sewer mains may be used where the applicant's property is more than one hundred (100) feet from an existing water or sanitary sewer main. This method shall be available only for use by an individual owner, personal or corporate, to secure water and sanitary sewer service for the individual's residence or business. Where eligible for this option, the applicant may advance and pay to the city the entire pro rata costs as set forth in this article on all property served by the desired main extension, less the one hundred (100) feet allowable, and the city, when such money has been actually deposited with the director of public works, will construct the desired water or sanitary sewer main along a street, alley or easement. When any property for which such person has advanced the pro rata costs is connected to such main extension, then, in that event, the pro rata advanced on both sides of the street for the frontage of the connecting property shall be refunded by the city to the applicant making the original deposit. At such time as sufficient frontage is connected so that the original applicant who advanced total pro rata should be eligible for extension under the provisions of this article, such applicant will be refunded the remainder advanced except for the charges due on the property for which the extension was originally made. (See Table 9) 
(d)  Where an extension is requested by an industry or commercial concern using large quantities of water and which cannot meet the requirements of one (1) customer per one hundred (100) feet, the extension may be made at the discretion of the city, provided forty (40) per cent of the estimated annual revenue from such customer will support interest and principal payments on the total cost of the extension required to serve. 
(e)  Should property be rental or leased property, the city is authorized to refuse service on the property or to discontinue service to any or all properties owned by, or places served in the name of, the owner until the property owner makes satisfactory arrangements with the city under the terms of this article to pay the applicable pro rata. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, §§ 2-2, 3-2, 11-19-68) 
TABLE 6 
Applicant has made arrangements for service. Since Lot 3 is served, its side frontage is exempt, also the 15' across the alley is excluded. Since the remaining frontage across Lots 4 & 5 is not greater than 100', the extension can be made. 
 
 
 
  
Sec. 37-62. - Extensions for property subdivided or platted for development—Basis.[4] 
(a)  Generally. Where extensions of water and sanitary sewer systems are required to serve property which is to be subdivided or platted for development by a developer, water and sanitary sewer facilities may be extended to such properties on the following basis and in accordance with minimum standards and procedures described in this section. This section also shall be applicable to all tracts or subdivisions of land within and without the city which have already been laid out in lots for the purpose of sale for residences or other purposes, but in which water and sanitary sewer mains, valves and fire hydrants have not been installed as herein provided for. The owners of such tracts or subdivisions, or of a group of two (2) or more lots in such subdivision, who are building for resale or rental as defined in section 37-56 as a developer, shall, before they may connect onto city water or sanitary sewer, comply with the terms of this section insofar as the same relates to the furnishing of water and sanitary sewer mains, valves and fire hydrants for such tracts or subdivisions of land. 
(b)  Platting requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person to provide water and sewerage service to any lot, tract or plot of land, or any part thereof, unless and until the plan, plat or replat of such lot or tract of land conforms to the platting requirements of the city, has been approved by the planning director and has been filed for record with the county. Before final platting, owners of the tract or subdivision shall submit to the director of public works, for his approval, a map or plat showing the location and size of water and sanitary sewer mains and valves and fire hydrants as, detailed in section 37-64, which will be required to insure adequate service and fire protection to the lots specified in such proposed tract or subdivision. Before such map or plat is officially adopted or accepted by the proper city officials, a contract for installation of the water and sanitary sewer mains, valves and fire hydrants, with a performance bond, shall be submitted to the director of public works for approval. Should the developer desire to plat more lots than he will construct utilities to serve, the city council may, in its discretion, accept in lieu of such finished work or accomplished contract a bond in such sum as it may deem sufficient as a guarantee that such water and sanitary sewer mains, valves and fire hydrants will be installed and completed within such time as it may designate or shall furnish a covenant running with the land agreeing to construct such utilities at total cost in accordance with this section. Upon approval of such bond or covenant, the city council may accept and approve such map or plat before the actual installation of water and sanitary sewer mains, valves or fire hydrants. 
(c)  Extensions within property to be developed. 
(1)  Developers of such property will defray the entire cost of water and sanitary sewer systems within their subdivision except that the city will refund the over-size cost of any water main or sanitary sewer main larger than eight (8) inches in size, unless a larger size is required to serve the subdivision in question. Size of mains for adequate service shall be determined by the director of public works and his decision will be final. Refunds for oversize cost will be made upon acceptance of the systems by the city, based upon prices established in section 37-65. (See Table 10) 
(2)  Mains lying along one or more sides of a subdivided tract: 
a.  For mains eight (8) inches and smaller the developer will be refunded one-half (½) the evaluated cost of the size main constructed as set forth in section 37-65, such refunds to be made upon acceptance of the system by the city. (See Table 11) 
b.  For mains larger than eight (8) inches in size, the developer will be refunded the difference between the evaluated cost of such water or sanitary sewer main and one-half (½) the evaluated cost of an eight (8) inch main or such larger sizes as are required to serve the subdivision for which extensions are required, provided the developer has advanced the total cost of such mains. Where such mains are laid by city contract in conjunction with the development, the developer will pay one-half (½) the evaluated cost of an eight (8) inch water or sanitary sewer main, or such sizes as are required to serve the subdivision. Refunds, when due, will be made upon acceptance of the system by the city. (See Table 12) 
(d)  Off-site extensions required to serve property development. Where water or sanitary sewer facilities are not available to a tract to be developed, the city will extend such facilities to the nearest subdivision property line within the following limitations: 
(1)  Water transmission mains or trunk sewers for which funds have been specifically programmed and funds are available will be extended to serve property to be developed, provided the total cost of such off-site water or sanitary sewer facilities, including city inspection and engineering costs, do not exceed three hundred eight dollars ($308.00) per customer or lot served in such subdivision. In multiple family dwellings each apartment or residence shall be considered as one-half (½) of a lot. Such price shall apply only so long as construction and operating costs of the department of public works do not increase. The developer requesting such extension will require his contractor to provide a performance bond specifying the time of completion of on-site facilities to be built by the developer, such bond to be equal to the amount of the contract. The city will be named as one of the beneficiaries under such bond. The time of completion will be subject to approval by the city. Where such programmed items of construction will extend through the area to be subdivided, and such construction is accomplished by city contract, the developer will pay to the public works department, in advance of contract letting, the evaluated price of an eight (8) inch water or sanitary sewer main or such sizes as are required to serve the subdivision for which extension is required. If the cost of off-site facilities exceeds this limitation, the developer shall deposit with the public works department sufficient funds or a bond to cover the excess cost. After a sufficient number of customers or lots have been served by such off-site extension to bring the area development within the limiting figure, the city will refund to the first developer the excess cost deposited. (See Table 13) 
(2)  Off-site water and sanitary sewer mains for which funds have not been specifically programmed will be constructed at the expense of the developer requiring such extensions; provided, however, that the city will refund the cost of such mains off-site as evaluated by the prices established in section 37-65, at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per bona fide connection to such utilities as installed or to extensions therefrom. In no instance will more than the total evaluated cost of the off-site facility be refunded. Should the amount refundable be in excess of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per connection, such excess will be refunded at the rate of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per connection at such time as further development of tracts adjacent to the original development has occurred utilizing the off-site main. (See Table 14) 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 4-2, 11-19-68) 
 
 
 
 
 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference— Basic subdivision ordinance, App. A; townhouse subdivisions, App. B. 
 
Sec. 37-63. - Same—Charge for existing or proposed main in or adjacent to property to be developed. 
(a)  Should an existing or proposed water main or sanitary sewer main lie in a street, alley or easement in an area or tract of land to be subdivided and developed, before extensions from or connections to such line or lines will be made by a developer he shall pay to the public works department the sum of three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) per linear foot of water main and four dollars ($4.00) per linear foot of sanitary sewer main. Should such existing or programmed main lie alongside the subdivision, one-half (½) of these costs shall be paid. (See Table 15) 
(b)  The charges prescribed by subsection (a) above shall not be assessed to platted lots fronting a water transmission main which is in place and existing but connection to serve the individual lots is not allowed by the city. In such instances, the developer shall install a service main, if needed, to serve the property. Where such transmission main will side the platted property, the developer will pay one-half (½) the evaluated cost of the standard main. (See Tables 16 and 17) 
(c)  Where lots are platted backing a thoroughfare or street and a duplicate service main is built on their frontage street, the charges will not be assessed on the main to the rear of the lot. (See Table 18) 
(d)  Mains smaller than those defined as standard will be replaced by the developer with mains determined by the director of public works to be of adequate size for permanent service, or the developer will pay pro rata for such distance as the main must be replaced. 
(e)  Charges due the city from developers for existing mains serving the development will be set off against refunds which are or will become due the developer for laying mains in the same development. Charges due in excess of refunds will be paid before water or sanitary sewer service is made available to the development. Such monies shall be paid to the public works fund and will constitute a charge for use of such water or sanitary sewer main in place. Refunds due the developer in excess of charges will be paid upon acceptance of the mains by the city, or in accordance with methods approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 4-3, 11-19-68) 
 
 
 
  
Sec. 37-64. - Same—Methods of construction. 
Water and sanitary sewer main extensions to serve a real estate subdivision in the city may be accomplished in the manner prescribed in this section. 
(a)  By private contract or developer himself. 
(1)  Upon approval by the city, a developer of an addition or plat shall design and prepare construction plans of water and sanitary sewer facilities, or either of them, to serve the subdivision, including any access or off-site facilities that may be required. These plans shall conform in all details to the city's standard as to design, grade, location, size and quality of materials and construction. Plans and profiles submitted by the developer's engineer shall be inked on standard twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch sheets of tracing linen. Plans and profiles shall be shown at scales of one (1) inch to forty (40) feet or one (1) inch to one hundred (100) feet horizontal and one (1) inch to six (6) feet vertical, unless approval is given otherwise. Plans and profiles shall show clearly all surface improvements, all existing or proposed subsurface utility lines and obstructions, and street and alley grades as approved by the department of public works. The engineer submitting the plans and profiles must be a registered professional civil engineer in the State of Texas, and he must affix his seal and signature to the tracings of all plans and profiles. 
(2)  Upon preliminary approval of the plans by the city, the developer may enter into a contract with any individual or may himself construct the system as so planned; provided, however, that the construction and installation of the water mains and sanitary sewer mains, or either of them, shall be supervised by inspectors of the city to see that the installation is made in accordance with the plans and the city's standard specifications which, in every instance, shall be a part of the installation contract. 
(3)  The completed tracings for water and sanitary sewer plans and profiles shall then be submitted to the public works department for final approval, accompanied by two (2) copies of the plans and profiles of the storm sewers and street grades as approved by the department of public works and one (1) copy of the plat of the addition that has been recorded in the records of the county and has been so stamped. Upon final approval, the tracings will be returned to the developer's engineer for the purpose of making such prints as the city may require, after which the tracings shall be returned to become permanent property of the public works department. 
(4)  When the project is ready for construction and the plat approved by the planning and zoning commission and filed for record, line and grade stakes will be set by the developer. 
(5)  No installation of water mains will be made at any other location except a dedicated street, alley or an easement running in favor of the city which shall be filed of record by the owner of the addition. 
(6)  Any such installation, when made, shall become the property of the city, free and clear of all encumbrances, and any contract entered into between the developer and a contractor shall provide for a performance bond and payment bond such as the city uses in its standard specifications, which, in every instance, shall be a part of the installation contract. The city shall be named as one (1) of the beneficiaries in such bond. 
(7)  In the event the developer makes the installation himself, then he shall execute a performance bond and payment bond in favor of the city in the same form and conditioned in the same manner as provided for in the standard contract documents used by the city in making of water and sanitary sewer installations. 
(8)  The city specifically reserves the option to advertise for bids and install all or any portion of extensions of water and sanitary sewer lines over eight (8) inches in size where evaluated prices are not specified in section 37-65. 
(b)  By city contract. Upon approval by the city, a developer of an addition or plat shall design and prepare construction plans of water and sanitary sewer facilities that may be required. The city will not be obligated to proceed under a city contract for partial construction of a project. The developer of an addition or plat may deposit with the city the total cost of all such extensions required to serve, including the cost of approach or off-site mains fronting property not owned by the developer, if required by the provisions of section 37-62(d). The city will construct such mains and upon determination of final completion cost, will refund any excess amount deposited or require of such developer additional funds due to defray the entire cost of the entire project. Refundable amounts for off-site costs or over-size cost shall be in accordance with section 37-62 and will be determined and refunded on the basis of unit bid prices of the project; provided, however, the city reserves the right to reject any unbalanced or unfavorable bid and may refuse to proceed under this basis if weather or seasonal conditions are likely to cause excessive costs to be bid for the work. If the developer desires to proceed under a contract deemed to be unbalanced or unfavorable, refundable amounts for off-site or over-size cost will be determined and refunded on the basis of evaluated cost. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 4-4, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-65. - Same—Evaluated prices for determination of over-size cost and off-site facilities. 
In the extension of water and sewer mains to a subdivision, the following evaluated prices shall be used in determining over-size cost and off-site facilities: 
(a)  Water mains and appurtenances: 
(1)  For 2? copper or cast-iron water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... $1.50 
(2)  For 2? galvanized iron or steel water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 1.25 
(3)  For 4? cement lined Cl. 150, C.I. water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 2.00 
(4)  For 6? cement lined Cl. 150, C.I. water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 2.60 
(5)  For 8? cement lined Cl. 150, C.I. water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 3.40 
(6)  For 12? cement lined Cl. 150, C.I. water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 5.50 
(7)  For 16? cement lined Cl. 150, C.I. water pipe, per lin. ft. ..... 8.50 
(8)  Fittings, per ton ..... 460.00 
(9)  For standard 3-way 5? fire hydrants, each ..... 180.00 
(10)  For 2? brass wheel valve, each ..... 20.00 
(11)  For 2? gate valve, each ..... 30.00 
(12)  For 4? gate valve, each ..... 66.00 
(13)  For 6? gate valve, each ..... 84.00 
(14)  For 8? gate valve, each ..... 120.00 
(15)  For 12? gate valve, each ..... 214.00 
(16)  For 16? gate valve, each ..... 480.00 
(17)  For ¾? copper deadhead service, each ..... 25.00 
(18)  For 1? copper deadhead service, each ..... 40.00 
(19)  For 1½? copper deadhead service, each ..... 70.00 
(20)  For 2? copper deadhead service, each ..... 90.00 
(21)  Corrosion protection: 
For sand embedment, per cu. yd. ..... 2.00 
For polyethyelene wrap (per linear ft. × pipe diameter in inches) ..... 0.04 
The unit prices above are inclusive of all concrete, wet connections, gravel foundations, granular backfill, and all other items not specifically listed herein which may be necessary to produce a complete job. 
The city reserves the right to require the use of Class 200 asbestos cement water pipe in areas of high corrosion potential at the same unit prices as set out above for cast-iron pipe. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 5-1, 11-19-68) 
(b)  Sanitary sewer mains and appurtenances: 
(1)  Fittings and labor: 
4? sewer connection (residential) ..... $ 75.00 
6? sewer connection (commercial) ..... 125.00 
8? sewer connection (commercial) ..... 150.00 
(2)  Pipe (vitreous clay-extra strength or cast iron at city's option): 
 4? pipe, lin. ft. ..... $2.40 
 6? pipe, lin. ft. ..... 2.90 
 8? pipe, lin. ft. ..... 3.40 
10? pipe, lin. ft. ..... 3.90 
12? pipe, lin. ft. ..... 5.30 
15? pipe, lin. ft. ..... 6.20 
(3)  Manholes (10' maximum depth measured to street grade): 
3' diameter ..... $450.00 
4' diameter ..... 550.00 
4½' diameter ..... 600.00 
5' diameter ..... 660.00 
5½' diameter ..... 740.00 
6' diameter ..... 900.00 
For each additional foot of depth add 10% of the above stated cost for same diameter. 
(4)  Street boring (measured to construction limits): 
8? casing—30' standard bore ..... $500.00 
For each additional foot of length add 15% of the above stated cost. 
Because the wastewater department cannot construct sanitary sewers more than eleven (11) feet deep, all sanitary sewers shall be contracted for by the standard specifications of the City of Pasadena and must further be approved by the city engineer. The above charges shall be assessed for all sewer work performed by the city on public right-of-ways. 
Charges for clean-outs and fittings are in addition to the above established charges and shall be computed at three (3) times the item price. The charges for clean-outs and fittings plus the appropriate charges computed from the schedule above shall be full compensation for a completed job. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 5-1, 11-19-68; Ord. No. 72-241, § 1, 9-5-72; Ord. No. 92-22, § 1, 2-11-92) 
(c)  Miscellaneous items pertaining to both water and sanitary sewer: 
(1)  For gravel paving, per sq. yd. ..... $ 2.00 
(2)  For asphalt penetration paving, per sq. yd. ..... 4.00 
(3)  For concrete and asphalt concrete paving, per sq. yd. ..... 6.00 
(4)  For sidewalk, per sq. yd. ..... 4.40 
(5)  For Class 3 embedment, per cu. yd. ..... 5.40 
(6)  For granular material, per cu. yd. ..... 1.80 
(7)  For 2000# concrete, per cu. yd. ..... 14.00 
(8)  For 3000# concrete, per cu. yd. ..... 16.00 
(9)  For stabilized backfill (2 sacks cement-yd. excavated material, per cu. yd. ..... 8.00 
(10)  For rip rap, per cu. yd. ..... 10.00 
(11)  For excavation over 10' depth below street grade: 
Dirt, per cu. ft. ..... 2.00 
Rock, per cu. ft. ..... 4.00 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 5-1, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-66. - Same—Letter of intention to be filed with city. 
Any developer desiring to make the installation of water and sanitary sewer mains, or either of them, shall file a letter in writing with the director of public works, stating that he elects to make the installation under the terms and provisions of this article, which letter, when received and accepted by the city, shall then be binding upon the city and the developer. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 5-2, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-67. - Check or back-flow valves; indemnity agreement. 
Where, in the opinion of the director of public works, the property for which water or sanitary sewer main extensions are requested is subject to flooding or the sanitary sewer is subject to being surcharged due to infiltration of storm water, or the property is subject to being flooded by an overcharged sewer due to its elevation in relation to the proposed sewer line, the owner or developer shall be denied a sanitary sewer main for service to the property, unless he agrees to install check or back-flow valves in each house sewer and agrees to indemnify fully the city and save it whole and harmless from and against any and all damages, costs or expenses of every kind, character and nature, whether real or asserted, accruing upon or about the buildings due to surcharge of the sanitary sewer. Such agreement shall be executed by the owner or developer of the property and shall be filed in the deed records of Harris County. Such agreement shall be a covenant running with the land and shall be binding on the owner or developer, his successors or assigns. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 4-1, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-68. - Replacement of substandard mains; maintenance of lines and mains by city. 
(a)  When, in the opinion of the director of public works, the replacement of a substandard size water main with a standard size water main becomes necessary in order to provide fire protection or to increase the supply of water for consumption, or to increase the water pressure for consumption, the city will construct, at its sole cost and expense, such standard size water main. 
(b)  Whenever a substandard size water main must be replaced by a standard size main in advance of street paving, the public works department will construct, at its sole cost and expense, the standard size main and transfer all service connections from the substandard size main to the standard size main, without reference to applications for such transfer by the property owners or water consumers. 
(c)  Whenever it becomes necessary, in the orderly improvement of the water distribution system, for the public works department to construct a standard size water main in any street, alley or easement served by a substandard main, all existing service connections on the substandard size main will be reconnected to the new main, and the substandard size main removed or abandoned or the substandard size main tied into the new standard size main at sufficient points to provide adequate pressure and volume. 
(d)  The department of public works will maintain repair and provide proper upkeep only for those water lines and sewer mains or extensions which are located in public streets, alleys, rights-of-way or other dedicated easements. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 3-1, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-69. - City not obligated to make extension. 
In no event shall the city be obligated to proceed under the terms of this article if funds are not available or if, in the discretion of the city, the extension may not be practical. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 6-2, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-70. - Exemptions from pro rata. 
All property platted into lots or tracts and having existing water and sanitary sewer mains installed by the city at the effective date of the original pro rata ordinance, May 24th, 1966, shall be exempt from the pro rata charges for the water and sanitary sewer mains, as to such existing adequate mains. Where such property is later subdivided, whereby an extension of mains is required to serve same, then the terms of this article shall govern. Where the property owner or developer has already paid or contributed towards any of the existing mains, then the property served by the existing mains without extensions thereof shall be exempt from the pro rata charges for water or sanitary sewer connections. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 6-4, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-71. - Payment and collection of charges. 
(a)  The connection charge prescribed by this article shall be paid at the time of the issuance of the permit to make such connection, or by written agreement, the property owner may pay the charge in seven (7) payments bearing interest at the rate of five (5) per cent per annum on the unpaid balance, provided that a cash payment equal to ten (10) per cent of the total connection charge shall be made with the application. The owner shall execute the required city provided form by which annual payments equal to one-seventh ( 1/7 th) of the total unpaid balance of the connection charge, plus five (5) per cent interest on the unpaid balance, will be made on each of the succeeding seven (7) permit anniversary dates. Delinquent payments will bear interest at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum until paid. The provided form will contain provisions for details, such as a description of the property connected, changes in property ownership, prepayment of balance due, collections of delinquent amounts and any other pertinent data or information. 
(b)  To facilitate billing and accounting procedures, the director of public works is authorized to divide the principal and interest payable for connection charges into seven (7) equal annual installments, rather than computing each year the interest due on the balance of the principal. However, should the debtor pay the balance due or any portion thereof prior to its due date, an adjustment shall be made so that, in any event, the city will receive interest during the existence of the debt at the rate of five (5) per cent per annum, except that, in cases of default or delinquent payments, the interest will be charged at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum on the amount of the delinquent or defaulted payment until paid. In case of default in making any payment when due, the director of public works shall have the option to declare the whole balance due and payable, and in such event, such balance will bear interest at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum until paid. In the event of suit to collect any amount due under the provisions of this article, the city will be entitled to judgment for reasonable attorneys' fees. 
(c)  The city shall have a lien against the property connected for the amount of the connection charges and all interest and penalties, and when the property involved is homestead, the agreement provided for in this section shall be signed by the husband and wife owners, and acknowledged by each of them in the manner prescribed by law and the instrument shall be recorded in the Mechanic's and Materialmen's Lien Records of the county clerk. The agreement shall be executed, acknowledged and recorded before the construction is commenced or the connection is made. 
(d)  In the event the ownership of premises, upon which there exists a lien for pro rata charges which, together with interest, remains unpaid, should change, either by voluntary or involuntary sale or transfer, the city shall have the absolute right to disconnect the services to the premises; provided, however, that the subsequent owner shall have the privilege of assuming and paying out the installments in accordance with the terms of the agreement. When the pro rata charges are fully paid out, and not until then, the service facilities shall become an appurtenance to the premises. 
(e)  Billing for payments of connection charges will be by the public works department, which will bill for deferred connection charges to sewer lines and delinquent payments. Delinquency will be dealt with in the same manner as for delinquency in payment of charges for water service, by cutting off the water service to force payment of delinquent accounts. All payments will be made to the same offices collecting water service charges. 
(f)  The department of public works will, on collection of amounts for sewer connection charges, retain five cents ($0.05) per bill so collected to cover collection costs. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, §§ 3-2, 6-5, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-72. - Disposition of charges. 
Any and all sums of money collected as a fee or connection charge, at the rate set out in this article, shall be credited to the water and sanitary fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 6-1, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-73. - Rights under previous ordinances. 
The right of persons entitled to refunds under previous ordinances, where the installations have actually been made of water or sanitary sewer mains, shall remain unaffected by this article. All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under such ordinances shall be and are preserved for the benefit of the city. 
(Ord. No. 68-202, § 6-3, 11-19-68)  
Sec. 37-74. - Connections required. 
(a)  In areas of the city in which there has been or will be constructed sanitary sewers under the provisions of Chapter 37 or any other provision of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena, Texas, all property on which there is located waste disposal facilities including domestic, industrial and commercial, and all residences, houses and business establishments within three hundred (300) feet of such sewer that are not then served by public sewers, shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of written demand by the city director of public health, install a sewer connection, if such property is not already provided therewith. The owner of the property shall then make application for a permit to connect, and upon receipt of such permit, connect their waste disposal facilities to the public sewer. When the connection is made, the private disposal facilities will be abandoned immediately, excepting only those facilities of commercial and industrial connection as may be required by regulations of the department of public health for pretreatment of certain kinds of waste. 
(b)  Any person, partnership or corporation who violates any provision of this article or demand by the city director of public health pursuant to the authority granted by this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 74-126, §§ 1, 2, 6-18-74; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Secs. 37-75—37-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-85. - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
Director of public health shall mean the director of public health of the city or his duly authorized representatives or agents. 
Individual sewage disposal system shall mean a sewage disposal system, other than a public system, which receives either human excreta or liquid waste, or both, from one or more premises. Included within the scope of this definition are septic tank soil-absorption systems, privies and chemical-type toilets, and such other types as may be prescribed in regulations adopted by the director of public health pursuant to the definitions, standards and guidelines of this article. 
Permit shall mean a written permit issued by the director of public health, permitting the construction of an individual sewage disposal system under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § I, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-86. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any person who violates any provision of this article or any provision of any regulation adopted by the director of public health pursuant to authority granted by this article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § V, 9-7-65; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
Sec. 37-87. - Minimum standards; regulations to implement article. 
(a)  The director of public health, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the city and of the general public, is authorized and directed to promulgate and amend, from time to time, regulations establishing minimum standards governing the design, construction, installation and operation of individual sewage disposal systems, subject to approval and adoption by the city council. All such regulations must be filed with the city secretary before the same shall be deemed effective. Such regulations shall establish such minimum standards as, in the judgment of the director of public health, based on his investigation, research and written findings, will insure that the waste discharged to various individual sewage disposal systems: 
(1)  Do not contaminate any drinking water supply. 
(2)  Are not accessible to insects, rodents, or other possible carriers of disease which may come into contact with food or drinking water. 
(3)  Do not pollute or contaminate the waters of any stream used for public or domestic water supply purposes or for recreational purposes. 
(4)  Are not a public health hazard or a public safety hazard by being accessible to children. 
(5)  Do not give rise to a nuisance because of odor, noxious fumes or other conditions denounced by law. 
(6)  Will not violate any other laws or regulations governing water pollution or sewage disposal. 
(b)  The director of public health is authorized to promulgate such additional regulations as are reasonably necessary, pursuant to the definitions, standards and guidelines of this article, to fully implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § II, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-88. - Inspections to enforce article. 
(a)  The director of public health is hereby authorized and directed to make such inspections as are reasonably necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this article and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the director of public health free access to the property at reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspections as are reasonably necessary to determine compliance with the requirements of this article and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § IV, 9-7-65)  
Secs. 37-89—37-95. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT TO CONSTRUCT, ALTER OR EXTEND 
 
Sec. 37-96. - Required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend any individual sewage disposal system within the city, unless he holds a valid permit issued by the director of public health in the name of such person for the specific construction, alteration or extension proposed. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § III.1, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-97. - Application generally. 
(a)  All applications for permits required by this division shall be made to the director of public health. Such applications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the applicant, and shall include the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Lot and block number of the property on which the construction, alteration or extension is proposed. 
(3)  A complete plan of the proposed disposal facility, with substantiating data, if necessary, attesting to its compliance with the minimum standards of the director of public health. 
(4)  Such further information as may be required by the director of public health to substantiate that the proposed construction, alteration or extension complies with regulations promulgated by the director and then in effect. 
(b)  The complete plan referred to in subsection (a)(3) above shall include: 
(1)  The number, location and size of all sewage disposal facilities to be constructed, altered or extended. 
(2)  The location of water supplies, water supply piping, existing sewage disposal facilities, buildings or dwellings, and adjacent lot lines. 
(3)  Plans of the proposed sewage disposal facilities to be constructed, altered or extended. 
(Ord. No. 1706, §§ III.2, III.4, III.5, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-98. - Approval or disapproval of application. 
Each application for a permit under this article shall be approved or disapproved by the director of public health within seventeen (17) days after the date of its filing. Conclusive notice of approval or disapproval shall be the posting of written notice of such action upon any corridor bulletin board in the City Hall. In the event such approval or disapproval is not given by the director of public health within the period specified herein, such application shall be deemed disapproved as of the end of the seventeenth day after the date of filing. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § III.6, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-99. - Fee. 
The director of public health shall require every applicant for a permit under this division to pay a permit and inspection fee to the city in the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00); provided, however, that the director may waive the fee for governmental and nonprofit charitable organizations. Such fee shall be refunded only in the event the applicant files with the director of public health a written request for withdrawal of his application prior to the commencement of inspection of work done pursuant to the permit. No other septic tank or individual sewage disposal system inspection fee shall be charged by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1798, § 2, 4-14-66; Ord. No. 81-228, § 1, 12-1-81; Ord. No. 94-1, § 10, 1-11-94)  
Sec. 37-100. - Issuance. 
The director of public health shall issue a permit under this article upon compliance by the applicant with the provisions of this article and any regulations adopted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § III.2, 9-7-65) 
Cross reference— Compliance with subdivision ordinance prerequisite to issuance of permit for installation of individual septic tank, App. A, § 7.  
Sec. 37-101. - Denial where public sewage system is available. 
The director of public health may refuse to grant a permit for the construction of an individual sewage disposal system where public sewage systems are reasonably available and not more than three hundred (300) feet away from the nearest property line enclosing the lot or lots upon which the system is proposed for installation. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § III.3, 9-7-65)  
Sec. 37-102. - Appeal from denial. 
Any person whose application for a permit under this article has been denied may request, in writing, and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the city council or one of its duly designated committees, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request by the director of public health. In the event the application is again denied in the written order to be made at the conclusion of such hearing, or in the event such hearing is not held within the thirty (30) day period, the applicant's administrative remedy shall be deemed exhausted. 
(Ord. No. 1706, § III.6, 9-7-65)  
Secs. 37-103—37-110. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PRETREATMENT PROGRAM REGULATIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, adopted December 29, 2009, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 37-111—37-137, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to discharge of industrial waste and derived from Ord. No. 72-219, §§ 1—27, 8-22-72; Ord. No. 75-95, §§ 1—27, 6-10-75; Ord. No. 79-35, § 1, 3-20-79; Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90; Ord. No. 99-204, § 1, 11-2-99. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-111. - Purpose and policy. 
This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of Pasadena and enables the City of Pasadena to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 USC 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with operation of the POTW; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with statutes and regulations; 
(4)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(5)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(6)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvements of the POTW; and 
(7)  To enable the city to comply with its TPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirement and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
This article shall apply to all industrial users of the POTW. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial user reporting and provides for setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-112. - Administration. 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director of public works may be delegated by the director of public works to other city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-113. - Definitions. 
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have meanings hereinafter designated: 
Act or "the Act". The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
Approval authority. The director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the appropriate regional administrator in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
Authorized representative of the industrial user: 
(1)  If the industrial user is a corporation, the authorized representative shall mean: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making function for the corporation; 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than two hundred fifty (250) persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding twenty-five million dollars ($25,000,000.00) (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the industrial user is a partnership, or sole proprietorship an authorized representative shall mean a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the industrial user is a federal, state or local governmental facility, an authorized representative shall mean a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or his and or her designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1)—(3) above may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or person responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade expressed in terms of mass and concentration [milligram per liter (mg/l)]. 
Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with sections 270(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
Categorical industrial user (CIU). An industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard. 
Certificate of occupancy. A permit showing that the industry or business has complied with this article and has been shown to have only sanitary waste discharge. 
City. The City of Pasadena. 
Chemical oxygen demand (COD). The measure of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant, expressed as mg/l. 
Color. The optical density at the visual wavelength of maximum absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred (100) per cent transmittance is equivalent to zero optical density. 
Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
Control authority. A POTW with an approved pretreatment program or approval authority in the absence of a POTW pretreatment program. 
Cooling water/noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. Cooling water may be generated from any use, such as air conditioning, heat exchangers, cooling or refrigeration to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
Daily maximum limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a pollutant during a calendar day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged over the course of the day. Where daily maximum limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements taken that day. 
Director of public works or director. The person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or his/her authorized representative. 
Domestic sewage. Water-borne wastes normally discharging from the sanitary conveniences, free from storm surface water, industrial wastes, and in which the average concentration of total suspended solids (TSS) is not greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l and BOD is not more than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
Domestic user (DU). Any industry or business discharging only domestic sewage into the city sewer system. 
Environmental protection agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the regional water management division director or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
Existing source. Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication of proposed categorical pretreatment which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
Grab sample. A sample collected over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes from a waste stream without regard to flow of the waste stream. 
Indirect discharge or discharge. The introduction of a nondomestic pollutant into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307 (b), (c) or (d) of the Act. 
Industrial user or user. An industry or business which discharges wastewater into the city's wastewater treatment plant. A source of direct discharge. 
Industrial waste questionnaire. The document provided by the city to all potential industrial users on which basic information and data are documented describing the applicant's production process, raw materials, and other information as deemed necessary by the city to accurately assess the nature of any potential waste discharges. 
Industrial wastes. All water-borne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial, manufacturing, or food processing operation or process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage distinct from domestic sewage. 
Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit. The maximum concentration (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
Interference. A discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources: 
(1)  Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment process or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and 
(2)  Therefore is a cause of a violation of city's TPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued there under (or more stringent state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), including Title" (Resource Conservation and Recovery Act - RCRA; and state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle 0 of the SWDA; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act. 
Lower explosive limit. The concentration of a gas or vapor (in per cent by volume) which, in the presence of an ignition source, will ignite. 
Medical waste. Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood by-wastes products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, fomites, etiologic, contaminated bedding, surgical potentially contaminated laboratory wastes and dialysis wastes. 
Monthly average limit. The highest allowable average of "daily discharges" over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all "daily discharges" measured during a calendar month divided by the number of "daily discharges" measured during that month. 
New source: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication or proposed standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting the criteria of "new source" section 37-113(1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or add to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this subsection has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing building, structure, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of a new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this subsection. 
Noncontact cooling water. Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product or finished product. 
New user. A "new user" is a user that is not regulated under federal categorical pretreatment standards but that applies to the city for a new building permit or occupies an existing building and plans to commence discharge of wastewater to the city's collection system after the effective date of this article. Any person that buys an existing facility that is discharging nondomestic wastewater will be considered an "existing user" if no significant changes are made in the manufacturing operation. 
Pass through. A discharge which exits the POTW into water of the U.S. in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's TPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
Permittee. A person or user issued a wastewater discharge permit. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, their association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, or local governmental entities. 
pH. A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a substance, expressed in standard units. It is the reciprocal of a logarithm (Base 10) of the hydrogen ion concentration of a solution. 
Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharge equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater (i.e.; pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, toxicity, and odor). 
Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in the wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes, by process changes, or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by applicable pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on an industrial user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
Pretreatment standards or standard. National pretreatment standard shall mean prohibitive discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
Process wastewater. The term process wastewater means any water which, during manufacturing or processing, comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, by-product, or waste product. 
Prohibitive discharge. Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 37-116 of this article. 
Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 USC 1292), which is owned by the state or municipality. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes and any conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the municipal entity having jurisdiction over the indirect dischargers and responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the treatment plant. 
Septic tank waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dishwashing operation, etc.). A combination of water carried waste; from residences, buildings, institution, and industrial establishments. 
Sewer. Any pipe, conduit ditch, or other device used to collect and transport sewage from the generating source. 
Significant industrial user (SIU). 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) GPD or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blow down wastewater); or 
b.  Contributes a process wastes stream which makes up five (5) per cent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or equipment. 
(3)  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user [and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)] determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be construed to include the plural and plural shall include singular as indicated by the context of its use. 
Slug load. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibitive discharge standards in section 37-116 of this article or any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge. 
Standard industrial classification code (SIC). A classification pursuant to the standard industrial classification manual issued by the U.S. Office Management and Budget. 
Stormwater. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, resulting there from, including snowmelt. 
Surcharge. The charge in addition to the published water and sewer rate. The basis for surcharges on industrial wastes is a capital and operating cost for the treatment and removal of suspended solids and BOD exceeding "domestic" sewage. 
Total suspended solids (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
Toxic pollutant. One of one hundred twenty-six (126) pollutants, or combination of those pollutants, listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision of Section 30 (33 USC 1317) of the Act or any other state regulated pollutant. 
Treatment plant effluent. Any discharge of pollutants from the POTW into waters of the state and/or U.S. 
User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. The source shall not include "domestic user" as defined herein. 
Utility superintendent or superintendent. The person designated by the director of public works as his/her her authorized representative. 
Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment of sewage and industrial waste. It shall mean any arrangement of devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, 12-29-09; Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 37-114. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviation shall have the designated meanings: 
2 nd NOV 	Second notice of violation 
BOD 	Biochemical oxygen demand 
CA 	Control authority 
CFR 	Code of Federal Regulations 
COD 	Chemical oxygen demand 
EPA 	Environmental protection agency 
gpd 	Gallons per day 
LEL 	Lower explosive limit 
mg 	Milligram 
mg/l 	Milligram per liter 
DU 	Domestic user 
NIS 	Notice of impending suspension 
NSIU 	Nonsignificant industrial user 
NOV 	Notice of violation 
TPDES 	Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
O&M 	Operation and maintenance 
RCRA 	Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC 	Standard industrial classifications 
SWDA 	Solids Waste Disposal Act (42 USC 6901, et seq.) 
TSS 	Total suspended solids 
USC 	United States Code 
 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-115. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 37-116. - Prohibitive discharge standards. 
No industrial user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all industrial users of the POTW whether they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirement. No industrial user may contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the municipal wastewater and POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flash point of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty (60) degrees Centigrade) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 11.0 or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment, or endangering city personnel. 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of flow in the POTW resulting in interference, or other interference with proper operation of the sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, fish scales, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, hair, fleshing, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk solids. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which either singularly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with either the POTW; or any wastewater treatment or sludge process, or will constitute a hazard to humans or animals. 
(5)  Any wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit (sixty-five (65) degrees Centigrade) or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit (forty (40) degrees Centigrade). 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(7)  Any pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problem. 
(8)  No trucked or hauled pollutants shall be discharged except at discharged points designated by the POTW. 
(9)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance, a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repairs. 
(10)  Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, dye waste, and vegetable tanning solution, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the city's TPDES permit. Color, in combination with turbidity, shall not cause the treatment plant effluent or reduce the depth of compensation point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten per cent from the seasonably established norm for aquatic life. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except as specifically approved by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, non-contact cooling water and unpolluted industrial wastewater unless specifically authorized by the director. 
(13)  Any sludge, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes. 
(14)  Any medical waste, except as specifically authorized by the director in a wastewater discharge permit. 
(15)  Any wastewater causing the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test. 
(16)  Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW. 
(17)  Any discharge of fat, oils, or greases of animal origin is limited to four hundred (400) mg/l. 
(18)  Any liquid, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient, either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system), be more than five (5) per cent nor any single reading over ten (10) per cent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. 
(19)  Grease, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dusts, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(20)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its TPDES and/or other disposal system permits. 
(21)  Any wastewater, which in the opinion of the director of public works can cause harm either to the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream; or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance, unless allowed under special agreement by the director of public works (except that no special waiver shall be given from categorical pretreatment standards). 
(22)  The contents of any tank or other vessel owned or used by any person in the business of collecting or pumping sewage, effluent, septic tank waste, or other wastewater unless said person has first obtained testing and approval as may be generally required by the City of Pasadena and paid all fees assessed for the privilege of said discharge. 
(23)  Any hazardous wastes as defined in rules published by the State of Texas or in 40 CFR Part 261. 
(24)  Persistent pesticides and/or pesticides regulated by the Federal Insecticide Fungicide Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). 
(25)  Sewage sludge, except in accordance with the city's TPDES permit, providing that it specifically allows the discharge to surface waters of sewage sludge pollutants. 
(26)  No person shall discharge into the public sewer any of the following materials unless limits have been established by the control authority (CA) and included in the industrial user's permit: 
Antimony 	Gasoline 
Beryllium 	Naphtha 
Bismuth 	Insecticides 
Boron 	Herbicides 
Molybdenum 	Fungicides 
Tellurium 	Uranylion 
Tin 	Radioactive Elements 
 
Waste prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials storage areas must be discharge to the industrial user's pretreatment facility before connecting with the POTW. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-117. - Federal categorical pretreatment standards. 
The national categorical pretreatment standards found in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-118. - Local limits. 
(1)  Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2), each POTW shall develop and enforce specific limits which are listed in subsection (3) of this section. The local limits in this section are based on the uniform concentration method and shall be applied as daily average limits. These local limits shall continue to be reevaluated and developed at least once every three (3) years and the city will effectively enforce such limits. 
(2)  The specific limits on pollutants developed by the city shall apply at the final discharge point of the industrial user prior to discharging into the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(3)  Specific limitations. Maximum concentration of heavy metals. Under this article, the maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals, stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), are as follows: 
Metal 	Composite sample limit (mg/L) 
Arsenic 	2.0 
Cadmium 	0.2 
Chromium 	1.0 
Copper 	2.0 
Lead 	1.0 
Mercury 	0.008 
Nickel 	2.0 
Silver 	1.0 
Zinc 	3.0 
 
Trace metals that are prohibited in section 37-116(26) above shall be evaluated with a local limit of 0.1 mg/l or the current minimum analytical limit (MAL), whichever is higher. The limit will be enforced at the permitted industry's discharge. 
(4)  Additional parameters that are limited are as follows: 
Oil and grease (petroleum or mineral products, animal or vegetable base) four hundred (400) mg/l. 
pH > 5.0 but < 11.0 
BOD > 250 mg/l and TSS > 250 mg/l is permissible provided that the user obtains an industrial waste permit that contains the surcharge for excess BOD/TSS strengths and the acceptance of the waste would not overload the city's POTW. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, 12-29-09; Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 37-119. - City's right of revision. 
The city reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW if deemed necessary to comply with the purpose and policy presented in section 37-111 of this article or the general and specific prohibitions in section 37-116 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-120. - Special agreement. 
The city reserves the right to enter into special agreements with industrial users setting out special terms which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a special agreement waive compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. However, the industrial user may request a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. They may also request a variance from the categorical pretreatment from EPA. Such a request will be approved only if the industrial user can prove that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from factors considered by EPA when establishing that pretreatment standard. An industrial user requesting a fundamentally different factor variance must comply with the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-121. - Dilution. 
No industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute its discharge, as partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by the applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The director may impose mass limitation on industrial users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements or in other case when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-122. - National pretreatment standards (nps). 
(1)  If more stringent NPS exist for certain categories of industries or if more stringent NPS are promulgated for certain categories of industries by the USPEA, the more stringent national standard will apply to the permittee. 
(2)  Unless exception is granted by the city, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons discharging: 
(a)  Wastewater. 
(b)  Industrial waste. 
(c)  Polluted liquids. 
(3)  Unless authorized by the TCEQ no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in the subsection above on public or private property or into or adjacent to any: 
(a)  Natural outlet. 
(b)  Watercourse. 
(c)  Storm sewer. 
(d)  Other area within the jurisdiction of the city. 
The director shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state, and local government. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-123. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 
 
Sec. 37-124. - Pretreatment facilities. 
Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits and the prohibitions set out in section 37-116 above within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the director. Any facilities required to pre-treat wastewater to a level acceptable to the director shall be operated, and maintained at the industrial waste user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the industrial user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge to the POTW under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-125. - Deadline for compliance with applicable pretreatment requirements. 
Compliance by existing sources covered by categorical pretreatment standards shall be within three (3) years of the date the standard is effective unless a shorter compliance time is specified in the appropriate standard. The city shall establish a final compliance deadline date for any existing user not covered by categorical pretreatment standards or for any categorical user when the local limits for said user are more restrictive than the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. 
New sources and new users are required to comply with applicable pretreatment standards within the shortest feasible time, not to exceed ninety (90) days from the beginning of discharge. New sources and new users shall install, have in operating condition, and shall start up all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable pretreatment standards before beginning to discharge. 
Any wastewater discharge permit issued to a categorical user shall not contain a compliance date beyond any deadline date established in EPA's categorical pretreatment standards. Any other existing user or a categorical user that must comply with a more stringent local limit which is in noncompliance with any local limits shall be provided with a compliance schedule placed in an industrial wastewater permit to insure compliance within the shortest time feasible. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-126. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the director may require industrial users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points, separate sewage waste-streams and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the industrial user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(2)  Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interceptors units shall be of type and capacity approved by the director and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the permittee at their own expense. 
(3)  Industrial users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detector meter. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-127. - Accidental spill prevention plans. 
The director of public works may require any user to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan (ASPP) or slug control plan. Where deemed necessary by the city, facilities to prevent accidental discharge or slug discharges of pollutants shall be provided and maintained at the user's cost and expense. An accidental spill prevention plan or slug control plan showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review and approval before implementation. The city shall determine which user is required to develop a plan and require said plan to be submitted within ten (10) days after notification by the city. Each user shall implement its ASPP as submitted or as modified after such plan has been reviewed and approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures by the city shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify its facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Any user required to develop and implement an accidental spill prevention plan shall submit a plan which addresses, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
b.  Description of stored chemicals. 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug discharges. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which would violate any of the standards in sections 37-116 through 37-118 of this article; 
d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic chemicals (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(2)  Users shall notify the city wastewater treatment plant immediately after the occurrence of a slug or accidental discharge of substances regulated by this article. The notification shall include location of discharge, date and time thereof, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions. Any affected user shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage to the POTW, in addition to the amount of any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under state or federal law. 
(3)  Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the user shall submit to the director of public works a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-128. - Reserved  
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ELIGIBILITY 
 
Sec. 37-129. - Wastewater survey. 
When requested by the director, all industrial users must submit information on the nature and characteristics of the wastewater by completing an industrial waste questionnaire prior to commencing their discharge. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update the survey. Failure to complete this questionnaire shall be considered a violation of the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-130. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
It shall be unlawful for any industrial user to discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director. Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subject the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in section 37-169 through 37-188. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-131. - Wastewater discharge permitting existing connections. 
Any industrial user which discharges industrial waste into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within ninety (90) days after said date, apply to the city for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 37-133 below, and shall not cause and allow discharges to the POTW to continue after ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the director. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-132. - Wastewater discharge permitting extra jurisdictional industrial users. 
(1)  Any existing industrial user located beyond the city limits shall submit a wastewater discharge permit application, in accordance with section 37-150 below, within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this article. New industrial users located beyond the city limits shall submit such applications to the director ninety (90) days prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW. 
(2)  Alternately, the director may enter into an agreement with the neighboring jurisdiction in which the industrial user is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of the pretreatment program requirements against said industrial user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-133. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
In order to be considered for a wastewater discharge permit the permittee must submit the information required by section 37-145(2) of this article. When a pretreatment process is required, plans must be submitted and stamped by a registered professional engineering licensed to practice in the State of Texas. The director shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. Categorical users submitting the following information shall have complied with 40 CFR 403.12(b). In addition, the following may be requested: 
(1)  Identifying information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners; 
(2)  Permits. The user shall submit a list of all environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
(3)  Description of operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are or could accidentally or intentionally be discharged to the POTW; number and type of employees, hours of operations; each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day) and the time and duration of discharges. This description should also include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated or manufacturing processes, site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans; and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, inspection manholes, sampling chambers and appurtances by size, location and elevation. 
(4)  Flow measurement. 
a.  Categorical user: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
i.  Regulated or manufacturing process streams; and 
ii.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula [40 CFR § 403.6(e)]. 
b.  Noncategorical User: The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
i.  Total process flow, wastewater treatment plant flow, total plant flow or individual manufacturing process flow as required by the director of public works. 
The city may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
(5)  Measurements of pollutants. 
a.  Categorical user: 
i.  The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for each regulated or manufacturing process. 
ii.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass where required by the categorical pretreatment standards or as required by the city of regulated pollutants (including standards contained in sections 37-116 through 37-118, as appropriate) in the discharge from each regulated or manufacturing process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section 37-155 and 37-156. 
iii.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
iv.  Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR § 403.6(e) for a categorical user, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application. 
b.  Noncategorical user: 
i.  The user shall identify the applicable pretreatment standards for its wastewater discharge. 
ii.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration in the discharge (or mass where required by the city of regulated pollutants contained in sections 37-116 through 37-118, as appropriate. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall conform to sampling and analytical procedures outlined in section 37-155 and section 37-156. 
iii.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection. 
iv.  Where the director of public works developed alternate concentration or mass limits because of dilution, this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted as part of the application. 
(6)  Certification. The user shall submit a statement, worded as specified in section 37-134, which has been reviewed by an authorized representative of the user, and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether the applicable pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O & M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, the user shall submit the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The user's schedule shall conform with the requirements of section 37-149. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established pursuant to section 37-149 of this article. 
a.  Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR § 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR § 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by this subsection, the information required by subsections (6) and (7) of this section shall pertain to the modified limits. 
b.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR § 403.7), the combined waste stream formula (40 CFR § 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (40 CFR § 403.13) after the user submits the report required by subsections (6) and (7) of this section, then a report containing modified information shall be submitted by the user within sixty (60) days after the new limit is approved. 
(8)  The user shall submit any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director of public works to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-134. - Application signatories and certification. 
All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by a responsible officer or manager, or sole proprietor or general partner as applicable or duly authorized representative and contain the following statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(1)  For the purpose of this section, a responsible officer or manager means: 
a.  A president, vice-president, secretary, or treasurer of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one (1) or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided, the manager is authorized to make management decisions which govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations and initiating and directing other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for control mechanism requirements; and where authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. This authorization must be made in writing by the principal executive officer or ranking elected official and submitted to the approval authority prior to or together with the report being submitted of the user and contain the preceding certification statement. 
(2)  A duly authorized representative is an individual designated by the responsible officer, manager, sole proprietor or general partner in writing. The written authorization must be submitted to the city and also specifies either an individual or a position having the responsibility of the overall operation of the facility from which the industrial discharge originates, such as the position of plant manager, operator of a well, or well field superintendent, or a position of equivalent responsibility, or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company. If an authorization in this section is no longer accurate because a different individual or position has responsibility for the overall operation of the facility, or overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, a new authorization satisfying the requirements of this section must be submitted to the city prior to or together with any reports to be signed by an authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-135. - Wastewater discharge permit—Review. 
The director will evaluate the data furnished by the industrial user and may require additional information. Within ten (10) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. If no determination is made within this time period, the application will be deemed denied. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-136. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 
 
Sec. 37-137. - Wastewater discharge permit—Duration. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five years. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five (5) years, at the discretion of the director. 
Other nondomestic users are issued a one-time "certificate of occupancy" permit to identify that domestic waste is their only discharge. 
Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-138. - Wastewater permit—Contents. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed necessary by the director of public works to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain the following conditions: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five (5) years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to and approval from the city, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Applicable pretreatment standards and requirements, including any special state requirements; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, submittal of technical reports, compliance schedules, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; 
e.  Requirement for immediate notification to the city where self-monitoring results indicate noncompliance; 
f.  Requirement to report a bypass of a pretreatment facility; 
g.  Requirement to report immediately to the city all discharges, including slug loadings, that could cause problems to the POTW; 
h.  Requirement for the SIU who reports noncompliance to repeat the sampling and analysis and submit results to the city within ten (10) days after becoming aware of the violation; 
i.  A statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule; 
j.  Requirements to control slug discharges, if determine by the POTW to be necessary. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Limits on the instantaneous, daily, and monthly average and/or maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified wastewater pollutants or properties; 
c.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
d.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine discharges; 
e.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
f.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
g.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
h.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; 
i.  Any special agreements the director of public works chooses to continue or develop between the city and user; 
j.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director of public works to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, 12-29-09; Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 37-139. - Wastewater discharge permit—Appeals. 
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the city to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within ten days of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed as a waiver of administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provision objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the city fails to act within ten (10) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider, not to issue, or not modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative action of a wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Harris County District Court within thirty (30) days of such final administrative action. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-140. - Wastewater discharge permit—Modification. 
The director may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to the following: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the industrial user's operation processes, wastewater volume or character since the time of the wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction relimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permittee's discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new owner and/or operator. 
(10)  The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-141. - Wastewater discharge permit—Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred to a new owner and or operator only if the permittee gives thirty (30) days advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include written certification by the new owner and/or operator and the following: 
(1)  Statement that new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identification of the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
(3)  Acknowledgement of full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit invalid on the date of the facility transfer. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-142. - Wastewater discharge permit—Revocation. 
Wastewater discharge permits may be revoked for the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to section 37-150; 
(3)  Misrepresentation of not fully disclosing all relevant facts in wastewater discharge permit; 
(4)  Falsifying self monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the director timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility. 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard, ordinance requirement or wastewater permit Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon nonuse, cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-143. - Wastewater discharge permit—Reissuance. 
All industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit renewal application, thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the industrial user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-144. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 
 
Sec. 37-145. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(1)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date a categorical pretreatment standard, or final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in subsection (2)a.—g., below. Ninety days prior to commencement of a discharge, new sources and sources that become industrial users subsequent to promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information in subsections (2)a.—e., below. Any new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
(2)  The industrial user shall submit the information required by this section including: 
(a)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility. 
(c)  Description of operation. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(d)  Flow measurements. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula as set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(e)  Measurement of pollutants. 
i.  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
ii.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with sample procedures set out in section 37-156. 
iii.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 37-156. 
(f)  Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by the qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(g)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion of this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 37-149 of this article. 
(h)  Baseline monitoring reports. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 37-134. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-146. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide reports to the city on forms prescribed by the director when the director has notified the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-147. - Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines. 
Within 90 days following the date for completion with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following the commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in section 37-145(2)d.—f. For industrial user subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in term allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the industrial user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 37-134. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-148. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  Any significant industrial user subject to a pretreatment standard shall during June and December each year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by such pretreatment standard and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 37-134 of this article. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the industrial user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be kept clean and maintained in good working condition at all times. The failure of an industrial user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the industrial user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If an industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in and of this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city's POTW, using the procedures prescribed in section 37-155 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall included in the report. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-149. - Compliance schedules for meeting applicable pretreatment standards. 
(1)  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
(2)  No increment referred to in subsection (1) of this section shall exceed nine (9) months. 
(3)  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-150. - Report of changed conditions. 
Each industrial user is required to notify the director of any planned significant changes to the industrial user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty (30) days before the change. 
(1)  The director may require the industrial user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 37-133. 
(2)  The director may issue wastewater discharge permit under section 37-135 or modify a wastewater discharge permit under section 37-140. 
(3)  No industrial user shall implement the planned changed condition(s) until and unless the director has responded to the industrial user's notice. 
(4)  For purposes of this requirement flow increases of ten (10) per cent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants shall be deemed significant. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-151. - Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary discharge, or a slug load which cause potential problems for the POTW (including a violation of the prohibited discharge standard in section 37-116 of this article), it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the city of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective action taken by the industrial user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge, the industrial user shall, unless waived by the director, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to a person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this article. 
(3)  Failure to notify the director of a potential problem discharge shall be deemed a separate violation of this article. 
(4)  A notice shall be permanently posted on industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place of advertising whom to call in the event of a discharge described in the subsection (1) above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(5)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the director immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-152. - Reports from noncategorical industrial users. 
Industrial users not subject to categorical pretreatment standards are subject to reporting requirements as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(h). 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-153. - Notice of violation or repeat sampling and reporting. 
If sampling performed by the industrial user indicates a violation, the industrial user must notify the director within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The industrial user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the director within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. Industrial user is not required to resample if the POTW performs sampling between the industry's initial sampling and when the industrial user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-154. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under section 37-150 above. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 37-145, 37-147 and 37-148 above. 
(1)  Any industrial user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities in writing of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste set forth in 40 CFR Part 21, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous batch or other). If the industrial user discharges more than ten kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the industrial user: 
a.  An identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
b.  An estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastewater discharged during that calendar month; and 
c.  An estimation of the mass and constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during following twelve (12) months. 
(2)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of subsection (1) of the city's ordinance during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous waste, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). 
Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30 (d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months which the industrial user discharges more than such quantities of nonhazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the POTW, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the industrial user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous waste generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-155. - Record keeping requirements. 
Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain and make available for inspection and copying all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three (3) years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or POTW, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-156. - Sampling and analytical requirements. 
(1)  Except as indicated in subsection (b) and (c) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite sampling techniques, unless time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by [the superintendent assigned/designated by the director of public works]. Where time proportional composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by [the city], the samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols (including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a twenty-four-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: For cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other parameters unaffected but authorized by [the city], as appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous limits. 
(2)  For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and ninety-day compliance reports required under 40 CFR 403.12(b) and (d), a minimum of four (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which historical sampling data are available, the director of public works may authorize a lower minimum. For the reports required by 40 CFR 403.12 (e) and (h), the director of public works shall require the number of grab samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by industrial users with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(3)  Samples shall be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist, immediately downstream from the regulated or manufacturing process if no pretreatment exists, or at a location determined by the city and specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit. For categorical users, if other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste stream formula of 40 CFR § 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the applicable categorical pretreatment standards. For other SIUs, for which the city has adjusted its local limits to factor out dilution flows, the user shall measure the flows and concentrations necessary to evaluate compliance with the adjusted pretreatment standard(s). 
(4)  All sample results shall indicate the time, date and place of sampling and methods of analysis and shall certify that the waste stream sampled is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges from the user. If a user sampled and analyzed more frequently than what was required in its wastewater discharge permit, using methodologies in 40 CFR Part 136, it must submit all results of sampling and analysis of the discharge as part of its self-monitoring report. 
(5)  All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-157. - Determination of noncompliance. 
A grab sample(s) may be used to determine noncompliance with pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-158. - Timing. 
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal Service, date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-159. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 
 
Sec. 37-160. - Inspection and sampling. 
The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any industrial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article, and any permit or order issued hereunder, is being met and whether the industrial user is complying with all the requirements thereof. Industrial users shall allow the director or his representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where an industrial user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the industrial user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon representation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state, and EPA will be permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The city, state, and EPA shall have the right to set up on the industrial user property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the users operations. 
(3)  The city may require the industrial user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe proper operating condition by the industrial user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quantity shall be calibrated annually to ensure accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the industrial user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the industrial user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city personnel access to the industrial user premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-161. - Monitoring facilities. 
Each user shall provide and operate at its own expense a monitoring facility to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurements of each sewer discharge to the city. Each monitoring facility shall be situated on the user's premises. The director of public works, whenever applicable, may require the construction and maintenance of sampling facilities at other locations (for example, at the end of a manufacturing line or a wastewater treatment system). 
There shall be ample room in or near such sampling facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, including the sampling and measuring equipment, shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
The director of public works may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. All monitoring facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable local construction standards and specifications. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-162. - Search warrants. 
If the director's authorized representative has been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof, and, if the director's authorized representative has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that the need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the city attorney, the municipal court judge of the city may issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the city marshal. In the event of an emergency affecting public health, safety and welfare, inspection shall be made without issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-163. - Vandalism. 
No person shall willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, tamper with, or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to the sanctions set out in this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-164. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 
 
Sec. 37-165. - Information on industrial users. 
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge reports and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the industrial user furnishing report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets, or secrets processes shall not be available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 403.14 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
The provisions of this division 8 shall be subject to the provisions of the Texas Public Information Act, codified as Chapter 552, Texas Government Code. In the event of a request under said Act for information which the industrial user or the city may deem confidential, the city shall request an opinion from the Texas Attorney General as to whether such information is subject to disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-166. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 9. - PUBLICATION OF INDUSTRIAL USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 
 
Sec. 37-167. - Publication of industrial users. 
The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) per cent or more of all of the measurements taken during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter, including instantaneous limits; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violation, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) per cent or more of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH), including instantaneous limits; 
(3)  Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or long term average) that the director determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
(4)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTWs exercise of its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide, within forty-five (45) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
(8)  Any other violation or group of violations which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
The control authority will evaluate whether each Significant Industrial User needs a plan or other action to control slug discharges. In accordance with 40 CFR.8(f)(2)(vi) the control authority is required to also keep records of the activities associated with slug control evaluation and results of such activities are required to be available to the approval authority upon request. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, 12-29-09; Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, 8-9-11)  
Sec. 37-168. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 37-169. - Notification of violation. 
Whenever the director finds that any user has violated any portion of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, a pretreatment requirement or any other violation of this article hereunder, the director or his agent may serve upon said user a written notice of violation (NOV). If a compliance date is not set in the notice then it shall state "within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to specific required action, shall be submitted by the user to the director or his agent" Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after the receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the city to take any action, including emergency actions, or any other enforcement action, without first issuing notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-170. - Consent orders. 
The director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-171. - Show cause hearing. 
The director may order any user which cause or contributes to violation(s) of this article, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard requirement, to appear before the director and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and request that the user show cause why this enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may be pursued following the hearing date. A show cause hearing shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-172. - Compliance orders. 
When the director of public works finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of public works may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a time specified in the order. If the user does not come into compliance within the time specified in the order, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders may also contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-173. - Second notice of violation (2nd NOV). 
When a violation is not corrected with a NOV, a second letter is addressed to the industrial user notifying them of a violation. This notice will include the nature of the violation, any necessary corrective measures, a compliance date, and the next possible enforcement action. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-174. - Notice of impending suspension (NIS). 
When the director finds that the user has violated or continues to violate the ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, he may issue a NIS to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance by a set date. If the user does not come into compliance by this set date, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. The NIS may also contain requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. An NIS may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a federal pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does an on compliance order release the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an NIS shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-175. - Cease and desist orders. 
When the director finds that the user is violating this article, the user's wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements, and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-176. - Administrative fines. 
(1)  When the director of public works finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director of public works may fine such user in an amount not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(2)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after ten (10) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of ten (10) per cent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of ten (10) per cent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines and penalties. 
(3)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the director of public works to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount with ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the director of public works shall convene a hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days of receiving the request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The city may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(4)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-177. - Emergency termination of services. 
The director may immediately suspend a user's discharge (after informal notice to the user) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present, or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The director may also immediately suspend a user's discharge (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in section 37-178 are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director, prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 37-171 and 37-178. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-178. - Termination of discharge. 
In addition to those provisions in section 37-142 of this article, any user that violates the following conditions of this article, wastewater permit, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge termination. 
(1)  Violation of wastewater permit conditions. 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge. 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operation or wastewater volume, constituents and characteristics prior to discharge. 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring or sampling. 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in division 2 of this article. 
(6)  When compliance has not been met on a NIS letter. Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under this section 37-171 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-179. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 11. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 
 
Sec. 37-180. - Injunctive relief. 
Whenever the user has violated a pretreatment standard or requirement, or continues to violate the provisions of this article, wastewater discharge permit or orders issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement, the director may petition any court of competent jurisdiction through the city attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the industrial user. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief may also be sought by the city. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as a prerequisite to taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-181. - Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any user which has violated or continues to violate this article, any order or wastewater permit hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(2)  The city may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
(3)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation the magnitude and corrective action by the user, the compliance history of the user, and other factor as justice requires. 
(4)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-182. - Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  Any user that violates any provision of this article, any orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a maximum sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  Any user that introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined a maximum sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  Any user making false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater discharge permit, or order, or who falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, be fined a maximum sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-183. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
The provisions in divisions 9 through 13 are not exclusive remedies. The city reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the city reserves the right to take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the city is empowered to take more enforcement action against any noncompliant user. These actions may be taken concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-184. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 12. - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS 
 
Sec. 37-185. - Performance bonds. 
The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in the sum not to exceed a value determined by the director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-186. - Liability insurance. 
The director may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this article, any orders, or a previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused by its discharge. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-187. - Water/wastewater supply severance. 
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water and/or wastewater service to the user may be severed. Service will only be reconnected, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-188. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 13. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 
 
Sec. 37-189. - Act of God defense. 
(1)  The act of God defense constitutes a statutory affirmative defense [V.T.C.A. Water Code § 7.251] in an action brought in municipal or state court. If a person can establish that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot, or other catastrophe, the event is not a violation of the ordinance or permit. 
(2)  An industrial user who wishes to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall demonstrate, through relevant evidence, that: 
a.  An event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance occurred, and the sole cause of the event was an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe; and 
b.  The industrial user has submitted the following information to the city within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance or a permit issued under the ordinance (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five (5) days); 
i.  A description of the event, and the nature and cause of the event; and 
ii.  The time period of the event, including exact dates and times or, if still continuing, the anticipated time the event is expected to continue; and 
iii.  Steps being taken or planned to reduce, eliminate and prevent recurrence of the event. 
(3)  Burden of proof. In any enforcement proceeding, the industrial user seeking to establish the act of God affirmative defense shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that an event that would otherwise be a violation of a pretreatment ordinance, or a permit issued under the ordinance, was caused solely by an act of God, war, strike, riot or other catastrophe. 
(Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, 8-9-11) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 11-129, § 2, adopted August 9, 2011, amended § 37-189 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former § 37-189, pertained to upset, and derived from Ord. No. 09-277, § 2, 12-29-09.  
Sec. 37-190. - General/specific prohibitions. 
(1)  An industrial user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action except for those circumstances specified in section 37-116(1), (2), and (8) of this article if it can be proven that it did not know or have reason to know that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(2)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the industrial user was in compliance with each directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference, or 
(3)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-191. - Bypass. 
(1)  For the purposes of this section: 
(a)  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
(b)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause applicable pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections (3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Notice of bypass. 
(a)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the POTW at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(b)  A user shall submit oral notice to the city of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the bypass. The POTW may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty four (24) hours. 
(4)  Bypass conditions. 
(a)  Bypass is prohibited, and the POTW may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
i.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
ii.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance enduring normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
iii.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (3) of this section. 
b.  The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the POTW determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (4)a. of this section. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-192. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 14. - CONTROL OF FATS, OIL, GREASE, LINT AND GRIT WASTE 
 
Sec. 37-193. - Interceptor requirements and sizing. 
Refer to Chapter 37 Article VII for requirements and sizing. No discharge from an interceptor shall exceed four hundred (400) mg/l as required in section 37-118 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
DIVISION 15. - INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SURCHARGE 
 
Sec. 37-194. - Industrial cost recovery. 
A permittee discharging industrial wastes with a BOD exceeding two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, or a TSS content of greater than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l, or both, and meeting all other sections of this article, may be accepted for waste water disposal provided that; 
(1)  The wastes will not cause damage to the collection system; 
(2)  The wastes will not impair the treatment process. 
(3)  The discharger of the waste obtains a wastewater discharge permit providing for a surcharge over and beyond the normal sewer base rate. The surcharge for industrial discharge is to be calculated as follows: 
a.  Computation of user charge. The user charges to be determined to each establishment producing industrial waste shall be computed by use of the following formula: 
UC = Q × [X + {(BOD - 250) × (8.337) × Y/1000) + {(SS-250) × (8.337) × Z}/1000] 
Formula values are: 
UC = User charge (in dollars). 
Q = Billable quantity of wastewater in thousand-gallon units. 
X = Current industrial base rate or heavy commercial base rate if industrial rate not established. 
Y = $0.2284. 
Z = $0.4879. 
BOD = Five-day, twenty (20) degrees Centigrade biochemical oxygen demand content of the waste delivered, in mg/l, but not less than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
SS = Suspended solids content of the waste delivered, in mg/l, but not less than two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
b.  When either BOD is equal to or exceeds two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter (mg/l) or suspended solids is equal to or exceeds two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter (mg/l) or both in a delivered waste, the formula provided in subsection (a) shall be used to determine user charges. The amount of the BOD to be used in the formula shall equal the actual amount or two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter (mg/l), whichever is greater. The amount of the suspended solids to be used in the formula shall equal the actual amount or two hundred fifty (250) milligrams per liter (mg/l), whichever is greater. 
c.  When an industry produces both domestic and process waste with one connection to the sewer system the waste so delivered shall be considered as industrial waste with uniform rate; or by user charge computations, in compliance with the above, based on the combined volume, BOD and suspended solids content. 
d.  A permittee may reduce his user charge rate by greater removals in pretreatment or plant operation procedure, but once the pretreatment or plant procedure is established to obtain uniform or lower rate, written consent from the director to increase the delivered strength shall be required, and charges for a higher rate based on tests by the city may be made without other notice to the industry. 
e.  Monthly billing for industrial waste disposal shall be accomplished, using established procedures. 
f.  The Y and Z rate factors established in subsection (a) may be determined and updated by the director periodically. These factors shall as best as practical represent the incremental operation and maintenance cost to treat BOD and TSS above two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-195. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 16. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 37-196. - Pretreatment charges and fees. 
The director of public works may adopt reasonable charges and fees for reimbursement of the city's costs of setting up and operating the pretreatment program, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing an industrial user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by industrial users; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing construction plans and responding to accidental discharges; 
(4)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(5)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements of its pretreatment program. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Sec. 37-197. - Special agreements. 
In the event city has entered any contract authorized by city council between the city and any industrial user which contract contains standards for effluent components or other contract provisions which vary from those contained in this article or as amended, in such case, the more stringent standards or provisions, as determined by city, will prevail. 
(Ord. No. 09-277, § 12-29-09)  
Secs. 37-198, 37-199. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - DROUGHT CONTINGENCY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 37-200. - Plan implementation. 
The City of Pasadena, Texas has implemented the City of Pasadena Water Conservation and Drought Contingency Plan January 2010 through Ordinance No. 2010-028 to define the Service Area Description, Water Conservation Goals, Measurement and Accounting for Water Deliveries, Water Supply Operation Plan, Water Conservation Plan, Implementation and Enforcement of Water Conservation Plan, Emergency Water Demand Management Plan, Emergency Water Demand Management Information Plan and the Implementation and Enforcement of the Emergency Water Demand Management Plan. 
(Ord. No. 10-028, § 1(Exh. B), 2-16-10)  
Sec. 37-201. - Informing the public. 
Radio, television and newspaper announcements will be made giving details of the expected conditions and warning the users of the penalty when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 87-163, § 1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 10-028, § 1(Exh. B), 2-16-10)  
Sec. 37-202. - Initiation and termination procedure. 
Radio, television and newspaper announcements will be made that the condition is in effect as of date and time and detailing the conditions and actions to be taken by the user. The public will be kept informed for the duration of the emergency and when the condition has been downgraded or terminated. 
(Ord. No. 87-163, § 1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 10-028, § 1(Exh. B), 2-16-10)  
Sec. 37-203. - Legal authority and implementation. 
The mayor, upon recommendation from the director of public works, shall determine the condition, upgrade or downgrade the condition, initiate the appropriate actions and terminate the condition when the emergency has ended. The mayor shall have authority to enact any or all of the prescribed procedures, and to adopt and promulgate rules and regulations if necessary to protect health and safety in case of system failure. The police department will be the enforcing agency. 
(Ord. No. 87-163, § 1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 10-028, § 1(Exh. B), 2-16-10)  
See. 37-204. - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to violate any provision or requirement hereof and any person convicted of violating any provision, restriction, requirement, or prohibition of this chapter for which no specific penalty is provided shall be fined in a sum of not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) and not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 87-163, § 1, 9-1-87; Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 10-028, § 1(Exh. B), 2-16-10)  
Secs. 37-205—37-214. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - PROHIBITION OF POLLUTION OF THE MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) 
 
Sec. 37-215. - General provisions. 
(a)  This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the City of Pasadena's municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), and enables the city to comply with all the applicable federal and state laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. et seq.). The objectives of this article are: 
(5)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the MS4 and the waters of the United States through the City's MS4; 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-216. - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C., et seq. 
Best management practices (BMPs ) means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control facility site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage. 
Business facility means a location within the City of Pasadena at which commercial industrial or professional business activities are conducted. 
CWA or the Act means Clean Water Act (formerly referred to as the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972) Pub.L. 92-500, as amended Pub.L. 95-217, Pub.L. 95-576, Pub.L. 96-483 and Pub.L. 97-117, 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. 
Code enforcement official means an employee designated by the mayor to make application for administrative and criminal search warrants under authority of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 18.05, as such warrants may be necessary to enforce any provision of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena or other municipal ordinances duly promulgated. 
Construction and post-construction: The general regulation BMPs for Stormwater management in new and redevelopments are minimum control measures to regulate construction and post-construction runoff. The minimum control measures, in this code, are acceptable and others may be considered on the case-by-case basis. Post-Construction BMPs are addressed in section 9-194.1 general regulations for construction and post-construction and section 9-194.3 maintenance for construction and post-construction. 
Director means the public works director. 
Discharge means to blow, conduct, deposit, drain, dump, emit, empty, enter, leak, place, pour pump, release, run, seep, spill, throw or cause or allow a substance or material to be blown, conducted, deposited, drained, dumped, emptied, emitted, entered, leaked, placed, poured, pumped, released, run, seeped, spilled or thrown into the MS4, including placement of a substance or material at a location where it will be blown or washed by a flow of water or another fluid into the MS4. 
Hydrocarbon means any chemical substance consisting in whole or in part of a combination of hydrogen chemically bonded to carbon and particularly those hydrocarbons, but not exclusively, produced from mining, drilling, distillation, or refining and generally known as fuels, oils, and lubricants used to propel and lubricate vehicles and commonly known as gas, oil, and grease, excluding, however, those hydrocarbon substances in use as paving material and painting. 
Health director means the director of health of the City of Pasadena, Texas or a person designated by the health director. 
Illicit connection means any man-made conveyance connecting an illicit discharge directly to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
Illicit discharge is defined at 40 CPR 122.25 (b) (2). 
MS4 is an acronym for "municipal separate storm sewer system" and is used to refer to either a large or medium municipal separate storm sewer system. 
Mayor means the mayor of the City of Pasadena, Texas or a person designated by the mayor. 
Municipal separate storm system (MS4) means a system of conveyance (including storm drains, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, impoundments, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, storm sewer manholes, pumping or treatment facilities, private drains and any other drainage devises) designed or used for collecting and conveying storm water and surface water drainage to the bays and natural tributaries, which is not part of a publicly-owned treatment works (POTW), as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, that is owned or operated by the City of Pasadena or a utility organized by the city. The MS4 includes any other publicly or privately owned structures or improvements that drain into or connect with the system owned or operated by the city that is located within the incorporated limits of the City of Pasadena or within five thousand (5,000) feet of the city limits, unless it is under the jurisdiction and control of any state agency that regulates water quality or water pollution. 
Permittee refers to any "person", as defined at 40 CFR 122.2, authorized by this NPDES permit to discharge to waters of the United States. 
Point source means any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, wall, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural storm water runoff. 
SWMP is an acronym for "storm water management program". 
Storm sewer, unless otherwise indicated, refers to a municipal separate storm sewer. 
Storm water means any flow occurring during, following or resulting from any form of natural precipitation, including snowbelt. 
Storm water discharge associated with industrial activity is defined at 40 CFR 122.26 (b) (14). 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99; Ord. No. 12-156, § 5, 10-16-12)  
Sec. 37-217. - Prohibited discharges into the MS4. 
It is unlawful and no person may intentionally knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence to commit or allow an of the following acts: 
(a)  Blow, sweep, throw or deposit or store in a manner which would allow to wash or flow into the municipal storm sewer system any straw, hay, grass, grass clippings, trees, limbs, trimmings, weeds, branches, leaf litter, dirt and other fill material, construction material, demolition material, garbage, debris or any other substance. It shall be defense to prosecution that these wastes occurred naturally or from normal landscape maintenance (e.g., leaves falling from trees, grass clippings left on lawns); 
(b)  An illicit discharge (e.g. a discharge of other than storm water), including artesian well water, cooling water (including contact and non-contact cooling water and treated and untreated cooling water), ground water, subsurface drainage, industrial wastewater, water from a well; 
(c)  An illegal discharge (e.g., a discharge of any substance that is prohibited from being discharged into the water of the United States or the State of Texas, or a tributary to those waters, by any federal or state law); 
(d)  A direct discharge of a pesticide or fertilizer; 
(e)  A pollutant or wastewater, other than storm water or a discharge that is not classified as an illicit discharge in subsections (b) and (c) (1) of this section, that is prohibited from being discharged into the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) by section 37-11 through 37-15 (a) of this chapter; 
(f)  To dispose of hydrocarbons or absorbent material by washing or otherwise allowing them to enter the public streets, bayous, drainage channels, or storm sewers of the City of Pasadena. 
(g)  To prevent entry into the public streets, bayous, drainage channels, and storm sewers of the city all hydrocarbon spills or accumulation shall be removed with absorbent materials. The absorbent material and the absorbed hydrocarbon shall be disposed of properly in trash containers or dumpsters in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas or other proper method of disposal as provided by any regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof. 
(h)  Solid wastes, including animal wastes (including an animal carcass, animal parts or scrap, excrement, grease of animal origin, offal, paunch manure and urine), ashes or clinkers, construction/demolition materials, dirt or other fill materials, debris, asphalt, floatables, garbage, heavy brush, heavy trash, automobiles, packing materials, crates, shopping carts, car parts, household appliances, household hazardous waste from chemicals or other substances utilized for residential or housekeeping purposes, including, but not limited to, bleaches, drain cleaners, paint, paint thinners, and solvents), industrial or commercial wastes, medical wastes refuse sewage, used motor vehicle fluids, (including motor oils, anti-freeze, brake fluids, transmission fluids, and other lubricants that have been drained from or any excess materials remaining after servicing a vehicle or piece of equipment including any absorbent material), yard waste (including grass clippings, weeds, leaves, mulch, trees, and shrub limbs, trimmings, or other plant material); 
(i)  Over spray and amounts of runoff from irrigation of vegetation that pools in a gutter or on a road surface, or flows in a steady stream into any manhole or catch basin, is considered an illicit discharge into the municipal separate storm sewage system; 
(j)  It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution for a violation of this section that the discharge was: 
(1)  Swimming pool water shall not be prohibited discharge, provided that the discharge has been tested using a method approved by the director to assure that it will not contain a harmful level of chlorine or other pollutants when it reaches streams, lakes or bays. 
(2)  The following discharges may be put into the municipal separate storm sewer system a discharge under a valid national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit when properly implemented, a discharge resulting from fire fighting activities, a discharge resulting from washing an automobile at a residence or at a charitable car wash maximum of two (2) per year per location each day counting as a separate occurrence, a discharge of potable water, a discharge of any surface waters (including water from diverted stream flows, uncontaminated rising ground water, water from foundation drains, crawl space pumps and footing drains, water from springs, and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands), a discharge resulting from flushing a water supply line when approved by the director, a discharge of street wash water, a nonpoint source discharge from agricultural activities (including return flows from irrigated agriculture); or condensate from cooling systems. 
(3)  An illicit discharge is considered uncontaminated if in the opinion of the director the quality of the water is equal to or better than the quality of the first natural body of water into which a portion of the municipal separate storm sewage system flows (receiving waters), including the Armand Bayou, Vince Bayou, Little Vince Bayou, Boggy Bayou, Horsepen Bayou, Lake Pasadena, Clear Lake, Cotton Patch Bayou, Houston Ship Channel and Galveston Bay. The results of the last water quality test of the receiving waters published by the director of public works with the city secretary will constitute prima facie evidence of the quality of the receiving waters. 
(4)  Nothing in this article prevents the placement of solid wastes scheduled for pickup at a location designated by the sanitation superintendent. 
(5)  Runoff from any effort to remove graffiti from buildings or other structures is not considered an illicit discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system. 
(6)  Nothing in this section prohibits any activities relating to the construction, maintenance, or operation of the municipal separate storm sewage system. 
(7)  Notwithstanding subsection (c) of this section, a person may discharge any substance or material specified, if at the time of discharge, the discharge of the substance or material was authorized by a valid permit from the Texas Natural Resource Commission or United States Environmental Protection Agency and the discharge was in compliance with all requirements contained in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-218. - Removal of improper discharge from and repair of damage to MS4. 
(a)  Any person who discharges any substance or article into the MS4 in violation of section 37-217 of this article shall promptly remove the substance or article from the MS4, take all measures necessary to reduce or eliminate any harmful effects for any substance or article that cannot be removed, repair any damage caused to the MS4 by the substance or article, and compensate the city for any additional expenses it was caused to incur as a result of the illegal or illicit discharge. 
(b)  If any person who discharged the substance or article into the MS4 fails to remove the substance or article within ten (10) days after receiving notice as provided in Section 342.006 (b) of the Texas Health and Safety Code, the mayor may have the substance or article removed from the MS4 and any damages to the MS4 repaired at the expense of the person who discharged the substance or article. 
(c)  The mayor may remove any substance or article from the MS4 without notice to the person who discharged the substance or article into the MS4, when directed to do so by the federal or state on-scene coordinator, under the Act; the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended; the Oil Spill Prevention and Response Act; or Texas Oil Land Hazardous Substances Sill Prevention and Control Act. The person who discharged the substance or article is liable for all costs incurred by the city as a result of the discharge. 
(d)  A person is presumed to have discharged a substance or thing into the MS4 if the substance or article contains any writing or other marking indicating that the person is the owner of the thing or has had possession of the thing. However, a person who manufactured or offered the item for sale to the public, which is marked with a trade name, is not presumed to have discharged the item if found in the MS4. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the director may temporarily disconnect any connection with the MS4, in order to prevent the continuing discharge of oil, a hazardous substance, sewage, or any other substance that poses an imminent health or safety threat to the community into the MS4. The person who discharged the substance is liable for all costs incurred by the city under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-219. - Prohibited connections with MS4. 
(a)  It is unlawful and no person may construct, maintain, or use, or cause or allow to be constructed, maintained or used, any drain from private property into a public street or any drain that connects with the MS4, unless the person has applied for a building or plumbing permit for the connection and obtained a permit from the building official with approval from the director. 
(b)  Any person in apparent control of any property in the city, who is maintaining any connection, or causing or allowing any connection to be maintained that does not conform with the provisions of this section or any other applicable provision of the city's Code of Ordinances shall be deemed to be maintaining a prohibited connection and such shall be deemed a prima facie violation of this chapter and, upon notice in writing from the Director, must remove the drain or obtain the required permits and make any modifications necessary for the drain to conform to the requirements of this section and any other applicable provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances. 
(c)  Upon receipt of written notice, the person in apparent control of any property in the city has five (5) working days to request a timely meeting with the director. The purpose of the meeting will be to establish a schedule, setting out when the drain will be removed or made to conform with the provisions of this section. In no event may the schedule allow for a time period greater than six (6) months to remove the drain or bring the drain into conformance with this section. 
(d)  The director is authorized to execute schedules in writing. 
(e)  A violation of the schedule constitutes a violation of this article, and each day beyond the scheduled time of removal or repair constitutes an separate violation of this article. 
(f)  For purposes of this article, any person in whose name a water meter connection is registered for servicing the private property, is presumed to be the person in apparent control of the property. Proof that the property in question has a water meter connection registered in the name of the defendant named in a criminal complaint filed under this article constitutes prima facie evidence to support the presumption that the person in whose name such water connection is registered is the person who permitted or allowed a prohibited connection under this section. 
(g)  In the event a person in apparent control of any property in the city, upon receipt of the notice requirement set out in section 37-216(b), fails to remove the drain or make the drain conform in every respect to the requirements of this section and any other applicable provisions of the city's Code of Ordinances, and in addition to any other remedies set out in this article, the city may disconnect the prohibited connection from the MS4 and charge the costs of the disconnection to the person in apparent control of the property from which the prohibited connection originates. 
(h)  In the event the prohibited connection is deemed a health problem by the Texas Health Director, under section 432.007 of the Health and Safety Code, the city may attach a lien on the property from which the prohibited connection originates. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-220. - Annual report, NPDES compliance monitoring, inspection, and sampling. 
(a)  The holder of a NPDES permit shall annually report its federal compliance status to the director of public works on forms provided by the city. 
(1)  it shall be the duty of every holder of a NPDES permit to notify the city of the existence of such permit by providing the director of public works a copy of the permit upon receipt by the permittee. 
(2)  Holders of either federal NPDES permits or state NPDES permits, and persons who facilities connect to the MS4 under written authority of the city, shall report to the director of public works any spill, release, or event for which the holder was required to notify the National Response Center (NRC), TNRCC, or Texas General Land Office (TGLO) within reasonable time of the report to the NRC, TNRCC, or TGLO. 
(3)  The director of public works has the authority to demand to see any NPDES permits held by the owner or operator of a business facility. The director of public works may enter a business facility to investigate and make determination whether such business facility is subject to NPDES permitting requirements. 
(4)  It is unlawful and a violation of this article if a business facility required to have a NPDES permit operates without a NPDES permit. 
(b)  The director of public works or persons designated by the mayor may enter any business facility during hours in which the business facility is open for business or is operating or is discharging into the MS4 to ascertain whether there is a violation of this article. The owner or operator of a business facility must allow the director of public works or persons designated by the mayor ready access to all parts of the business facility for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a business facility has security measures in force that require proper identification and clearance before entry into the business facility, the owner or operator shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city, state and federal agencies are permitted to enter without delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. 
(2)  City, state and federal agencies have the right to set on the business facility any device necessary to sample and/or meter any discharge or to detect any illegal or illicit discharge into the MS4. 
(3)  The director of public works may require the owner or operator of a business facility to install monitoring equipment, as necessary. The business facility's sampling and monitoring equipment must be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator of the business facility at the owner's or operator's expense. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to a business facility to be inspected and/or sampled must be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or verbal request of the mayor and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the owner or occupant. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing city personnel access to residence or business facility is a violation of this article. 
(6)  Hours of operation of the business facility and times during which the facility is discharging into the MS4 are deemed reasonable hours for entry of city, state or federal inspectors for the purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-221. - Other enforcement actions authorized. 
(a)  Upon the written certification by the mayor or the director of a violation of any section of this article, the city attorney is authorized to petition any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to enjoin the continued violations. This remedy is cumulative of all other enforcement powers granted to the city by the terms of its charter, any ordinance or by the laws of the state. 
(b)  In the event the responsibility and maintenance of the MS4 is transferred from the City of Pasadena to another public utility, such utility, upon approval of its board, is also authorized to petition any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction to enjoin the violation of this article upon the written certification of the violation of a provision by an authorized representative of the governing body of such utility. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-222. - Collection of expenses; liens, suit. 
The mayor shall file statements of expenses incurred under sections 37-210, 37-211, 37-216 and 37-217, giving the amount of such expenses, the date on which such work was done and a description of the property upon which such work was done or improvements made with the county clerk of the county. The city has a privileged lien on such lot or real estates upon which such work was done or improvements made to secure the expenditures so made, under section 342.007 of the Texas Health and Safety Code, which lien is second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements, and such amount bears ten (10) per cent interest from the date the statement was filed. For any such expenditures and interest, suit may be instituted and recovery and foreclosure of such lien may be had in the name of the city, and the statement of expenses so made, or a certified copy of the statement, is prima facie proof of the amount expended for such work or improvements. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-223. - Special warrants. 
Under Article 18.05, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, if the director has been refused access to a building facility or residence, or any part thereof, and if such official can demonstrate (1) probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this ordinance and (2) that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this ordinance, or any permit or order issued under this ordinance, to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then upon application by the city attorney, through an enforcement official, the municipal court judge of the city shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on the property described. Such warrant shall be served at reasonable hours by the code enforcement official in the company of a uniformed police officer of the city. Hours during business operation or during permittee's discharge to the MS4, if there be a permit, shall be presumed reasonable hours of access. In the case of a suspected unpermitted discharge, or discharge from a domestic source, the municipal court judge shall make determination of reasonable hours for entry. In the event of any emergency affecting public health and safety, inspections shall be made without the issuance of a warrant. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-224. - Conflicts with other laws. 
Nothing in this article is intended nor shall any part or portion hereof be construed so as to conflict with any applicable provisions of the Texas Health and Safety Code, or Texas Water Code. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Sec. 37-225. - Penalties. 
(a)  A violation of any provision of this chapter is a class C misdemeanor. A conviction is punishable by a fine as provided in section 37-205 of this Code. Each day a violation continues constitutes a separate offense. Each violation of a separate provision in this article constitutes a separate offense. A culpable mental state is not required to prove an offense under this ordinance. 
(b)  If the person violating any of the provisions of this article is a corporation, the president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer of the corporation or any manager, agent or employee of the corporation responsible for the management of the property where the violation occurred is severally liable for any penalty. 
(c)  Failure to appear in response to a citation issued for violation of this chapter is a separate violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 99-204, § 2, 11-2-99)  
Secs. 37-226—37-240. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - LIQUID WASTE GENERATORS AND TRANSPORTERS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 37-241. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Company shall mean anyone owning or operating one (1) or more liquid waste transporter vehicles. 
Disposal site shall mean a permitted site or part of a site at which grease interceptor waste, grit interceptor waste is processed, treated and/or intentionally placed into or on any land in a manner compliant with all applicable federal, state and local regulations, and at which site said waste will remain after closure. 
Disposer shall mean a person who receives, stores, retains, processes or disposes of liquid waste. 
Fats, oils, and grease (FOG) shall mean the organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CRF 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or greases." 
Generator shall mean any person who owns or operates a grease trap or grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste. The generator is responsible for assuring that the produced waste is disposed of in accordance with federal, state and local disposal regulations. 
Grease trap shall mean a device designed to use differences in gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. 
Grease trap waste shall mean material collected in and from a grease trap in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes. 
Incompatible wastes shall mean wastes which have different processing, storage or disposal requirements. 
Liquid waste transporter shall mean a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport grit trap waste and grease trap waste. 
Manifest/trip ticket shall mean the written, multi-part documentation required to be in the possession of the transporter enabling disposal of hauled grit trap waste or grease trap waste at a permitted or registered disposal site. 
Permit shall mean a valid Liquid Waste Transporter Permit issued by the City of Pasadena Health Department. 
POTW or publicly owned treatment works shall mean a treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502 (4) of the Clean Water Act. This definition includes a devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW Treatment Plant. The term also means the municipality as defined in section 502 (4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works. For purposes of this ordinance, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably. 
Regulatory authority shall mean the director of the City of Pasadena Health Department or their duly authorized representative. 
TCEQ shall mean the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
DIVISION 2. - TRANSPORTERS 
 
Sec. 37-242. - Accumulation of liquid waste prohibited. 
A person commits an offense if he allows liquid waste to accumulate upon property under his control that emits noxious or offensive odors, is unsanitary, injurious to the public health or is deleterious to the environment. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-243. - Restricted disposal of liquid waste. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if they unload or offer for sale or exchange liquid waste, except at a place approved by the city and permitted by the state or federal government. 
(b)  A person commits an offense if they deposit or discharge liquid waste onto a street or into a storm or sanitary sewer or an area that drains into a storm system. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-244. - Tampering with monitoring device. 
No person may falsify, tamper with or knowingly render inaccurate any monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-245. - Permit required; application. 
(a)  A person commits an offense if they operate or cause to be operated a vehicle for the purpose of transporting liquid waste without an applicable permit. A permit shall be issued for transportation of liquid waste. A separate vehicle permit number shall be issued for each vehicle operated. Excluded from this division are vehicles which operate within the city solely for the purpose of transporting liquid waste through the city and where no liquid waste is received, unloaded, stored or parked within the city and vehicles owned or operated by the city or vehicles operated for the city with the permission of the regulatory authority. 
(b)  A person who desires to obtain a permit must make application by legibly completing a form provided by the regulatory authority. 
(c)  Each driver shall submit to the regulatory authority at the time of application a photocopy of his or her driver's license. 
(d)  The regulatory authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits for an inspection by the regulatory authority the vehicle the applicant proposes to use to transport liquid waste and the vehicle is found by the regulatory authority to be constructed and equipped in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(e)  The regulatory authority shall not issue a permit unless the applicant submits proof of current registration with TCEQ. 
(f)  Each applicant must specify in writing with application of the disposal site to be used for the authorized disposal of liquid waste. The approving authority shall be immediately notified of additional disposal sites used during the permit period. 
(g)  A permit issued by the city excludes the hauling of incompatible waste, hazardous waste material and prohibits the commingling of hazardous waste and non-hazardous waste. 
(h)  Waste materials to be recycled for other commercial uses such as but not limited to waste motor oil and waste cooking oil, are not required to be manifested or permitted under this chapter, but shall be stored collected and transported in and through the city in conditions that are sanitary, free from odors and which will not adversely affect the environment. 
(i)  Prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must provide to the City of Pasadena Health Department, evidence of a policy of automobile liability insurance and thereafter keep same in full force and effect with an insurance company authorized to do business in the state. The policy shall insure the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person property from the operation of a defective vehicle or negligence of the owner or any person of such policy shall provide a minimum amount of coverage in the policy as to each and every transporter vehicle to be not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death of any one person, for bodily injury or death in any one accident, for the damage to, or destruction of, property in any one accident. Coverage is to include the pollution liability endorsement with limits not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). Such coverage shall be endorsed to cover the upset, overturn, and remediation of the load in transport. The certificate of insurance required by this subsection shall contain a provision requiring that the City of Pasadena Health Department be provided with thirty (30) days advance notice, in writing, of cancellation or material change in the policy. In the event of cancellation or material change in the transporter's policy, the permit shall be suspended until such time as the transporter can again secure appropriate coverage. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-246. - Fee; display of permit. 
(a)  A permit shall not be issued until the appropriate established fee is paid. The fee for a permit required by this division shall be a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per company and one-hundred dollars ($100.00) per transport vehicle. Such fee shall be paid prior to issuance of the initial permit and upon renewal of such license each year thereafter. A transporter operating in the city without a valid permit shall be required to pay the full annual fee. The permit shall expire on the fifteenth day of July and must be renewed annually. 
(b)  Renewal applications received after the expiration date shall be charged an additional twenty-five dollar ($25.00) late fee. Permits are not transferable and the permit fee is not refundable. 
(c)  Each permit holder shall cause to be displayed in the lower right corner of the front windshield a current permit sticker. 
(d)  Each permit holder shall have the following information on both sides of the vehicle in a color contrasting with the background, in three inch high letters or larger: company name, TCEQ (Texas Commission on Environmental Quality) registration number, telephone number and tank capacity in gallons. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-247. - Liquid waste transporter vehicle; inspection and maintenance. 
(a)  A liquid waste transporter vehicle shall be inspected by the regulatory authority prior to the issuance of a vehicle permit with qualifications as follows: 
(1)  Tank shall be at fifty (50) per cent capacity upon inspection and have a functional volume measuring or an indicating device accessible during inspection of vehicle; 
(2)  Use a vehicle with a single tank capacity of not less than five hundred (500) gallons. The tank shall be an integral portion of the liquid waste transport vehicle; portable tanks or other containers temporarily installed in vehicles are prohibited; 
(3)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be permanently attached to the tank and/or vehicle; 
(4)  Tank shall be liquid tight; 
(5)  Tank shall be constructed so that every interior and exterior portion can be easily cleaned; 
(6)  Piping, valves and connectors shall be accessible and easy to clean; 
(7)  Inlet or opening of tank shall be constructed so that collected waste will not spill during filling, transfer or transport; 
(8)  Outlet connections shall be constructed so that no liquid waste will leak, run or spill out from the vehicle; 
(9)  Outlets shall be of a design and type suitable for the liquid waste handled and capable of controlling flow or discharge without spillage or undue spray on or flooding of immediate surroundings while in use; 
(10)  Pumps, valves, cylinders, diaphragms and other appurtenances shall be of a design and type suitable for the type of waste handled, capable of operation without spillage, spray or leakage and capable of being easily disassembled for cleaning. 
(b)  A liquid waste transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain hoses, tanks, valves, pumps, cylinders, diaphragms, pipes, connections and other appurtenances on a vehicle in good repair and free from leaks; 
(2)  Provide a safety plug or cap for each valve of a tank; and 
(3)  Cause a vehicle exterior to be clean and odor free at the beginning of each work day. 
(c)  The regulatory authority may cause to be impounded a vehicle which is being operated in violation of this chapter, and to authorize the holding of the vehicle until the violation(s) is corrected. The regulatory authority may also revoke the permit for an improperly operated vehicle. If a vehicle is impounded or a permit is revoked, an appeal may be filed by the transporter pursuant to the appeals section of this article. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-248. - Responsibilities of liquid waste transporters. 
(a)  Before accepting a load of liquid waste for transportation, a liquid waste transporter shall determine the nature of the material to be transported and that his equipment is sufficient to properly handle the job without spillage, leaks of release of toxic or harmful gases, fumes, liquids or other substances. Upon delivery of the waste to the disposer, the transporter shall inform the disposer of the nature of the waste. 
(b)  Hazardous waste or hazardous waste in conjunction with non-hazardous waste shall not be transported in any vehicle permitted by this chapter. 
(c)  A transporter holding a city permit must use a disposal site permitted by the state or federal government for disposal of non-hazardous liquid waste. 
(d)  At no time shall a transporter commingle incompatible wastes in any transport vehicle. 
(e)  A manifest system, consisting of a five part trip ticket is used to document the generation, transportation and disposal of all applicable liquid waste generated in the city and shall be used as follows: 
(1)  City of Pasadena trip ticket books will be used exclusively for individual vehicles. One trip ticket book shall be issued annually to each permitted vehicle upon inspection and approval by the regulatory authority. In the event additional trip ticket books are needed during a current permit year, books shall be purchased from the City of Pasadena Health Department. 
(2)  A transporter will legibly complete one trip ticket for each location serviced. 
(3)  The original top copy of a trip ticket shall be legibly signed by the transporter and the generator at the time of waste collection and the second copy maintained by the generator. 
(4)  The original top copy of a trip ticket shall be legibly signed by the disposer at the time of disposal and the third copy maintained by the disposer. 
(5)  The fourth copy of a trip ticket shall be maintained by the transporter. 
(6)  The fifth copy of the completed trip ticket shall be delivered to the generator. 
(7)  The original top copy of the trip ticket shall be delivered, at least monthly, by the transporter to the regulatory authority. 
(8)  All voided trip tickets must be returned within one month of voiding to the City of Pasadena Health Department and missing tickets shall be explained in writing. 
(9)  A legible copy of all trip tickets shall be maintained for a period of three (3) years and shall be made available to the regulatory authority or their representative for inspections during normal business hours. 
(f)  A transporter or any person servicing a grease trap shall remove the entire contents of the collection device. Skimming the surface layer of waste material, partial cleaning of the trap or use of any method which does not remove the entire contents of the trap is prohibited. 
(g)  A transporter shall: 
(1)  Maintain sanitary conditions in area where picking up liquid waste and assure that area is free of litter and odor free; 
(2)  Report spills of liquid waste to the regulatory authority immediately; and 
(3)  Clean up all spills and abate unsanitary conditions immediately, and have all materials used to mitigate the spill disposed of by approved means. 
(h)  For compliance and tracking purposes, a transporter shall, upon submission, provide to the regulatory authority: 
(1)  Past or current routes or schedules of a vehicle's full daily operation; 
(2)  Notice, prior to operation in the city, of the time and location of the vehicle's operation; and 
(3)  A grab sample of transported waste. The sample shall be analyzed at an accredited lab and required sampling shall be at the expense of the operator. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-249. - Denial, suspension and revocation of permit. 
(a)  The regulatory authority may deny a permit if it is determined that an applicant for a liquid waste transporter's permit is not qualified under any section of this chapter and may suspend or revoke a permit if it is determined that a permitee: 
(1)  Is not qualified under any section of this chapter; 
(2)  Has violated or failed to comply with a provision of this chapter; or 
(3)  Has failed to maintain a vehicle in safe working order as evidenced by conviction or statutory violations. 
(b)  The regulatory authority may revoke for a period of one year or less all permits held by a liquid waste transporter, if the transporter or an employee of the transporter violates any provisions of this chapter, any rule or regulation promulgated by the regulatory authority, or applicable provisions of the City Code or state law. 
(c)  A permitee whose permit is suspended or revoked shall not collect, transport or dispose of any waste material within the city limits of the City of Pasadena. 
(d)  After suspension under this section, a permitee may file a request for reinstatement of the permit. When the regulatory authority determines that the permitee is again qualified, all violations have been corrected, precautions have been taken to prevent future violations, and all required fees have been paid, the permit may be reinstated. 
(e)  After denial of a permit application, suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permit holder shall not be entitled to any refund of fees. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-250. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the article is a class "C" misdemeanor and will result in a fine, upon conviction, of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2000.00). Each day a violation under this chapter exists will be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-251. - Appeal. 
If the regulatory authority denies the issuance of or revokes a permit, the department shall send to the applicant, or permit holder, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of his/her action and the right to an appeal. The applicant, or permit holder, may appeal the decision of the regulatory authority to the city council. Any appeal must be filed with the regulatory authority, in writing, within ten days of notice of the action taken. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
DIVISION 3. - GENERATORS 
 
Sec. 37-252. - Operations. 
(a)  Facilities generating fats, oils, or greases as a result of food manufacturing, processing, preparation, or food service shall install, use, and maintain appropriate grease traps or interceptors as required in section 37-253 of this chapter. These facilities include but are not limited to restaurants, food manufacturers, food processors, hospitals, hotels and motels, nursing homes, and any other facility preparing, serving, or otherwise making any foodstuff available for consumption. 
(b)  No user may intentionally or unintentionally allow the direct or indirect discharge of any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, mineral oil, or any fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin into the POTW system in such amounts as to cause interference with the collection and treatment system, or as to cause pollutants to pass through the treatment works into the environment. 
(c)  All operations, maintenance and installations must comply with City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances, Chapter 29, Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-253. - Responsibilities of liquid waste generators. 
(a)  Grease traps shall be constructed to prevent fats, oils or greases from entering the sanitary sewer. The standards for allowable legal limits shall be as they now exist or as they may from time to time be altered, in the City of Pasadena Code of Ordinances Chapter 37, Article V. Grease traps shall be located so that they are easily accessible for cleaning, maintenance, and inspection. The size and installation of grease traps shall comply with the requirements of the City of Pasadena Plumbing Code. 
(b)  A generator shall install a sample port on the discharge side of the grease trap to allow for sampling of the grease trap effluent. 
(c)  The sampling port and grease trap shall be accessible to the regulatory authority by the owner/operator. Each generator is subject to random sampling and grease trap inspection. Generators will be subject to fines and penalties if samples and/or inspections exceed allowable limits. 
(d)  A generator may be required to provide samples of the grease trap at random intervals as determined by the regulatory authority. Samples shall be analyzed at an accredited lab and all samples required will be at the expense of the facility being sampled. Records shall be made available to the regulatory authority for inspections during normal business hours. 
(e)  A generator will have grease trap cleaned and serviced as frequently as necessary to prevent bypass or overflow and to insure proper operation of the trap. Such generators, at a minimum, shall have the grease trap serviced once every ninety (90) days. 
(f)  No generator shall allow a transporter to remove waste from a site under the person's control unless the transporter's vehicle displays current and valid registration decals. 
(g)  A generator shall supervise the servicing of their grease or grit traps and shall ensure they are completely emptied by the transporter during such servicing. The transporter shall not return any material to the grease or grit trap once the trap has been cleaned. 
(h)  A generator shall cleanup or cause to be cleaned up all spills of liquid or solid waste and shall have the waste properly disposed of by the transporter. 
(i)  A manifest shall be generated every time the grease or grit trap is pumped or cleaned. The generator shall sign a copy of the manifest as well as the liquid waste transporter. It shall be the responsibility of the generator to insure they receive a copy of the manifest from the liquid waste transporter after the grease or grit trap has been cleaned and that they receive a final copy of the manifest after the waste has been disposed of at the final disposal site and the disposal facility has signed the manifest. The generator shall post the most recent manifest/trip ticket next to the food establishment permit. 
(j)  It shall be unlawful for any establishment to install and/or operate a grease trap within the city limits of the City of Pasadena without first obtaining a permit for installation from the approving authority. 
(k)  Grease trap self-cleaning generators must receive approval from the regulatory authority annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s) located inside a building, provided: 
(1)  The grease trap is no more than fifty (50) gallons in liquid/operating capacity. 
(2)  Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash). 
(3)  The local solid waste authority allows such practices. 
(4)  Grease trap waste is placed in a leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out. 
(5)  Detailed records on these activities are maintained. 
(l)  Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the regulatory authority for approval. The written request shall include the following information: 
(1)  Business name and street address. 
(2)  Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone number. 
(3)  Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor. 
(4)  Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Sec. 37-254. - Penalties. 
Any violation of the chapter is a class "C" misdemeanor and will result in a fine, upon conviction, of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day a violation under this chapter exists will be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 07-46, § 1, 2-27-07)  
Chapter 38 - WATERWAYS AND WATERCRAFTS 
 
Sec. 38-1. - Definitions. 
Definitions used in establishing water safety rules and regulations shall be in accordance with the accepted meaning as used in context with the pertinent subject or as further defined in other ordinances passed by city council. For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
Boat means any vessel or watercraft, other than a seaplane on water, used or capable of being used for recreation or transportation on water. 
Motorboat means any boat propelled or designed to be propelled by a motor, the same being defined as a self-contained internal combustion propulsion system, excluding fuel supply whether or not permanently or temporarily affixed. 
Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a motorboat or a boat on water. 
Owner means the person who rightfully claims lawful possession of a boat by virtue of legal title or an equitable interest. 
Person means individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or other entity. 
Personal watercraft means a specific category of motorboat, less than ten (10) feet in length, designed to be operated by a person or persons kneeling, sitting, standing on or straddling the boat or vessel rather than in the conventional manner of sitting or standing inside the vessel. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 38-2. - Applicability. 
These rules and regulations shall be applicable to, and enforceable on, all public waters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 38-3. - Restrictions on boating operations on public waters. 
(a)  Armand Bayou (also previously known as Middle Bayou) from its confluence with Lake Pasadena (also previously known as Mud Lake and/or Forest Lake), and its tributaries within the city, including but not limited to Horsepen Bayou, Big Island Slough, and Spring Gully: 
(1)  These water courses shall be designated as no-wake and safety zones. 
(2)  The use and operation of any category of motorboat, including any personal watercraft on these waterways, shall be expressly prohibited. 
(3)  Only boats being propelled by an electrical trawling motor or such category of boats or vessels as canoes, kayaks, and rowboats shall be permitted on these water courses. 
(4)  However, all governmental agencies and Armand Bayou Nature Center staff that are directly involved in the maintenance, rehabilitation of habitat, preservation of wildlife and the law enforcement of the aforementioned environmental tasks will be allowed to use motorboats (propelled by internal combustion engines), but shall do so with the utmost care and responsibility using well-maintained and monitored motors. Every effort shall be made to minimize any introduction of petrochemicals or other harmful substances into the waterway. 
(5)  Swimming and paddle boards are prohibited at any location designated by signage. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91; Ord. No. 97-220, § 1, 12-2-97; Ord. No. 15-163, § 1, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 38-4. - Speed. 
(a)  No person may operate any boat or motorboat on the public waters of the city at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the conditions and hazards, actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic, or greater than will permit him, in the exercise of reasonable care, to bring the boat to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead. 
(b)  No person shall operate a motorboat on the public waters of the city at a speed greater than five (5) miles per hour. City waters are designated a "Slow, No Wake Zone." 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91; Ord. No. 15-163, § 2, 12-1-15)  
Sec. 38-5. - Alcoholic beverages and controlled substances. 
No person shall sell, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or any controlled substances on public waters within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 38-6. - Rules concerning special events. 
The city council may authorize the holding of regattas, boat races, tournaments and exhibitions. Whenever a regatta, boat race, tournament or exhibition is proposed to be held, the person in charge shall, at least thirty (30) days prior to such event, file a written application with the city secretary for permission to hold such a regatta, boat race, tournament or exhibition. The application shall set forth the date, time, and location where it proposes to hold the regatta, boat race, tournament or exhibition, and it shall not be conducted without the explicit authorization of the city council. The city may recover actual expenses incurred in connection with special events, such as administrative fees, personnel costs, and services rendered. A deposit may be required with the application or the city may invoice the applicant for expenses incurred by city. Nothing in these rules and regulations shall be construed to apply to the operator of a boat or vessel, motorboat, or any type of personal watercraft when competing in a race, regatta, tournament or exhibition duly authorized by city council. Compliance with this section does not exempt persons from operating in compliance with United States Coast Guard Rules and Regulations. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 38-7. - Rules of the road. 
The United States Coast Guard Inland Rules apply to all public water of the corporate limits of the city to the extent they are applicable. 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
Sec. 38-8. - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates the rules and regulations created and established herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 91-205, § 1, 10-29-91)  
APPENDIX A - BASIC SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 67-1966 
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE PROVISIONS OF CHAPTER 231, ACTS OF THE 40TH LEGISLATURE REGULAR SESSION, 1927 AS HERETOFORE OR HEREAFTER AMENDED (COMPILED AS ARTICLE 974a V.T.C.S.) AND THE PROVISIONS OF SECTION 4 OF THE MUNICIPAL ANNEXATION ACT AS HERETOFORE OR HEREINAFTER AMENDED (COMPILED AS ARTICLE 970a V.T.C.S.) DECLARING THE POLICY AND THE RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING THE PLATTING AND SUBDIVISION OF LAND IN AND ADJACENT TO THE CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 67-1966 is set out herein as adopted on July 5, 1967. The original arrangement, including article and section numbers and headings, has been retained. Amendments have been worked into their proper places and are indicated by history notes appearing at the end of the amended section or subsection. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is derived, unamended, from Ordinance No. 67-1966. 
Cross reference— Townhouse subdivisions, App. B; buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; enforcement of deed restrictions, § 9-1; fence or wall for multi-family dwelling or apartment house abutting or adjacent to residential subdivision, § 9-4; compliance with setback requirements of recorded subdivision plats, § 9-77; planning, Ch. 28; subdivision plat subcommission of planning and zoning commission, § 28-43; electrical code, Ch. 12; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 13; heating, air conditioning and mechanical refrigeration code, Ch. 16; mobile homes and mobile home parks, Ch. 21; plumbing, Ch. 29; signs, Ch. 31; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; water, sewers and sewage disposal, Ch. 37; extension of water and sewer mains for subdivisions, § 37-56 et seq. 
State Law reference— Subdivisions generally, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 974a; extraterritorial jurisdiction for subdivision purposes, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 970a, § 4. 
 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Section 1. - Short Title. 
This Ordinance shall be known as the Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Pasadena, Texas.  
Section 2. - Adoption of Legislative Grant of Power. 
The Subdivision Ordinance of the City of Pasadena, Texas is adopted under the authority of the constitution and laws of the State of Texas, including particularly Chapter 231, Acts of the 40th Legislature Regular Session, 1927, as heretofore or hereafter amended and compiled as Article 974a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes and the provisions of Section 4 of the Municipal Annexation Act as heretofore or hereafter amended and compiled as Article 970a, Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes. This Ordinance is adopted pursuant to the provisions of the Charter of the City of Pasadena, Texas.  
Section 3. - Interpretation and Purpose. 
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed to be minimal in nature, and whenever the principles, standards, or requirements of any other applicable provision of other ordinances or regulations of the City of Pasadena are higher or more restrictive, the latter shall control. The purpose of these regulations is to achieve orderly development through land subdivision; to promote and develop the utilization of land to assure the best possible community environment in accordance with the Pasadena Comprehensive Plan; to provide for adequate municipal services and safe streets; to allow freedom of creative design on the part of developers; and to protect and promote the public health, safety and general welfare.  
Section 4. - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning[s] ascribed to them in this section. 
Alley means a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots, which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
Building setback line: The line within a property defining the minimum horizontal distance between a building and the adjacent street line. 
Certificate of approval means a written certification issued by the commission to the person applying for the approval of a plan, plat or replat indicating that the plan, plat or replat has been reviewed and approved by the commission. 
Certificate of determination means a written certification issued by the commission to an owner of land, a public utility, or governing body of a city, making the determinations as set forth in section 10-1. C. Consideration. 
City: The City of Pasadena, Texas. 
Commission: The planning commission of the city. 
Comprehensive development plan means the Pasadena Comprehensive Plan and includes any element or part of such plan separately adopted and any amendments to such plan or parts thereof. 
Crosswalk means a public right-of-way between property lines, which provides pedestrian circulation. 
Developer means any subdivider as defined herein, or his agent, constructing or proposing to furnish or construct any public works improvements in a subdivision. 
Director of public works means the duly appointed city official whose jurisdiction is applicable to the review approval, specification, or item concerned. 
Easement means a right granted for the purpose of limited public or semi-public use across, over, or under private land. 
Engineer means a person duly authorized under the provisions of the Texas Engineering Registration Act, as heretofore or hereafter amended, to practice the profession of engineering. 
Flood plain shall mean an area subject to flooding by tidewater, surface water or running streams or rivers and shall include all areas thirteen (13) feet or less above the mean sea level as established by the latest U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey or such other component survey as may be approved by the Commission. 
Lot means an undivided tract or parcel of land having frontage on a public street and which is, or in the future may be offered for sale, conveyance, transfer or improvement; which is designated as a distinct and separate tract, and which is identified by a tract or lot number or symbol in a duly approved subdivision plat which has been properly filed of record. 
Major thorofare plan means that part of the comprehensive development plan showing the locations and dimensions of major and secondary thorofares. 
Neighborhood means a complete and distinct residential development designated as a neighborhood unit in the comprehensive development plan. 
Plat means the map, drawing or chart on which a subdivider's plan of a subdivision is presented, which he submits for approval and a copy of which he intends to record in final form. 
Shall, may: The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is merely directory. 
Street means a public right-of-way which provides vehicular circulation and/or access to adjacent land, whether designated as a street, highway, thorofare, parkway, throughway, avenue, lane, boulevard, road, place, drive, or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Major thorofare means a principal traffic artery more or less continuous across the city, which is intended to connect parts of the city or areas adjacent thereto, and act as a principal connecting street including each street designated as a major thorofare on the Plans of Pasadena and adjacent metropolitan area or so designated by the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Collector street means a street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major thorofares or arterial streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and principal streets within a neighborhood. 
(3)  Minor street means a street which is intended primarily to serve traffic within a neighborhood or limited residential district, and which is not necessarily continuous through several residential districts. 
(4)  Cul-de-sac means a short minor street having but one vehicular access to another street and terminated by a vehicular turn-around. 
(5)  Dead-end street means a street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one vehicular access to another street. 
(6)  Street width means the shortest horizontal distance between the lines which delineate the right-of-way of a street. 
(7)  Roadway or paving width means the portion of a street available for vehicular traffic; where curbs are laid, the portion between the face of curbs. 
Subdivider: Any person or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as that term is defined herein. In any event, the term "subdivider" shall be restricted to include only the owner, equitable owner or authorized agent of such owner or equitable owner, of land sought to be subdivided. 
Subdivision: A division of any tract of land situated within the corporate limits or within the subdivision jurisdiction of the city in two (2) or more parts for the purpose of laying out any subdivision of any tract of land or any addition of any town or city, or for laying out suburban lots or building lots, or any lots, and streets, alleys or parts or other portions intended for public use or the use of purchasers or owners of lots fronting thereon or adjacent thereto. Subdivision includes resubdivision but does not include the following: 
(1)  The division of land in parcels or tracts of five (5) acres or more and not involving any new street, alley or easement of access; 
(2)  The division of land within a designated Industrial District; 
(3)  The division of land within a previously recorded commercial reserve; or 
(4)  The division of land into no more than two (2) parts for nonresidential purposes and not involving any new street, alley or easement of access. 
Surveyor: A licensed state land surveyor or a registered public surveyor, as authorized by the state statutes to practice the profession of surveying. 
Utility easement: A interest in land granted to the city, to the public generally, and/or to a private utility corporation, for installing or maintaining utilities across, over or under private land, together with the right to enter thereon with machinery and vehicles necessary for the maintenance of said utilities. 
Any office referred to in this ordinance by title means the person employed or appointed by the city in that position, or his duly authorized representative. 
Definitions not expressly prescribed herein are to be construed in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices. 
(Ord. No. 71-54, § 1, 3-9-71; Ord. No. 88-229, § 1, 12-6-88)  
Section 5. - Jurisdiction. 
No person shall create a subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena, Texas or within the city's appropriated extraterritorial jurisdiction, without complying with the provisions of this Ordinance. 
All plats and subdivisions of any such land shall conform to the rules and regulations herein set forth.  
Section 6. - Variance. 
The Planning Commission may authorize a variance from these regulations when, in its opinion, undue hardship will result from requiring strict compliance. In granting a variance, the Commission shall prescribe only conditions that it deems necessary to or desirable in the public interest. In making the findings hereinbelow required, the Commission shall take into account the nature of the proposed use of the land involved, existing uses of land in the vicinity, the number of persons who will reside or work in the proposed subdivision, and the probable effect of such variance upon traffic conditions and upon the public health, safety, convenience and welfare in the vicinity. No variance shall be granted unless the Commission finds: 
A.  That there are special circumstances or conditions affecting the land involved such that the strict application of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of his land; and 
B.  That the variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and 
C.  That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injuries [injurious] to other property in the area; and 
D.  That the granting of the variance will not have the effect of preventing the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Such findings of the Commission, together with the specific facts upon which such findings are based, shall be incorporated into the official minutes of the Commission meeting at which such variance is granted. Variances may be granted only when in harmony with the general purpose and intent of this Ordinance so that the public health, safety and welfare may be secured and substantial justice done. Pecuniary hardship to the subdivider, standing alone, shall not be deemed to constitute undue hardship.  
Section 7. - Enforcement. 
A.  No permit shall be issued by the City for the installation of septic tanks upon any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
B.  No building, repair, plumbing or electrical permit shall be issued by the City for any structure on a lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor for any structure on a lot within a subdivision in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
C.  The City shall not repair, maintain, install or provide any streets or public utility services in any subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved and filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full; provided, however, such provision shall not apply to residential or commercial districts fully developed for a period of at least 10 years prior to the effective date of this Ordinance. 
D.  The City shall not sell or supply any water, gas, electricity, or sewerage service within a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved or filed for record, nor in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full. 
E.  In behalf of the City, the City Attorney shall, when directed by the City Council, institute appropriate action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance or the standards referred to herein with respect to any violation thereof which occurs within the City, within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City as such jurisdiction is determined under the Municipal Annexation Act, or within any area subject to all or a part of the provisions of this Ordinance. 
F.  If any subdivision exists for which a final plat has not been approved or in which the standards contained herein or referred to herein have not been complied with in full, and the City Council of the City shall pass a resolution reciting the fact of such noncompliance or failure to secure final plat approval, and reciting the fact that the provisions of paragraphs A, B, C, and D of this Section will apply to the subdivision and the lots therein, the City Secretary shall, when directed by the City Council of the City, cause a certified copy of such resolution under the corporate seal of the City to be filed in the Deed Records of the county or counties in which such subdivision or part thereof lies. If full compliance and final plat approval are secured after the filing of such resolution, the City Secretary shall forthwith file an instrument in the Deed Records of such county or counties stating that paragraphs A, B, C, and D no longer apply. 
G.  Provided, however, that the provisions of this Section shall not be construed to prohibit the issuance of permits for any lots upon which a residence building exists and was in existence prior to passage of this Subdivision Ordinance, nor to prohibit the repair, maintenance, or installation of any street or public utility services for, to or abutting any lot, the last recorded conveyance of which prior to passage of this Ordinance was by metes and bounds, and/or any subdivision, or lot therein, recorded or unrecorded, which subdivision was in existence prior to the passage of this Ordinance.  
Section 8. - Severability Clause. 
The City Council of Pasadena, Texas does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this Ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that, in such event it would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this Ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid, and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this Ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 9. - Penal Provision. 
Any person violating any provision of this Ordinance within the corporate limits of the City of Pasadena, Texas, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction shall be fined an amount not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this provision shall never be a bar to any other remedy or relief for violation of this Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 90-128, §§ 1, 2, 7-24-90)  
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURE 
 
Section 10. - Preapplication Conference. 
A.  General. Prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat, the subdivider may seek the advice of the Planning Department or the Planning Commission, in order to determine the feasibility of the proposal before substantial expense is incurred, to acquaint him with any plans and requirements for the area and the availability of utilities and sewer extensions, the existence of floodplains within the area and to ascertain that the proposed subdivision meets the primary objective of this Ordinance. A filing fee according to Chapter 28, Article IV. Section 28-46 shall be paid by the developer for review of the project and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena. 
B.  Necessary Information. Forms or maps needed for such a meeting are described and shown in Exhibit B. 
C.  Within fifteen (15) days, the Planning Commission shall inform the subdivider that the plans and data as submitted do or do not meet the objectives of this Ordinance. If the plans do not meet these objectives the reasons therefor shall be expressed. 
(Ord. No. 71-54, § 2, 3-9-71; Ord. No. 84-13, § 1, 1-24-84; Ord. No. 18-102, § 4, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 10-1. - Certificate of Determination. 
A.  General. On the written request of an owner of land, a public utility, or the governing body of the city, the commission shall make the following determinations regarding the owner's land or the land in which the utility or governing body is interested that is located within the jurisdiction of the city: 
(1)  Whether a subdivision is required; and 
(2)  If a subdivision or resubdivision is required, whether a plat or replat has been prepared and whether it has been reviewed and approved by the commission. 
B.  Necessary Information. The requesting party shall provide to the planning department a copy of the deed conveyance and a legal description of the property. 
C.  Consideration. 
(1)  If the commission determines that a subdivision or resubdivision is not required, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. 
(2)  If the commission determines that a subdivision or resubdivision is required, but that no plat or replat has been prepared, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. 
(3)  If the commission determines that a subdivision or resubdivision is required and that a plat or replat has been prepared, but not reviewed or approved by the commission, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. 
(4)  If the commission determines that a subdivision or resubdivision is required and that a plat or replat has been prepared and has been reviewed but not approved by the commission, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. 
(5)  If the commission determines that a subdivision or resubdivision is required and that a plat or replat has been prepared and has been reviewed and approved by the commission, a written certification of that determination shall be issued to the requesting party. 
(6)  The commission shall make its determination within twenty (20) days after the date it receives the written request and necessary information under this section and shall issue the certificate, if appropriate, within ten (10) days after the date the determination is made. 
(Ord. No. 88-229, § 1, 12-6-88)  
Section 11. - Preliminary Plat Conditional Approval. 
A.  Filing Procedure. 
(1)  After reaching conclusions informally regarding his program and objectives, as described above in Section 10, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with other supplementary data as specified and shown in Exhibit B for formal submission to the Planning Commission. 
(2)  Twenty-four (24) prints of the preliminary plat shall be submitted to the commission. A certificate of filing shall be maintained by the director of planning and a copy of the certificate shall be given to the party filing the plat. 
(3)  A filing fee according to Chapter 28, Article IV. Section 28-46 shall be paid by the subdivider for review of the subdivision and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena upon submittal of a preliminary plat. 
B.  Approval. The Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove any preliminary plat within thirty (30) days from the date it is filed. Approval of the preliminary plat as such shall not constitute final acceptance or approval of the subdivision. When a preliminary plat has been approved by the Planning Commission, the final plat shall be submitted within six (6) months thereafter, otherwise approval of the preliminary plat shall terminate unless the time for filing of the plat is extended by the Planning Commission at the request of the subdivider. If no action to disapprove a preliminary plat is taken within the thirty (30) day period from date of filing, the preliminary plat is deemed to have been approved and a certificate showing said filing date and the failure to take action within thirty (30) days from said filing date shall on demand be issued by the Planning Commission and certificate shall be sufficient in lieu of a written endorsement or other evidence of approval. 
C.  Disapproval. The preliminary plat may be resubmitted to the Planning Commission with the necessary recommended changes within thirty (30) days without requirement of refiling fee. 
(1)  In no event shall any filing fee required by this Ordinance be refunded. 
(Ord. No. 84-13, § 2, 1-24-84; Ord. No. 88-229, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 00-34, § 1, 3-14-00; Ord. No. 18-102, § 4, 8-21-18)  
Section 12. - Master Preliminary Plat and Unit of Plat. 
Where the proposed subdivision constitutes a unit of a larger tract owned by the subdivider which he intends to be subsequently subdivided as additional units of the same subdivision, the subdivision plat shall be accompanied by a layout of the entire area, showing the tentative proposed layout of streets, blocks, drainage and other platting characteristics, including the existence of a flood plain, if any, for such Commission [sic] shall be attached to and filed with a copy of the approved subdivision plat in the permanent files of the Planning Commission. Thereafter, fractional final plats of subsequent units of such subdivision may be submitted without additional preliminary plat approval if the flood plain has not been altered by subsidence during the interim, and shall conform to such approved overall layout, unless changed by the Planning Commission. Where the subdivider does not agree to such change, the Planning Commission may change such approved overall layout only when it finds: 
(a)  That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will hinder the orderly subdivision of other land in the area in accordance with the provisions of these regulations; or 
(b)  That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or will be injurious to other property in the area. Each subsequent fractional plat submitted for approval shall be adjacent to a unit previously developed. 
(c)  That adherence to the previously approved overall layout will interfere with flood plain management within the area to be subdivided. 
(d)  Conditional approval of a master preliminary plat shall expire three (3) years after the date it is filed. Such conditional approval may be reinstated after review of the Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 71-54, § 3, 3-9-71)  
Sec. 13. - Final Plat Approval. 
A.  Filing Procedure. 
(1)  After conditional approval of the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a final plat conforming substantially to the preliminary plat together with supplementary data as specified in this section and Exhibit B for formal submission to the commission. 
(2)  Twenty-four (24) prints of the final plat and a filing fee according to Chapter 28, Article IV. Section 28-46 shall be paid by the subdivider for review of the subdivision and shall not be refundable, in whole or in part. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Pasadena upon submittal of a final plat. 
(3)  The subdivider shall submit the following data at the time of filing of the final plat: 
a.  Tax certificate from the assessor and collector of the City of Pasadena, Texas, within whose jurisdiction the proposed subdivision lies to the effect that all City of Pasadena ad valorem taxes have been paid on the land included within the subdivision. 
b.  Utility certificate from appropriate director of public works or engineer approving the proposed utilities layout and indicating that adequate service is available to the subdivision. 
c.  Site improvement data. Three (3) prints of the final, sealed engineering drawings for the subdivision which shall contain the following data; 
(1)  Streets, alleys, sidewalks, crosswalks, and monument plans and profiles with data outlined in Exhibit A. 
(2)  Storm drainage data and proposed drainage structures, water lines and other water facilities, sanitary sewers and sewerage facilities including calculation, plans and profile using design data outlined in Exhibit A. 
(4)  Prior to final approval of the plat by the commission, the site improvement data shall be submitted and approved by the director of public works or engineer. 
(5)  After consideration by the commission, the plat shall be submitted to the city council for action. Should the city council fail to act on the plat within thirty (30) days thereafter, the plat shall be deemed finally approved by the city council. 
(6)  After the city council is satisfied that the subdivider will comply with all requirements for utilities and street construction, it shall return the plat to the commission indicating such action as the council may have taken in regard to the plat. Then the commission shall enter its order giving final approval of the plat. 
(7)  After a plat has been finally approved, the commission shall cause the plat to be recorded in the plat records of the county and shall issue a certificate of approval stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the commission. 
(8)  After final approval and the subdivider or authorized agent shall apply to the public works department for street, water main, storm and sanitary sewer construction permits. As in the case of the city public works construction contract administration, the same city inspection procedure shall be followed until final completion of the work and acceptance by the city council at a regular city council meeting. 
(9)  A filing fee, based on the then current schedule of fees of the county clerk, shall be submitted to the planning department for payment of filing fees for maps and deed restrictions by the city to the Harris County Clerk of Deeds and Records. 
(Ord. No. 67-2074, § 1, 12-12-67; Ord. No. 88-229, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 18-102, § 4, 8-21-18)  
Sec. 14. - Short Form Procedure. 
A.  General. A short form procedure, omitting the filing of the preliminary plat may be followed when the proposed subdivision or resubdivision meets one of the following requirements: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision or resubdivision complies with the requirements of an amending plat as set forth in Section 212.016 of the Local Government Code and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision (i) contains lots all fronting on a previously dedicated street or streets of adequate width and is so situated that no additional streets, alleys, easements, or other public property are required in order to meet the requirements of these regulations, (ii) contains utilities and drainage facilities that are required in these regulations which are in place to serve each lot in the proposed subdivision and which require no alterations, or satisfactory arrangements have been made to affect any necessary alterations. 
B.  Final Plat Approval. 
(1)  The final plat approval procedures set forth in Section 13 of this ordinance shall apply to a subdivision or resubdivision meeting the requirements outlined in subsection A above with the exception of the following: 
(1)  The submission of site improvement data and the certificate by the director of public works set forth in Exhibit B, Paragraph D. Standard Forms, shall not be required; 
(2)  The final plat shall not be submitted to the city council for action. 
(2)  The commission shall approve or disapprove any plat meeting the requirements of this Section 14 within thirty (30) days from the date the plat is filed. If no action to disapprove is taken within the thirty-day period from the date of filing, the plat is deemed to have been approved. 
(3)  After approval of any plat meeting the requirements of this Section 14, the commission shall enter its order giving final approval. The commission shall cause the plat to be recorded in the plat records of the county and shall issue a certificate of approval stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the commission. 
(4)  A filing fee, based on the then current schedule of fees of the county clerk, shall be submitted to the planning department for payment of filing fees for maps and deed restrictions by the city to the Harris County Clerk of Deeds and Records. 
C.  Administrative Plat Approval. An administrative approval procedure, omitting the filing of the preliminary plat may be followed when the proposed subdivision meets one (1) of the following requirements: 
(1)  The proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of an amending plat as set forth in Section 212.016 of the Local Government Code and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
(2)  The proposed subdivision (i) contains two or fewer lots fronting on a previously dedicated street or streets of adequate width and is so situated that no additional streets, alleys, easements, or other public property are required in order to meet the requirements of these regulations, (ii) contains utilities and drainage facilities that are required in these regulations which are in place to serve each lot in the proposed subdivision and which require no alterations, or satisfactory arrangements have been made to affect any necessary alterations. 
(1)  The director of planning may approve a subdivision plat that conforms to the conditions and requirements of Subsection C above, and procedures set forth in Section 13 shall apply to the subdivision with the exception of the following: 
(1)  The submission of site improvement data and the certificate by the director of public works set forth in Exhibit B, Paragraph D. Standard Forms, shall not be required; 
(2)  The final plat may not be submitted to the planning and zoning commission or the city council for action. 
(2)  The director shall approve or disapprove any plat meeting the requirements of this section within thirty (30) days from the date the plat is filed. If no action to disapprove is taken within the thirty-day period from the date of filing, the plat is deemed to have been approved. 
(3)  After approval of any plat meeting the requirements of this section, the director shall enter its order giving final approval. The director shall cause the plat to be recorded in the plat records of the county and shall issue a certificate of approval stating that the plat has been reviewed and approved by the commission. 
(4)  A filing fee, based on the then current schedule of fees of the county clerk, shall be submitted to the planning department for payment of filing fees for maps and deed restrictions by the city to the Harris County Clerk of Deed and Records. (Ord No. 88-229, §1, 12-6-88) 
(5)  The director may, for any reason elect to present the plat to the planning and zoning commission or city council, or both, to obtain additional approvals in accordance with procedures of these requirements. 
(6)  The director shall not disapprove the plat and shall be required to refer any plat which he refuses to approve to the planning and zoning commission or city council, or both, within the time period specified in Section 212.009, Texas Local Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 88-229, § 1, 12-6-88; Ord. No. 00-34, §§ 1, 2, 3-14-00)  
Section 15. - Responsibility for Payment of Site Improvement Costs. 
A.  The subdivider shall furnish all site improvements required for normal neighborhood development within the subdivision including the dedication of all rights-of-way for minor streets and the permanent improvement thereof including curbs and gutters whereby lots front or side such a facility as well as all utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers and appurtenant drainage facilities required to serve the area within the subdivision in accordance with city standards. 
B.  Any subdivider who shall propose to plat a subdivision within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed major thoroughfare or collector street corridor as indicated on the current Major Street Plan of the Comprehensive Development Plan for Pasadena, Texas, shall participate as follows: 
(1)  Proposed major thoroughfare and/or collector street designed to serve an area greater than that of the subdivision and either passing totally within the confines, abutting, or adjoining the proposed subdivision development: 
a.  Right-of-way: 
1.  The developer shall cause to be dedicated to the city by plat approval, a maximum of fifty (50) feet right-of-way for a major thoroughfare or a maximum of forty (40) feet for a collector street. 
2.  Such additional right-of-way as may be indicated in the Comprehensive Development Plan, the Major Street Plan and any subsequent amendments thereto, as well as under Article IV, Required Improvements, Section 28, Schedule of Minimum Street Improvements of the Subdivision Ordinance, as hereby amended, shall be reserved for later purchase by the city. Said total right-of-way, however, shall not be less than one hundred (100) feet for a major thoroughfare or eighty (80) feet for a collector street. 
3.  In such instances whereby the developer does not own the land so required to be dedicated to the city, the developer shall pay to the city an amount equal to the fair market value of the land required based on the findings of an appraiser who shall be selected by the city. In the event the fair market value of the land so required is contested by the developer, both parties shall agree on the selection of a certified MAI-SRPA professionally affiliated appraiser within Harris County. The findings of the second appraisal shall be conclusive on both parties and the cost for such appraisal shall be equally borne by both parties. Said money to be deposited with the city by the developer shall be placed into an account so specifically designated, and the Legal Department shall initiate such procedures as necessary to acquire the property or institute condemnation proceedings. 
b.  Paving section: 
1.  The developer shall permanently improve one-half of the roadway surface of the ultimate proposed major thoroughfare or collector street in accordance with city specifications. In those instances whereby lots either back or side the facility, no direct driveway access shall be provided onto such roadways. 
2.  The paving section to be required for a major thoroughfare shall be one (1) twenty-four-foot, eight-inch crowned concrete section with continuous concrete curb and gutter along both sides, including appurtenant drainage facilities. The paving section to be required for a collector street shall be one (1) twenty-two-foot, seven-inch concrete section (slope drained) with continuous concrete curb and gutter along one (1) side, including appurtenant drainage facilities. 
C.  The subdivider shall provide for all street lighting within the proposed subdivision. The number, spacing, location, and style of such lighting fixtures shall be as described on that plat or drawing as prepared by the Houston Lighting and Power Company, Engineering Division. Rates shall be established on a per-fixture basis using a typical twenty-six-foot metal ornamental standard with a 9,500 lumen high pressure sodium vapor fixture as the norm, and such rates shall be in accordance with those rate schedules as officially published periodically by the Houston Lighting and Power Company. 
D.  The subdivider shall totally provide for initial street signing of all intersections within the subdivisions, save and except such traffic regulatory devices placed on said standards by the city through warrants of permanency. Rates for the installation of said street signs shall be in accordance with those current materials costs plus labor and shall be billed by the Department of Traffic and Transportation. 
E.  Permanent Access Easements. Lots that front on or take access from a permanent access easement must be a part of a unified development scheme where the owners of all lots within the subdivision as a precondition of property purchase, are legally bound together by deed restriction, contract or another constituted and binding homeowners association, corporation, or other organization with, as one of its purposes, the continued care and maintenance of all commonly owned properties within the subdivision, particularly the areas established as permanent access easements, and the authority and means to impose binding assessments upon the lot owners for that purpose. Each subdivision plat that contains a permanent access easement shall contain the following notation on the face of the plat: 
"THIS SUBDIVISION CONTAINS ONE OR MORE PERMANENT ACCESS EASEMENTS THAT HAVE NOT BEEN DEDICATED TO OR ACCEPTED BY THE CITY OF PASADENA OR ANY OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY AS PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. THE CITY OF PASADENA HAS NO OBLIGATION, NOR DOES ANY OTHER LOCAL GOVERNMENT AGENCY HAVE ANY OBLIGATION, TO MAINTAIN OR IMPROVE ANY PERMANENT ACCESS EASEMENT WITHIN THE SUBDIVISION, WHICH OBLIGATION SHALL BE THE SOLE RESPONSIBILITY OF THE OWNERS OF PROPERTY IN THIS SUBDIVISION." 
F.  Restrictions of Access. A subdivision containing one or more permanent access easements may restrict public access unto lots within said subdivision by erecting gates approved by the City across the permanent access easements. Each individual property owner having frontage on a permanent access easement shall have perpetual access to their respective property, and shall not be denied passage through any gate system installed for the benefit of the subdivision. No gates shall be allowed to restrict access to any publicly accepted right-of-way. Said approved gates shall be permitted, constructed and maintained in accordance with all regulations of Section 13-10, Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 84-229, § 1, 9-3-85; Ord. No. 00-34, § 2, 3-14-00)  
Section 16. - Guarantee for Installation of Site Improvements. 
A.  Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the subdivider shall file with the City Council a bond executed by a surety company holding a license to do business in the State of Texas and acceptable to the Council, in an amount equal to 100 per cent of the cost of all utility equipment installed in the subdivision warranting that the equipment will render satisfactory operations for a period of one (1) year after completion of the installation. Said bond shall be approved as to form and legality by the City Attorney.  
Section 17. - Dedication and Maintenance of Streets. 
Disapproval of a plat shall be deemed a refusal to accept the offered dedications shown thereon. Approval of a plat shall not be deemed an acceptance of the proposed dedications and shall not impose any duty upon the city or county concerning the maintenance of or improvements of any such dedicated parts until the proper authorities have actually appropriated the same by entry, use, or improvement.  
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS 
 
Section 18. - General Principles and Objectives. 
A.  Conformity with Comprehensive Development. All subdivisions shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan for orderly and unified development of streets, utilities, neighborhood design, and public land and facilities. 
B.  Achieving Desirable Neighborhood Development. Residential subdivisions shall be designed to take advantage of the principles and general designs for neighborhood development as established by the Comprehensive Development Plan and the Planning Commission in order to achieve the most advantageous development of the entire neighborhood unit in which the subdivision is located. 
C.  Provision for Future Subdivision. If a tract is subdivided into parcels larger than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to allow logical further subdivision and the opening of future streets. 
D.  Standards for Site Improvements. All streets, permanent access easements, alleys, sidewalks, utility installations and other site improvements required to be installed by the subdivider under the provisions of these regulations shall conform to the requirements of this section and to the then current policies, specifications, and regulation(s) of the City of Pasadena, or other approved agencies responsible for design, construction methods and standards, payment, refunds, credits, and other financial arrangements. 
E.  Connection of Permanent Access Easements to the City Street Network. Proposed subdivisions containing permanent access easements shall be designed to allow a sufficient number of ingress locations for emergency vehicles. The planning and zoning commission shall have the discretionary authority to disapprove any plat containing permanent access easements when such plats do not provide for convenient and adequate vehicular access and traffic circulation within the subdivision and as may be necessary for the subregion. Portions of a proposed subdivision may be required to be dedicated with public road systems to accommodate previously platted roadway links or future roadway links as necessary on adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, §§ 1, 2, 3-14-00)  
Section 19. - Streets. 
A.  Street Layout. The arrangement, extent, character, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the Major Thorofare Plan and the Comprehensive Development Plan. Minor residential streets shall provide adequate circulation within the neighborhood and yet discourage excessive through traffic. The street layout shall be arranged to achieve the most desirable development of the entire neighborhood unit with appropriate consideration of creeks, drainage channels, wooded areas and other topographical features which lend themselves to attractive treatment. 
B.  Projection of Streets. When adjoining areas are not yet subdivided, the arrangement of streets shall provide for the proper projection of streets into the adjoining unsubdivided areas as will be required to complete the neighborhood pattern or conform to the Comprehensive Plan. 
C.  Private Streets. Private streets which connect to the public street system and which serve more than one residential lot are allowed to be constructed within a permanent access easement in accordance with "Exhibit A", Specifications and Design Standards for Public Works Improvements of the Basic Subdivision Ordinance number 67-1966 as amended. Private streets may not be constructed within an easement or right-of-way that has been dedicated to the public. 
D.  Partial or Half Streets. In the case of minor streets, no new half-streets shall be platted or constructed. Where the proposed subdivision abuts upon an existing half-street the remaining half of the street shall be platted. In the case of secondary streets and major thorofares, half-streets may be platted, if necessary, in conformance with the Comprehensive Development Plan. One-foot reserves shall be dedicated to the public in fee as a buffer separation, the condition of such dedication being that when the adjacent property is subdivided in a recorded plat, the one-foot reserve shall thereupon become vested in the public for street right-of-way purposes. No person or abutting property owner shall be permitted to construct or maintain any improvements upon any adjacent half street as provided herein unless all of such street shall have been paved. 
E.  Dead-End Streets and Cul-de-Sacs. 
(1)  Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as short stubs projected to be continued in future subdivisions in conformance with Section 19B of this article, or when designed as cul-de-sacs. Temporary turn-arounds shall be provided on projected streets until such time as they are extended. 
(2)  Cul-de-sacs shall, generally, not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length and shall have a turn-around of not less than one hundred (100) feet in diameter in single family residential areas, one hundred and twenty (120) feet in multi-family residential areas and not less than two hundred (200) feet in diameter in commercial and industrial areas. 
F.  Alignment. The alignment of all major thorofares and secondary streets shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and the requirements of "Exhibit A" of these regulations. Minor street alignment shall meet the requirements of "Exhibit A" and in no case shall street jogs be offset less than one hundred and twenty-five (125) feet on the centerline. 
G.  Intersections. All intersections on major thorofares and secondary streets shall be at ninety (90) degrees except as shown on the Comprehensive Development Plan or approved by the Planning Commission. The intersections of minor streets shall be as nearly ninety (90) degrees as practicable. The curb radii at street intersections in urban subdivisions shall conform to Table 1 or "Exhibit A". 
H.  Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. All street and pavement widths shall conform to the Comprehensive Development Plan and the requirements of "Exhibit A", but in no case shall the right-of-way widths be less than the following: 
(1)  Major thorofares—One hundred and twenty (120) feet. 
(2)  Collector streets—Eighty (80) feet. 
(3)  Minor streets—Fifty (50) feet. 
I.  Street Names. Names of new streets shall not duplicate the names of existing streets within the county unless the new street is a continuation of or part of a future continuation of such existing street. Street names shall be chosen to avoid similarity or confusion with existing street names. Names of all new streets shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission and coordinated on an area-wide basis. 
J.  Construction Standards. All streets shall be constructed with reference to base, surfacing, curbs, grades, horizontal curves and intersection curve radius in accordance with the standard specifications, City of Pasadena, the standards prescribed in "Exhibit A" of these regulations and the then current policies of the City's Public Works Department. 
K.  Temporary Right-of-Way. When deemed necessary by the Planning Commission, temporary right-of-way may be provided for certain uses or locations, such as the provisions of turn-arounds on projected streets. Such temporary right-of-way shall revert to the abutting property owners when no longer required for its original purpose. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Section 20. - Alleys. 
A.  Commercial and Industrial Districts. Paved alleys not less than twenty (20) feet wide shall be provided in all commercial or industrial districts, except that the Planning Commission may elect to give consideration to the waiver of this requirement where other definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading and parking consistent with and adequate for the uses proposed. 
B.  Residential Areas. If alleys are provided in residential areas they shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet wide, with at least ten (10) feet of paved surface. 
C.  Intersections and Turns. Alley intersections and sharp changes in alignment shall be avoided, but where two alleys intersect, or an alley turns at an angle sharper than one hundred (100) degrees, a cut-off not less than ten (10) feet from the normal intersection of the property lines shall be provided. 
D.  Dead-End Alleys. Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but if unavoidable, shall be provided with adequate turn-around facilities as determined by the Planning Commission and have not less than sixteen (16) foot pavement width. 
E.  Construction. All alleys shall be constructed in accordance with the standards prescribed in "Exhibit A" of these regulations.  
Section 21. - Easements. 
A.  Utility Easements. In residential areas where alleys are not platted, easements shall be provided for installation of utilities. In general, the rear easement shall be sixteen (16) feet wide, centered on the rear lot lines. Additional requirements for public utility easements shall be determined by the Director of Engineering. 
B.  Drainage Easements. Where the subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel or stream, there shall be provided a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially with the lines of such water course, and of sufficient width, as determined by the Director of Public Works, to accommodate further width or construction and allow access for maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 85-226, § 1, 11-12-85)  
Section 22. - Pedestrian Circulation. 
A.  Sidewalks. Paved sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of major and collector thorofares and at least one side of minor streets as prescribed in "Exhibit A". Sidewalks shall be provided as deemed necessary by the Planning Commission in commercial and industrial areas. 
B.  Crosswalks. Pedestrian crosswalks not less than ten (10) feet wide easement with not less than four (4) feet of paved surface shall be dedicated in subdivisions where deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.  
Section 23. - Block. 
A.  General Layout. The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated. 
(2)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. 
(3)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  Length. In general, block lengths along minor or collector streets shall not exceed one thousand four hundred (1,400) feet or be less than five hundred (500) feet, and along major thorofares shall not exceed one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet or be less than nine hundred (900) feet. 
C.  Width. In general, blocks shall be platted of sufficient width to contain two tiers of lots with alley or utility easements between them, except where lots are double-fronted on major thorofares, railroads, or drainage channels, or where overall neighborhood design justifies a different layout, or where a single tier of lots is platted to adjoin the rear of existing lots or unplatted tracts.  
Section 24. - Lots. 
A.  General Layout. The size, width, depth, shape and orientation of lots shall be appropriate for the neighborhood in which the subdivision is located, and for the type of development and use contemplated, to assure provision of proper open space and prevent overcrowding. 
B.  Lot Dimensions. 
(1)  Residential lots where served by public sewage system shall be at least sixty (60) feet wide, at least one hundred (100) feet deep and shall have an area of at least six thousand (6,000) square feet, unless specifically excepted by the planning commission. Each residential lot shall provide a driveway of such design to accommodate two (2) vehicular off-street parking spaces exclusive of any garage. 
(2)  Depth and width of properties laid out for commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. 
(3)  Corner lots shall have sufficient width to permit the required building setback and proper orientation to both streets. Lots abutting on crosswalks shall be treated as corner lots. 
(4)  Where a residential lot backs up to a railroad right-of-way, high pressure gas line, industrial areas or any other land use which may have a depreciating effect on residential property, and where no marginal access street or other street is provided at the rear of such lot, additional depth shall be required by the Commission. Where a lot sides to any of the above, appropriate additional width shall be required. Where a lot sides to any of the above, a no-access easement of at least ten (10) feet shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such traffic artery or other disadvantageous land use, it being the finding of this City Council that such planted easement to be in low-trunk trees of the Italian Cypress or comparable type materially reduces the noise, unusual glare and child safety hazards normally connected to the proximity of residential lots to major thoroughfares. 
(5)  No single-family residential lot shall face a major thoroughfare or a collector street. 
(6)  Radial residential lots shall be at least sixty (60) feet wide at the building line. 
C.  Orientation. Residential lots shall be oriented to take advantage of topography, and the best relationship to the overall design of the neighborhood and to minimize the effects of any surrounding depreciating land uses. 
(1)  The placing of residential lots facing directly upon a major thorofare shall be avoided, unless lots face a marginal access street parallel to such major thorofare. Lots should side or back to major thorofares and other depreciating land uses. 
(2)  The placing of lots at right angles to each other (with rear and side lot lines adjacent) shall be avoided. 
(3)  Side lot lines shall be as nearly perpendicular as practicable to the street the lot faces, or radial to curved streets. 
D.  Access. Every lot shall be provided with adequate access to a public street by direct frontage on such street. Rear and/or side driveways access to major thoroughfares and collector streets shall be prohibited. 
E.  Building Lines. To further promote the health and safety of the residents of the City, minimum front and side building setback lines at streets and crosswalks shall be shown on all plats and shall conform to the restrictions, if any, imposed on the subdivision by the subdivider, but in no event shall such setback lines be less than the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Lot Frontage: 
a.  Minor Streets: The front setback to the livable area or a side loaded garage shall be twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of a public street. Garages front loaded by a driveway shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way of a public street. 
b.  Building lines on all collector streets and major thoroughfares shall be as set forth and defined by Ordinance No. 77-130, and any subsequent amendments thereto, and Article IV, Setback Requirements, Building and Building Regulations of the Pasadena Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  Side Yard Requirements: 
a.  Corner Lots: The exterior side yard shall be fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way of a public street as measured from the foundation of the livable area of the residence or side loaded garage. Garages front loaded by a driveway shall be no less than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way of a public street. 
b.  Interior Lots: A minimum side yard separation of ten (10) feet shall be maintained between the foundations of residences. If one side yard on a property is less than five (5) feet, the remaining side yard on the property shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet. In any instance whereby a side yard dimension is three (3) feet or less, an easement of five (5) feet onto the adjacent lot shall be required exclusively for maintenance purposes and no openings for access, light, or air shall be directly permitted in the reduced side yard wall of the residence. In no case shall any roof line or gutter system extend over any property line. A consistent side yard setback shall be designated on the plat. 
Subdivision plats properly filed in the deed or map records of Harris County prior to final passage of this ordinance shall be in compliance with those building lines as indicated on the plat or Article IV, Setback Requirements, Buildings and Building Regulations, Pasadena Code of Ordinances. In such instances whereby no corner lot side building line is indicated on a plat, a setback of fifteen (15) feet shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 72-192, § 1, 7-25-72; Ord. No. 85-226, § 1, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 00-34, § 1, 3-14-00)  
Section 25. - Public Sites and Open Spaces. 
A.  Conformance with Comprehensive Development Plan. Where a proposed park, school, playground, or other public facility is shown in the Comprehensive Development Plan or an official neighborhood plan and is located in whole or in part in a subdivision, the subdivider shall dedicate such land to public use, or shall cause such land to be held in reserve for a period of three (3) years from date the plat is recorded for purchase by the appropriate public agency. If detailed plans are not available for the land to be publicly used, the Planning Commission shall cause such determination to be made within reasonable period of time and inform the subdivider of the extent of land area required. Each plat containing forty (40) acres or more shall designate and locate a park preserve thereon of an area calculated on the following formula, based on the National Recreation Association standard of number of acres or parks to be available in ratio to the increment of population added and to be served by the completely developed subdivision, at the rate of four (4) persons per house: 
Number of Acres- 
Area or fraction 
applicable 	Number of 
Persons 
4.0 	600 
5.3 	800 
6.6 	1000 
 
The appropriate public agency shall, within one hundred and twenty (120) days after final approval of said plat, enter an order for payment to the subdivider of ten (10) per cent of the fair market value of said park preserve as of the date of final plat approval and shall pay the balance of such value within three (3) years thereafter. In the event the appropriate public agency fails to exercise the purchase option (10% payment) within said one hundred and twenty (120) days, or enters an order releasing said park preserve, the subdivider may submit, at no additional charge, a fractional plat for development of the released park preserve. 
Where the appropriate public agency chooses to purchase said reserve in installments, it shall pay to the subdivider interest not to exceed five (5) per cent on the agreed purchase price until the land is completely acquired.  
Section 26. - Projection [Preservation] of Natural Features. 
The Planning Commission may decline approval if due regard is not shown for the preservation of natural features such as large trees, water courses, scenic points, historical spots, and similar community assets, which if preserved, will add attractiveness, stability and value to the property.  
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Section 27. - Monuments. 
Concrete monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points of curve, and all corners of boundary lines of the subdivision as required by the Director of Public Works. All intermediate property corners shall be marked with iron stakes. Placement, size, length, and type of monuments shall conform to specifications of the Director of Public Works in conformance with the applicable Ordinances of the City of Pasadena, Texas.  
Section 28. - Streets and Utilities. 
All street improvements shall meet the then current requirements of the Comprehensive Development Plan, specifications of the City's Public Works Department, and the requirements of "Exhibit A" of these regulations, but in no case shall be more minimal than the following schedule: 
SCHEDULE OF MINIMUM STREET IMPROVEMENTS 
_____
Classification 	Right- 
of-way 	Pavement 
Standard 	Drainage 
Standard 	Sidewalk 
Standard 
_____
Expressway 	As required by Comprehensive Plan, Planning Commission, Director of Public Works, or Highway Department 
_____
Major Thorofare 	As required by Comprehensive Plan, Planning Commission, Director of Public Works, or Highway Department 
_____
Collector Thorofare 	80' 	40' 	Curb and Gutter 	4' Both Sides* 
_____
Minor Street 	50' 	28' 	Curb and Gutter 	4' One Side 
_____
Frontage Street 	40' 	24'eol;32' 	No Parking Curb and Gutter 	4' One Side* 
_____
*Minimum 6' where adjacent to back of curb. 
  
Section 29. - Water Systems. 
A.  General. All water supply, treatment, storage, and distribution facilities shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the Standard Specification, City of Pasadena "Exhibit A" of these regulations, the then current policies and specifications of the Director of Public Works and the Texas State Department of Health. 
B.  Residential Service. Every lot in any subdivision shall be provided with an approved supply of water, either by the construction of a distribution system connected to an adequate approved public water system, or if such public source is not available, by construction of a complete water system, including a safe, adequate water source, proper treatment facilities, pumps, storage facilities and distribution system, approved by the State Department of Health. 
C.  Fire Hydrants. Every subdivision shall be provided with standard fire hydrants as part of the water distribution system, in accordance with current specifications, and so that every lot is within five hundred (500) feet of a fire hydrant.  
Section 30. - Sewerage System. 
A.  General. All facilities for the collection and disposal of sewerage shall be furnished and installed in compliance with the requirements of the Standard Specification, City of Pasadena, "Exhibit A" of these regulations of the City's Public Works Department, and the Texas State Department of Health. 
B.  Sanitary Sewers. Sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve each lot in all subdivisions where connection is to be made immediately to a community disposal system or to a public sewerage system. Where such connection is not to be made immediately, plans shall be prepared for installation of a sewage collecting system to serve each lot, and those parts of such system which will lie in the portion of streets and alleys intended for vehicular traffic shall be installed before such street or alley is paved. 
C.  Septic Tank. In any subdivision in which immediate connection to a sewerage system cannot be made, a septic tank conforming to the provisions of Ordinance Nos. 1706 and 1798 of the Code of Ordinances, City of Pasadena shall be provided. [2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference— See Ch. 37, Art. IV. 
 
Section 31. - Drainage. 
A.  General. No lot in any subdivision which is subject to flooding by rainfall shall be approved until drainage facilities adequate to carry off such rainfall have been provided, based on computations as approved by the Public Works Department. 
B.  Required Facilities. All necessary storm drainage facilities including enclosed storm sewers, bridges, culverts, and water course improvements, to carry off storm water within the subdivision and integrate such subdivision drainage with the overall urban drainage system, shall be installed in accordance with the then current requirements of the City's Public Works Department. "Exhibit A" of these regulations, and official urban and county drainage plans.  
Section 32. 
Where reference is made herein to the Comprehensive Master Plan, such provisions shall not be operative until such Master Plan, or portions thereof, shall have been lawfully adopted by the City Council.  
Section 33. - Repealing Clause. 
All ordinances in force when this Ordinance becomes effective and which ordinances are inconsistent herewith or in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed, insofar as said ordinances are inconsistent or in conflict with this Ordinance. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall of the City this 27th day of June, A.D. 1967. 
APPROVED this 27th day of June, A.D. 1967. 
/s/ CLYDE DOYAL, MAYOR 
OF THE CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
/s/ DARYLENE DANIELS 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
APPROVED: 
/s/ RODNEY D. PARROT 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
PASSED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING, by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall of the City this 5th day of July, A.D. 1967. 
APPROVED this 5th day of July, A.D. 1967. 
/s/ CLYDE DOYAL, MAYOR 
OF THE CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
/s/ DARYLENE DANIELS 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
APPROVED: 
/s/ RODNEY D. PARROT 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS  
"EXHIBIT A" - SPECIFICATIONS AND DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC WORKS IMPROVEMENTS 
 
A. - General Provisions. 
Copies, the number determined by the then current policies of the City of Pasadena, of plans and profiles for streets, alleys, sidewalks and drainage easements and water and sewerage improvements including the following information shall be submitted with each subdivision plat.  
B. - Streets, Alleys and Sidewalks. 
(1)  Plans. 
a.  Typical sections showing the proposed pavement width, type, thickness and crown; the proposed curb or curb and gutter type as required, location in relation to centerline and exposure; the proposed sidewalk dimensions and location in relation to curbs and property lines; the proposed street grading slopes, for each of the different types of streets and alleys in the subdivision. 
b.  Alignment of each street, alley, sidewalk and crosswalkway showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve; the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another street, alley or drainage easement; the station and radius of each curb return; the location of adjacent right-of-way lines; the location and limits of sidewalks and curbs of each street; the location of monuments. 
c.  Location, description, and elevation of bench marks; the top of curb grade at each curb end, each fifty (50) foot station and each end of each curb return; the centerline grade at each end and at each fifty (50) foot station of alleys; the gradient of each tangent grade and the location and length of each vertical curve; the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection; the profiles of streets, alleys, and drainage ditches shall show the natural ground at adjacent property lines and the proposed centerline. 
d.  All plans shall show scale, north arrow and date. Plan and profile shall be drawn to scale of one inch (1?) equals fifty (50) feet horizontally and one inch (1?) equals five (5) feet vertically. 
e.  All street and alley plans and profiles shall bear the seal of a Registered Professional Engineer. 
(2)  Design Standards. 
a.  At each street intersection the curb shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R", varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1. 
b.  At each intersection the property lines at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R", varying with the interior angle as specified in Table 1. 
c.  Street and alley grades shall, in general, conform to the terrain, and shall not exceed the grades specified in Table 2. No street or alley grade shall be less than three-tenths (0.3) of one (1) per cent unless otherwise specified by the Director of Public Works. Vertical distance between the gutter and natural ground not to exceed 1.5'. 
d.  Horizontal curve radii shall not be less than those specified in Table 2. 
(3)  Construction Requirements. All improvements shall be contracted in accordance with the provisions of City of Pasadena Standard Specifications adopted by Resolution 1140 and its then current amendments.  
C. - Drainage and Drainage Structures. 
(1)  Plans. The required plans shall show the following information: 
a.  Construction details of all drainage structures including dimensions, reinforcing, and components such as grates and manhole covers. 
b.  Alignment of drainage easements showing a beginning and ending station; each deflection angle of the centerline, and the station of the point of intersection; the station of the point of curvature and the point of tangency of each curve, the station and angle of intersection of each intersection with another drainage easement, the location of each drainage structure, and the location and size of all storm sewers. 
c.  The centerline grade at each end and at each fifty foot station of drainage ditches, the direction of storm drainage flow at each intersection, the flow line elevations of each drainage structure, the flow line elevation of each storm sewer, at each point of change, each end, and at the intervening gradients. 
(2)  Drainage Computations. 
a.  Run-off rates shall be computed as determined by the Director of Public Works. In all cases run-off rates shall be computed on the basis of ultimate development of the entire watershed contributing run-off water to the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Construction Standards. All improvements shall be contracted in accordance with the provisions of City of Pasadena Standard Specifications as adopted by Resolution 1140 and its then current amendments.  
D. - Sanitary Sewers. 
(1)  All gravity sewers shall be vitrified clay or epoxy lines asbestos cement sewer pipe conforming to A.S.T.M. standards, and installed in conformance with the specifications of the City's Public Works Department. 
(2)  The minimum size of lateral sewer mains in residential areas shall be six (6) inches in diameter. Minimum grades shall be sufficient to produce a velocity of one and six-tenths (1.6) feet per second. 
(3)  All outfall mains shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the maximum anticipated flow from the entire area tributary to the line as approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  Lift stations shall be furnished where necessary, of such size and design as approved by the Director of Public Works.  
E. - Water Mains. 
(1)  All water distribution mains shall be cast iron or asbestos cement pipe, installed in conformance with the specifications of the City's Public Works Department. Other suitable material may be used when authorized by the Director of Public Works. 
(2)  The minimum size of lateral water mains shall be six (6) inches in diameter, except that a small main may be used when a looped system designed to serve less than 18 families is approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(3)  All principal mains shall be of sufficient size to meet all anticipated requirements of the system as approved by the Director of Public Works. 
(4)  The layout of mains shall assure two-way flow at all points in the system, with the exception of extensions on cul-de-sacs and other dead-ends approved by the Director of Public Works. 
TABLE 1 
CURB AND BLOCK CORNER RETURNS 
	Intersection 
of Minor or 
Secondary Streets 	Intersection of Minor 
or Secondary with 
Major Thorofare 	Intersection of 
Major Thorofares 
Interior 
Angle in 
Degrees 	Curb 	Corner 	Curb 	Corner 	Curb 	Corner 
	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 	* 
150-145 	15 	12 	25 	15 	25 	15 
145-140 	15 	12 	25 	15 	28 	18 
140-135 	15 	12 	25 	15 	30 	20 
135-85 	15 	12 	25 	20 	35 	25 
85-75 	20 	20 	30 	25 	50 	40 
75-65 	25 	30 	35 	40 	80 	70 
65-55 	30 	40 	40 	50 	90 	80 
55-45 	35 	50 	45 	70 	110 	100 
45-0 	35 	75 	45 	90 	150 	140 
*Radius 						
 
TABLE 2 
GRADES AND HORIZONTAL CURVES 
		Center Line Radius 
Street 
Classification 	Minimum 
Percent Grade 	With .05 
Super- 
elevation 	With .10 
Super- 
elevation 
Major Thorofare 	6% 	1200' 	400' 
Secondary Thorofare 	7% 	700' 	285' 
		No Superelevation 
Minor Street 	10% 	100' 
Frontage Street 	10% 	100' 
Alley 	10% 		
  
"EXHIBIT B" - SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARDS FOR PLATS AND SUBDIVISION DOCUMENTS 
 
A. - Pre-Application Plans and Data. 
The following information should be furnished by the subdivider at the pre-application conference. 
(1)  General Subdivision Information. A description of existing conditions of the site and the proposed development, data on land characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, information describing the proposed number and size of lots, price range, business areas, public areas, proposed protective covenants and physical improvements. 
(2)  Location Map. A sketch map showing the relationship of the proposed subdivision to existing community facilities within one mile radius, including shopping centers, public schools, parks, playgrounds and the development name and location, scale, north arrow, and date. 
(3)  Sketch Plan. A sketch showing the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features which may be a free hand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available.  
B. - Preliminary Plats and Data for Conditional Approval. 
The preliminary plat shall include the following information and other pertinent data as required to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
(1)  Topographic Data: 
a.  Existing boundary lines, bearings and distances, and acreage of the proposed subdivision. 
b.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent properties as shown by the official records of the County Clerk of Harris County with adequate ties to well established points or league survey corners. 
c.  Location, size and centerline of all existing utilities, drainage structures, water courses, railroads, and other physical features affecting the proposed development. 
d.  Location, name, type and width of surfacing of all streets and alleys on or adjoining the proposed development. 
e.  Location, size and purpose of all easements and public areas on or adjoining the proposed development. 
f.  Topographic information including existing and proposed contours at intervals of 0.5 feet based on the latest city standard datum, which shall be specified on the plat. 
g.  Information concerning other conditions on the site such as marshes, wooded areas, buildings and other significant features may be required by the Planning Commission when deemed necessary. 
h.  Information concerning other conditions on adjacent land, such as direction and gradient of ground slope, buildings, railroads, power lines, towers and other nonresidential land uses of adverse nature may be required by the Planning Commission when deemed necessary. 
(2)  Title and Certificate: 
a.  Present tract designation of record at office of the County Clerk, Harris County. 
b.  New City or County Block number, if any. 
c.  Title under which new subdivision is to be recorded. 
d.  Notation stating acreage, scale, north arrow, datum, bench marks, and date of survey. 
e.  Certification of registered professional land surveyor. 
(3)  Draft of Protective Covenants, if any, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use and otherwise protect the proposed development. 
(4)  Drawings. The preliminary plat shall be drawn on sheets measuring twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches, at a scale of one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger and shall show the following: 
a.  Existing conditions required in B(1), "Topographic Data." 
b.  Proposed streets with names, right-of-way widths, roadway widths, and types, central angles of street intersections, approximate grades and gradients; and similar information for alleys and other right-of-way easements. 
c.  Lot lines, lot numbers, and block numbers. 
d.  Any sites to be reserved or dedicated for parks, playgrounds, utility facilities or other public uses. 
e.  Any sites for multi-family dwellings, shopping centers, industry, churches, or other non-public uses exclusive of single-family dwellings. 
f.  Building setback lines. 
g.  Title, north arrow, scale and date. 
h.  Key map, drawn at a satisfactory scale to show the relation of the property to adjacent existing streets and identifying features for a distance of at least a half-mile. 
i.  Index sheet if plat is drawn on more than one sheet, showing the entire subdivision at a suitable scale. 
(Ord. No. 90-245, § 1(1), (2), 12-18-90)  
C. - Final Plats. 
The final plat shall include the following information: 
(1)  Data: 
a.  Primary control points, approved by the Director of Public Works or descriptions and "ties" to such control points, to which all dimensions, angles, bearings and similar data on the plat shall be referred. 
b.  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and all other rights-of-way and property lines of residential lots and other sites; with accurate dimensions, bearing or deflection angles and radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves. 
c.  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
d.  Location, dimensions and purpose of all easements. 
e.  Number to identify each lot, site, and block. 
f.  Purpose for which all sites other than residential lots are dedicated or reserved. 
g.  Minimum building setback lines on all lots and other sites. 
h.  Location and description of monuments. 
i.  Reference to recorded subdivision plats or adjoining public land by recorded name, date and number. 
j.  Present ownership, tract designation and property lines of all adjacent unplatted land. 
k.  Title, scale, north arrow, and date. 
(2)  Titles and Certificates: 
a.  Certification of registered professional land surveyor certifying to accuracy of survey and plat. 
b.  Certification of title showing that subdivider is land owner. 
c.  Statement by owner dedicating streets, right-of-way and all sites for public uses as required by these regulations. 
d.  Certificate by the Director of Public Works certifying compliance to the appropriate codes and ordinances of the City of Pasadena. 
(3)  Protective Covenants in Form for Recording. 
(4)  Drawings. Final plat shall be drawn in ink on tracing cloth sheets measuring twenty-four (24) inches by thirty (30) inches, at a scale or [of] one hundred (100) feet to the inch or larger. If more than one sheet is necessary, the plat shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. In the case of large subdivisions the final plat shall be accompanied by an index sheet showing the entire subdivision. In the case of large subdivisions the final plat may be submitted for approval progressively in contiguous sections satisfactory to the Planning Commission. In addition to the foregoing requirements the following shall also apply. 
(i)  For any subdivision containing twenty (20) lots or less, a list of Cartesian Coordinates for all lot corners, points of curvatures, points of tangency, block corners and subdivision boundaries shall be submitted on electronic media in a format established by and acceptable to the director of public works. 
(ii)  For any subdivision containing twenty-one (21) or more lots, a complete plat shall be submitted on electronic media in a format established by and acceptable to the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 90-245, § 1(3), (4), 12-18-90)  
D. - Standard Forms. 
(1) Form of Dedication 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF 
I (or We), (Name of owner or names of owners), owner (or owners) of the property subdivided in the above and foregoing map of the (Name of Subdivision), do hereby make subdivision of said property, according to the lines, streets, lots, alleys, parks, building lines, and easements therein shown, and designate said subdivision as (Name of Subdivision) in the _______ Survey, _______ County, Texas; and dedicate to public use, as such, the streets, alleys, parks, and easements shown thereon forever; and do hereby waive any claims for damages occasioned by the establishing of grades as approved for the streets and alleys dedicated, or occasioned by the alteration of the surface of any portion of streets or alleys to conform to such grades; and do hereby bind myself (or ourselves), my (or our) heirs and assigns to warrant and forever defend the title to the land so dedicated. 
The following paragraph is not required but is necessary for overhead lines in easements: 
"There is also dedicated for utilities an unobstructed aerial easement five (5) feet wide from a plane twenty (20) feet above the ground upward located adjacent to all easements shown hereon." 
The following paragraph is to be used for all subdivisions: 
I (or We) hereby covenant and agree that all lots within the boundaries of this subdivision are for residential purposes unless otherwise noted. 
WITNESS my (or our) hand in Pasadena, Harris County, Texas this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	/s/   
      (Signature of Owner) 
 	 
	/s/   
      (Or Signatures of Owners) 
 	 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF 
BEFORE ME, the undersigned authority, on this day personally appeared (Name of Owner or names of Owners), known to me to be the person (or persons) whose name (or names) is (or are) subscribed to the foregoing instrument and acknowledged to me that he (or they) executed the same for the purposes and consideration therein set forth. (If a husband and wife join in the dedication, the following form should be added:) and the same said (Name of wife), having been examined by me privately and apart from her husband and having the same fully explained to her by me, acknowledged said instrument to be her act and deed, and that she had willingly signed the same. 
GIVEN UNDER MY HAND AND SEAL OF OFFICE, this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
	/s/   
      Notary Public in and for 
      _______ County, Texas (SEAL) 
 	 
(2) Certificate of the Surveyor 
This is to certify that I, (name of registered professional land surveyor), a registered professional land surveyor of the State of Texas, have platted the above subdivision from an actual survey on the ground, that all block corners, angle points, and points of curve are properly marked, and that this plat correctly represents that survey made by me. 
	/s/   
      Surveyor 
      Texas Registration No. _____ 
 	 
(Seal) 
(3) Approval of Planning Commission 
This is to certify that the Planning Commission of the City of Pasadena, Texas, has approved this plat and subdivision of (Name of subdivision) as shown hereon. 
IN TESTIMONY WHEREOF, witness the official signature of the Chairman and Secretary of the Planning Commission of the City of Pasadena, Texas, this _____ day of ________, 19___. 
/s/   
      Secretary - Engineer 	
 	 
/s/   
      Chairman 	
 	 
(4) Certificate By the Director of Public Works 
I, the undersigned, Director of Public Works of the City of _______ hereby certify that this subdivision plat conforms to all requirements of the subdivision regulations of the City as to which his approval is required. 
(5) County Clerk's Certificate 
I, ___________, Clerk of the County Court of _______ County, do hereby certify that the within instrument with its certificate of authentication was filed for registration in my office on ________, 19___, at _______ o'clock _____.m., and duly recorded on ________, 19___, at _______ o'clock _____m., and at Film Code No. _____ of the Map Records of _______ County for said County. 
Witness my hand and seal of office, at _______, the day and date last above written. 
	/s/ (Name of County Clerk) 
      Clerk of the County Court 
 	 
_____ County, Texas 
By: _____ 
Deputy 
(6) Dedication for Short Form Subdivision 
THE STATE OF TEXAS 
COUNTY OF 
I, (or We) (Name of Owner) (or Owners) of the property subdivided in the above and foregoing map of (Name of subdivision), do hereby make subdivision of said property, according to the lines, streets, lots, alleys, parks, building lines, and easements thereon shown and designate said subdivision as (Name of Subdivision), located in the _______ Survey, _______ County, Texas, and dedicate to public use, as such, the streets, alleys, parks, and easements shown thereon forever; and do hereby waive any claims for damages occasioned by the alteration of the surface of any portion of streets or alleys to conform to such grades; and do hereby bind ourselves, our successors and assigns to warrant and forever defend the title to the land so dedicated. 
(7) Form for Restricted Lots (Section 14A) 
I (or We), (Name of Owner or Names of Owners), do hereby covenant and agree that this amending plat does not attempt to remove any recorded covenants or restrictions as filed in Harris County Clerk's file _______ for _______ subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 90-245, § 1(5)—(8), 12-18-90)  
APPENDIX B - TOWNHOUSE SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 71-291 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING TOWNHOUSE SUBDIVISIONS; REPEALING ORDINANCE NO. 71-77, PASSED APRIL 13, 1971; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING A REPEALING CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING A SAVINGS CLAUSE. 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PASADENA: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Prior to the enactment of Ord. No. 71-291, adopted Oct. 5, 1971, Appendix B consisted of Ord. No. 71-77, adopted as an addition to Ordinance No. 67-1966, as codified in Supplement No. 3 to the 1964 Code of Ordinances (Chapter 25) and the sections were numbered accordingly. In preparing this Code, said Supplement No. 3 was ignored and Ord. No. 67-1966 is included herein, as adopted by the council, in Appendix A. Hence, the editors renumbered the sections of Ord. No. 71-77 so as to eliminate the references to Chapter 25 of the 1964 Code. 
Sec. 1 of said Ord. No. 71-291, expressly repealed Ch. 25, Art. VII, §§ 25-80—25-84, of the 1964 Code, as adopted by Ord. No. 71-77, passed April 13, 1971, and enacted in lieu thereof new provisions as set out herein in App. B. 
Cross reference— Buildings and general building regulations, Ch. 9; standards for residential condominium development, § 9-171 et seq.; planning, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; fence or wall for multi-family dwelling or apartment house abutting or adjacent to a residential subdivision, § 9-4; buildings and structures to conform to setback requirements of recorded subdivision plats, § 9-77; extension of water and sewer mains for subdivisions, § 37-56 et seq.; basic subdivision ordinance, App. A. 
 
Section 1. - Definitions. 
Alley. The term "alley" shall apply to a minor public right-of-way, not intended to provide the primary means of access to abutting lots and used for service access to the back or sides of properties otherwise abutting on a public street. 
Common area. The term "common area" shall apply to all private property within the townhouse subdivision held in common ownership by the owners of the lots within said subdivision for the use and enjoyment of residents of the subdivision. 
Front. The term "front", within the terms of this article [ordinance] shall mean that end of a townhouse lot or units which does not include a means of vehicular access. 
Gross area. The term "gross area" shall apply to the overall total area of the townhouse subdivision site exclusive of deductions. 
Open space. The term "open space" shall apply to lands designated to be used for recreation area, park, play lot area and plaza and ornamental areas. The required open space within townhouse subdivisions shall be common area. Section 25 of Ordinance No. 67-1966 [Appendix A] shall apply to townhouse subdivisions, open space requirements for townhouse subdivisions, not withstanding. 
Patio. Within this article [ordinance], "patio" shall be defined as an area of two hundred (200) square feet or more with a minimum dimension of ten (10) feet, located wholly on a townhouse lot and obstructed from the public view by means of common walls, solid fences or other construction which assures a degree of privacy within the patio. The patio shall be open to the sky or partially covered by a translucent material. 
Private drive. The term "private drive" shall apply to those streets within a townhouse subdivision which provide immediate vehicular access to individual townhouse lots or two (2) vehicular parking places in the common area. Said private drive shall be owned and maintained by the homeowners association which shall guarantee full use to all lot owners, their guests and invitees, and to all public service and emergency vehicles. 
Townhouse. The terms "townhouse" and "row house" shall be used interchangeably and shall mean a structure which is one of a series of living units designed for single-family occupancy, which living units are structurally connected or immediately adjacent to each other without side yards between individual living units. 
Townhouse subdivision. The term "townhouse subdivision" shall apply to those developments in which it is proposed to partition land into individual lots and construct townhouses which may be individually owned and where the minimum lot sizes are to be less than those required under the subdivision ordinance of the City of Pasadena (Appendix A). The site shall generally not be less than three (3) acres of contiguous land, unless the planning and zoning commission finds a property of less than three (3) acres is suitable by virtue of its unique character. 
(Ord. No. 84-164, § 1, 7-24-84)  
Section 2. - Minimum requirements. 
Any person proposing or intending to develop [a] townhouse subdivision within the City of Pasadena, shall, before any building permits are issued, cause a plat to be recorded in the map records of the County Clerk of Harris County, Texas, in conformance with the latest City Planning and Zoning Commission's Rules for Land Subdivision, except for the following requirements: 
A. STREETS: 
(1)  Access streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of sixty (60) feet, and shall be developed with a minimum forty (40) foot paving section constructed with concrete curbs and gutters in accordance with city standards. All public streets constructed within the townhouse subdivision shall fulfill access street standards. 
(2)  Private drives shall have a minimum paving width of twenty-six (26) feet and shall be constructed in accordance with minimum city specifications. Where townhouse construction occurs on only one side of a private drive, the width of that drive may be reduced to twenty-four (24) feet. Curbs shall be laid except where access is provided to the individual unit. Private drives shall not exceed five hundred (500) feet in length. In the case of dead-end private drives which do not exceed three hundred (300) feet in length, adequate turn-arounds shall be required as determined by the public works and traffic departments. 
(3)  Dead-end access streets and those private drives greater than three hundred (300) feet in length shall be terminated by a cul-de-sac with a minimum paving radius of forty (40) feet constructed in accordance with minimum city specifications. 
(4)  Alleys shall be prohibited. 
B. BUILDING SETBACK LINES: 
(1)  Building setback lines of ten (10) feet shall be required on all lots siding on access streets, private drives, or upon a plat boundary except where traffic safety or other factors necessitate the establishment of a greater setback. 
(2)  Building setback lines of six (6) feet shall be required on all lots fronting on an access street. 
(3)  No townhouse shall front on a private drive, or back on a public street. 
(4)  Townhouse units constructed on a street already in existence or dedicated shall conform to the setback lines previously established for that street. 
(5)  Where townhouse lots and living units are designed to front upon an open or common access courtyard rather than upon a public street said open or common courtyard shall be at least forty (40) feet wide and consistent with acceptable design standards. Said courtyard may not include vehicular drives or parking area in front of dwelling units. 
(6)  Where townhouse series fronts the sides of another series, the setback between series shall not be less than twenty (20) feet. 
C. LOTS: 
(1)  Lot width shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet for multi-story units. Minimum interior living area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(2)  Lot width shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet for single story units. Minimum interior living area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet. 
(3)  Dwelling units shall be constructed up to side lot lines without side yards. Side windows in staggered units may be provided, but shall not overlook adjacent patio areas. Side windows and doors on end units are permissible. 
(4)  Private patios shall be provided on each lot. 
(5)  All townhouse units shall be constructed within three hundred (300) feet of a public street and have access thereto by means of a common private drive. 
D. DENSITY: 
(1)  Maximum density shall not exceed sixteen (16) living units per gross acre. 
(2)  Optimum grouping of townhouses is from five (5) to eight (8) living units per series. No series shall contain more than twelve (12) living units. 
(3)  The minimum distance between series of townhouses shall be twelve (12) feet. 
E. ORIENTATION: 
All townhouse units in a continuous series shall be oriented in the same manner. Example: All units in a group shall front or back on a street or courtyard. 
F. SIDEWALKS: 
Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of an access street either adjacent to the curb or the property line, except that no sidewalk shall be required on a side of said street where no townhouse construction occurs; however, a continuous system of sidewalks shall be provided. 
G. EASEMENTS: 
All utilities shall be underground and utility easements shall be as required by the utility companies serving the subdivision. There shall be no public easements for water or sewer within the plat boundaries. Where a utility easement abuts an access street, required sidewalks must be constructed adjacent to the curb. 
H. OPEN SPACE: 
There shall be a minimum of twenty per cent (20%) of gross site area set aside for open space. The location and the use of open space shall in all cases be subject to the approval of the Pasadena City Planning and Zoning Commission. 
I. OFF-STREET PARKING: 
There shall be a minimum of two (2) off-street parking places required per townhouse lot. The required spaces must be on the lot they serve, or on a common parking area within two hundred (200) feet of the lots they are intended to serve as measured and accessible along a pedestrian walkway. 
J. ILLUMINATION: 
All streets, private drives and pedestrian walkways shall be lighted at night with a minimum intensity of 0.2 foot candles illumination.  
Section 3. - Exhibits. 
In addition to those exhibits and drawings required under sections 11 and 12 of Ordinance No. 67-1966 [Appendix A], the developer of a townhouse subdivision shall submit to the planning commission drawings indicating the orientation of all townhouse lots and the units on those lots, in addition to typical elevations and floor plans of one series or group.  
Section 4. - Ownership and maintenance. 
Approval of the townhouse subdivision shall not be granted until the developer provides, in addition to the final plat, the following: 
(1)  A declaration of protective covenants and restrictions applicable to the land within the subdivision. 
(2)  The articles and bylaws of a homes association and its incorporation. 
Both shall be approved by the planning commission prior to recording of any instrument. 
A homes association shall be defined as an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land agreements running with the land through which: 
(a)  Each lot owner is automatically a member; and 
(b)  Each lot is automatically subject to an annual assessment for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's activities. 
The covenants, restrictions, bylaws, and articles of incorporation are to be determined by the developer, but shall contain as a minimum a clearly defined liability or responsibility of the individual property owners or the association for the following: 
(1)  Any joint operations and maintenance of utilities. 
(2)  Liability insurance. 
(3)  Tax obligations on the properties. 
(4)  Property rights in the common properties. 
(5)  Membership, transition, and voting rights in the association. 
(6)  Assessments or dues. 
(7)  Party walls. 
(8)  Maintenance of walks, recreation areas, parking areas and exterior of living units. 
(9)  Maintenance of landscaped area on public right-of-way within the subdivision. 
In addition, the sale and conveyance of the homes by deed shall confirm the rights and duties which are provided above. 
The articles and bylaws should clearly state if the home owners association has the power to dissolve itself at a later date, and the disposition of the common areas at the time of dissolution.  
Section 5. - Limitations. 
A.  The provisions and exceptions cited in these regulations shall apply only to those developments which fall within the definition of a "townhouse subdivision." 
B.  The dedication on the plat shall carry the following certification: 
"It is hereby covenanted and agreed with each lot owner, with the City of Pasadena, and with the Pasadena City Planning and Zoning Commission that this subdivision will be developed to conform in all ways with the rules and regulations of said Commission last adopted by it prior to this date, and upon which basis this plat is approved."  
Section 6. - Severability. 
The City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid, or unconstitutional, by a court of competent jurisdiction, that, in such event it would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portions of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be so found to be unconstitutional or invalid, and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect.  
Section 7. - Repealing clause. 
All ordinances in force when this ordinance becomes effective and which ordinances are inconsistent herewith or are in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as said ordinance are inconsistent, or in conflict with, this ordinance.  
Section 8. - Savings clause. 
All rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this chapter [ordinance] and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefits of the city. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting, in the City Hall this 28th day of September, A.D., 1971. 
APPROVED this 28th day of September, A.D., 1971. 
/s/ CLYDE DOYAL, MAYOR OF THE CITY OF 
PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
/s/ RUSSELL L. DRAKE 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
APPROVED: 
/s/ CHARLES A. EASTERLING 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
PASSED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING by the City Council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this 5th day of October, A.D., 1971. 
APPROVED this 5th day of October, A.D., 1971. 
/s/ CLYDE DOYAL, MAYOR OF THE CITY OF 
PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
/s/ RUSSELL L. DRAKE 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
APPROVED: 
/s/ CHARLES A. EASTERLING 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS  
APPENDIX C - PATIO HOME SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 91-36 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING APPENDIX C, PATIO HOME SUBDIVISION, OF THE BASIC SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE NO. 67-1966, PASADENA CODE OF ORDINANCES FOR THE PURPOSE OF REGULATING SUCH CONSTRUCTION; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; PROVIDING FOR A REPEALING CLAUSE; AND PROVIDING FOR A SAVINGS CLAUSE. 
WHEREAS, Ordinance No. 81-48 created certain patio home subdivision regulations, and Ordinance No. 83-354 revised those patio home subdivision regulations; and 
WHEREAS, innovative residential design and land use flexibility are necessary in order to utilize urban land more efficiently; and 
WHEREAS, maximizing choices in the types of environment and living units available to the public will further promote the general welfare, NOW, THEREFORE, 
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PASADENA: 
Section 1. That Appendix C, Patio Home Subdivision, of the Basic Subdivision Ordinance No. 67-1966, Pasadena Code of Ordinances is hereby amended in its entirety as set forth attached hereto and incorporated herein for all purposes: 
APPENDIX C 
PATIO HOME SUBDIVISIONS 
Definitions. 
Words and phrases given special definitions as contained in this ordinance are defined as follows. Words or phrases not specifically defined herein shall be in accordance with the accepted meaning as used in context with the pertinent subject or as further defined in other ordinances or resolutions passed by the city council. 
Common open space. The term "common open space" shall mean land set aside for the use by all subdivision residents for active and/or passive recreation. 
Lot coverage. The term "lot coverage" shall refer to that per cent of land on a patio home lot covered by buildings, carports, garages, and driveway(s) necessary for required parking. 
Nonzero lot line patio home. The term "nonzero lot line patio home" shall mean a detached, single-family dwelling located on an individual lot with one side of the foundation slab not more than twenty-four (24) inches from a side lot line, save and except, specific corner lots and plat boundary lots which abut other private property as established in this ordinance. The lot includes a patio or side yard oriented toward the opposite side of the dwelling entirely enclosed by the dwelling wall, zero lot line wall or privacy wall of a neighboring dwelling and other fences or walls. 
Patio area. The term "patio area" shall mean that private enclosed open space not visible from the street and oriented toward one side of a patio home, extending to include the side and rear portion of the lot, as well as that portion of the adjoining lot between the privacy wall and side lot line (in the case of a nonzero lot line structure), and enclosed on all sides by building walls or fences. 
Patio home subdivision. The term "patio home subdivision" shall refer to those developments in which it is proposed to partition land into individual lots of a size smaller than required elsewhere in the subdivision ordinance, for the purpose of constructing patio homes. A patio home subdivision shall include a minimum of eight (8) contiguous lots. 
Privacy wall. The term "privacy wall" shall mean that wall of a nonzero lot line patio home or garage which is no more than twenty-four (24) inches from a side lot line. 
Zero lot line/zero lot line wall. The term "zero lot line/zero lot line wall" shall refer to that situation whereby the side lot line is coincident with a patio home wall. 
Zero lot line patio home. The term "zero lot line patio home" shall mean a detached, single-family dwelling located on an individual lot with one side of the foundation slab coincident with a side lot line, save and except, specific corner lots and plat boundary lots which abut other private property as established in this ordinance. The lot includes a patio or side yard oriented toward the opposite side of the dwelling entirely enclosed by the dwelling wall, zero lot line wall or privacy wall of a neighboring dwelling and other fences or walls. 
Minimum requirements. 
Any person proposing or intending to develop a patio home subdivision within the City of Pasadena, shall, before any building permits are issued, cause a plat to be recorded in the map records of the county clerk of Harris County, Texas, in conformance with the latest city planning and zoning commission's rules for land subdivision, except for the following requirements: 
A.  Lot, Building Size Minimum Requirements. The minimum size lot to be permitted in a patio home subdivision shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet, and a patio home shall contain a minimum of eight hundred (800) square feet of livable space. Lot coverage shall not exceed fifty (50) per cent of the total lot. The minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet at the building line. 
(B)  Common open space. Each patio home subdivision containing twenty-five (25) acres or more, whether approved under one plat or phased development, shall at that time provide a park reserve equivalent to eight (8) per cent of the then total gross site area. The location and configuration of said park reserve shall be subject to approval by the planning and zoning commission and delineated on the recorded plat. The city shall, within six (6) months from the recording date of said plat, enter an order for payment to the subdivider of at least ten (10) per cent of the appraised fair market value of said reserve and shall pay the balance plus interest, within one year thereafter. In the event the city fails to exercise the purchase option, after six (6) months, the developer may submit at no additional charge, a plat for the development of the released park reserve. Common open space in patio home subdivisions may be owned by all property owners of the subdivision and maintained by a homeowners association as established in accordance with this ordinance. 
(C)  Building lines. The front setback to the livable area of an interior lot patio home or side loaded garage shall be no less than twenty (20) feet from the right-of-way line of a public street. Garages or carports front loaded by a driveway shall be no less than twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way line of a public street. On corner lots, the side setback to the livable area of a patio home or side loaded garage shall be no less than fifteen (15) feet from the right-of-way line of a public street. Patio homes and detached structures on a patio home lot shall be set back no less than eight (8) feet from the rear property line along a shared utility easement or sixteen (16) feet along a peripheral lot. Side setback lines for both zero and nonzero lot line patio homes with garages/carports shall maintain a minimum size yard separation of ten (10) feet between the walls of adjacent patio homes. Side setback lines shall be indicated by building limit lines on the subdivision plat. Adjoining lots shall not have common zero lot line walls or adjacent privacy walls. In that specific instance whereby a patio home lot abuts another private property, a building line of five (5) feet shall be required. A detached structure or outbuilding to be utilized exclusively as a shed, storage area or other such nonresidential use and located on the same lot with a patio home, shall be constructed no closer than five (5) feet to the side lot line of the adjoining property. 
(D)  Zero lot line wall. In a zero lot line patio home, no openings for access, light, or air shall be directly permitted in the zero lot line wall of a patio home. Wood veneer shall not be permitted for zero lot line walls, which shall be built with brick or masonry materials. No portion of the dwelling or any architectural features (i.e., sills, facias, soffits, eaves, gutters, etc.) shall project over any property line. 
(E)  Privacy wall. In a nonzero lot line patio home, no openings for access or light shall be directly permitted for privacy walls, which shall be built with brick or masonry materials. No portion of the dwelling or any architectural features (i.e., sills, facias, soffits, eaves, gutters, etc.) shall project over any property line. 
(F)  Building height. No patio home shall exceed thirty-six (36) feet in height. 
(G)  Lot fencing. Solid (opaque) walls or fences of wood, masonry or other durable, suitable materials shall extend the full length of the rear lot line as well as those portions of the front building line behind the front wall of a patio home. In a zero lot line patio home, the fence or wall shall extend along the side lot line behind the zero lot line wall to the rear lot line. In a nonzero lot line patio home, the fence or wall shall extend from the rearmost corner of the privacy wall in a perpendicular direction to the side lot line and then extend along the side lot line to the rear lot line. Chain link fences using opaque slats are expressly prohibited. Fences or walls shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet in height. On corner lots; fencing shall be required along the building setback lines. 
(H)  Patios. The enclosed private open space (patio area) of a patio home shall be oriented toward one side of the home and may extend to include the rear area of the lot. The "patio area" shall contain a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet and be enclosed entirely on the dwelling wall, privacy wall or zero lot line wall of the neighboring dwelling, and other lot fencing. In nonzero lot line patio homes, the patio area includes that portion of the neighboring lot abutting the privacy wall. 
(I)  Garage and driveway requirements. All patio homes shall provide for a garage or carport. Where a carport is utilized, such shall not be constructed within twenty-five (25) feet from the right-of-way line of a public street and shall be screened from the street view by a garage-type door. Driveways shall be concrete and of such design to accommodate two (2) vehicular off-street parking spaces on each lot exclusive of the garage/carport area. In no instance, shall a driveway exceed twenty-five (25) feet in width. 
(J)  Lot drainage. Topography of the finished, graded lot shall be so designed as to divert surface runoff away from all dwelling units. The builder or developer of a patio home shall provide the city permit division with a site plan indicating that system by which drainage will be provided for each lot. 
(K)  Roof drainage. In a zero lot line patio home, the structure should be architecturally designed so that water does not drain from the roof to the zero lot line side. In a nonzero lot line patio home where the roof slopes toward the privacy wall side, an adequate stormwater gutter system shall be provided. 
(L)  Utilities and easements. All utilities shall be underground and utility easements shall be as required by the utility companies serving the subdivision. A side easement extending no more than five (5) feet from the privacy wall or zero lot line wall into the patio area of the neighboring lot shall be required and shall be used for maintenance and drainage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 00-34, § 1, 3-14-00) 
Ownership and maintenance. 
Approval of a patio home subdivision shall not be granted until the developer provides, in addition to the final plat, the following: 
(1)  A declaration of protective covenants and restrictions applicable to the land within the subdivision. 
(2)  The articles of incorporation and bylaws of a homeowners association if applicable, for a patio home subdivision whereby common open space is to be provided for the residents. 
Such instruments shall be approved by the planning and zoning commission prior to recording any instrument. In those instances whereby common open area is to be provided, said necessary protective covenants, restrictions, articles of incorporation and bylaws shall be determined by the developer, but shall contain as a minimum a clearly defined liability or responsibility of the individual property owner or the homeowners association for the following: 
(1)  Any joint operations and maintenance of utilities. 
(2)  Liability insurance. 
(3)  Tax obligations on the properties. 
(4)  Property rights in the common properties. 
(5)  Membership, transition, and voting rights in the homeowners association. 
(6)  Assessments or dues. 
(7)  Maintenance, repair or replacement of masonry-like walls and wood fences adjacent to common property lines. 
(8)  Maintenance of walks, recreation areas, and parking areas. 
(9)  Maintenance of landscaped area on public right-of-way within the subdivisions. 
A homeowners association shall be defined as an incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under a recorded land agreement running with the land through which: 
(1)  Each lot owner is automatically a member; and 
(2)  Each lot is automatically subject to an annual assessment for a proportionate share of the expense for the organization's activities. 
The articles of incorporation and bylaws should clearly state if the homeowners association has the power to dissolve itself at a later date, and the disposition of the common areas at the time of dissolution. In addition, the sale and conveyance of the homes by deed shall confirm the rights and duties which are provided above. 
Limitations 
(A)  The provisions and exceptions cited in these regulations shall apply only to those developments which fall within the definition of a patio home subdivision. 
(B)  This article shall not be construed to permit more than two (2) single-family dwellings to be constructed on adjacent lots without the observance of the total required side yard between same. 
(C)  The dedication on the plat shall carry the following certification: 
"It is hereby covenanted and agreed with each lot owner, with the City of Pasadena, and the Pasadena Planning and Zoning Commission that this subdivision shall be restricted to patio homes only and developed to conform in all ways with the rules and regulations of said commission last adopted by it prior to this date, and upon which basis this plat is approved." 
Section 2. That the city council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, does hereby declare that if any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, word, or portion of this ordinance is declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that, in such event the city council would have passed and ordained any and all remaining portion of this ordinance without the inclusion of that portion or portions which may be found to be unconstitutional or invalid, and declares that its intent is to make no portion of this ordinance dependent upon the validity of any other portion thereof, and that all said remaining portions shall continue in full force and effect. 
Section 3. That all ordinances in force when this ordinance becomes effective which are inconsistent with or are in conflict with this ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as said ordinance is inconsistent with or are in conflict with this ordinance. 
Section 4. That all rights and remedies which have accrued in favor of the city under this ordinance and amendments thereto shall be and are preserved for the benefits of the city. 
PASSED ON FIRST READING by the city council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this the 19th day of February, A.D., 1991. 
APPROVED this the 19th day of February A.D., 1991. 
JOHN RAY HARRISON, 
MAYOR OF THE CITY 
OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
APPROVED: 
_____
_____
PAN RAMEY 
LEE CLARK 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
PASSED ON SECOND AND FINAL READING by the city council of the City of Pasadena, Texas, in regular meeting in the City Hall this the 26th day of February, A.D., 1991. 
APPROVED this the 26th day of February, A.D., 1991. 
JOHN RAY HARRISON, 
MAYOR OF THE CITY 
OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
ATTEST: 
APPROVED: 
_____
_____
PAN RAMEY 
LEE CLARK 
CITY SECRETARY 
CITY ATTORNEY 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
CITY OF PASADENA, TEXAS 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ordinance No. 91-36, adopted Feb. 26, 1991, pertaining to patio home subdivisions, amended App. C in its entirety to read as herein set out. Prior to such ordinance, App. C pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 81-48, adopted March 10, 1981, as amended by Ord. No. 83-354, §§ 1, 2, adopted Nov. 29, 1983. 
Cross reference— Buildings and building regulations, Ch. 9; fence or wall for multifamily dwelling or apartment house abutting or adjacent to a residential subdivision, § 9-4; buildings and structures to conform to setback requirements of recorded subdivisions plats, § 9-77; standards for residential condominium development, § 9-171 et seq., planning, Ch. 28; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 32; basic subdivision ordinance, App. A; townhouse subdivisions, App. B. 

