7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/422
City of Pflugerville
Charter and Code of Ordinances
Including Web Update 19.2
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 1393-19-04-23
passed 4-23-19.
HOME RULE
CHARTER
PREAMBLE*
We, the citizens of Pflugerville, Texas, in order to provide for the future progress of our city, establish and maintain a system of selfgovernment
based on sound fiscal and operational methods, ensure equal protection and treatment of all persons, and secure fully the
benefits of our location and environment, do adopt this Home Rule Charter in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, AND BOUNDARIES
Section 1.01. Incorporation.
The inhabitants of the City of Pflugerville, Travis and Williamson Counties, Texas, residing within its corporate limits as they exist
and may be established in the future, constitute and shall continue to be a municipal body politic and corporate in perpetuity under
the name of the “City of Pflugerville,” with the powers, privileges, rights, duties, and immunities set forth in this charter. The City of
Pflugerville is referred to in this charter as “the city.”
Section 1.02. Form of Government.
The municipal government provided by this charter shall be the city council-manager form of government, consisting of a mayor and
council members, elected by the people and responsible to the people, and a city manager, appointed by and responsible to the
council for proper administration of the city. Subject only to the limitations imposed by the state constitution, applicable state
statutes, and this charter, all powers of the city shall be vested in the elected mayor and council members, who shall enact local
legislation, adopt budgets, and determine policies. All powers of the city shall be exercised in the manner prescribed by this charter
or, if not prescribed, as set out by ordinance, adopted in accordance with this charter.
Section 1.03. Boundaries.
The bounds and limits of the city shall be those established in the original incorporation proceedings of the city, filed of record on
October 20, 1965, in the office of the County Clerk of Travis County, Texas and those boundaries established and changed after that
date by annexation ordinances and proceedings of the city.
Section 1.04. Extension of Boundaries or Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
The City Council shall have the full power to annex territory, to extend and enlarge the city boundaries and exchange areas with
other municipalities.
Before the city may annex an area or extend its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city manager must present a written report on the
financial impact of the proposed annexation or extension and the adoption of any proposed service plan to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and city council.
Section 1.05. Detachment or Contraction of Boundaries.
The city council by ordinance may detach any territory not suitable or necessary for city purposes with or without the consent of the
inhabitants or owners of the area to be detached. In detaching any area, the city council shall provide notice and hearings as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/422
prescribed by Local Government Code § 43.052. The ordinance detaching an area shall specify accurately, by metes and bounds, the
affected area.
ARTICLE II. POWERS OF THE CITY
Section 2.01. General Powers Enumerated.
In addition to the powers enumerated in or implied by this charter, the city shall have and may exercise all powers of local selfgovernment
and all other powers, rights, privileges, and immunities which, under the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
Section 2.02. Tort Liability.
In order to preserve a claim under the Texas Tort Claims Act, Chapter 101, Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, notice of
personal injury, death, or property damages must be mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the city manager within
ninety days of the date that the incident giving rise to the claim occurred. The notice must:
(1) describe the damage or injury claimed;
(2) state the time, date, and place of the incident;
(3) describe the incident in reasonable detail;
(4) state the city's alleged fault producing or contributing to the injury or damage; and
(5) identify all parties involved in the claim.
This ninety-day notice is not required if the city has actual notice of all elements of the claim, including knowledge of fault and
knowledge of the injury or damage. In addition, the city may, by majority vote of its city council, waive the ninety-day notice
requirement for good cause. Any claim against the city is subject to the limitations of the Texas Tort Claims Act.
ARTICLE III. THE CITY COUNCIL
Section 3.01. Number, Selection, and Term.
The city council shall be composed of the mayor and six council members, who shall be elected from the city at large. Each council
member shall occupy a position on the council, numbered one through six consecutively. The mayor and council members shall be
elected in the manner provided in Article V of this charter to serve for three-year terms.
Unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the terms “city council” or “council”, when used in this charter, shall mean the mayor
and the council members.
Section 3.02. Term Limits.
Council members and the mayor shall be limited to three consecutive full terms in office. A person who has served three consecutive
full terms as a council member, regardless of place number, or as mayor may not again hold the same office until at least one term
out of office has passed. A person who has served three consecutive terms as a council member shall be eligible to be elected to the
office of mayor for three consecutive terms, and a person who has served three consecutive terms as mayor shall be eligible to be
elected as a council member for three consecutive terms.
Section 3.03. Qualifications.
In addition to any qualifications for holding office prescribed by law, the members of the council shall reside within the city and shall
meet the conditions of section 5.02 of this charter while in office.
Section 3.04. Compensation.
Members of the city council shall serve without compensation, but shall be entitled to payment of or reimbursement for all necessary
expenses incurred in the performance of official duties, upon approval by the city council.
Section 3.05. General Powers and Duties.
All powers of the city shall be vested in the city council, except as otherwise provided by law or this charter. The city council shall
provide for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed on the city by law through the establishment of general policies
and ordinances, which will be implemented by the City Manager. Any member of city council may place an item on the agenda for a
subsequent regular council meeting with the consent of a second member of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/422
Section 3.06. Mayor and Mayor Pro-tem.
The mayor shall have the following rights and responsibilities:
1. Preside at all meetings of the city council.
2. Sign any ordinance, order, resolution, plat, bond, conveyance, contract, or other document that is authorized or
enacted by the city council.
3. Serve as head of the city government for all ceremonial purposes.
4. Serve as the official representative of the city.
5. Perform other duties, consistent with this charter, as may be imposed by the city council.
The mayor shall have the power to vote on all matters which come before the City Council in the same manner as City Council
members. The mayor may not bind or obligate the city in any way without prior authorization from the city council.
The mayor pro-tem shall be a council member elected by the council at the first meeting following the canvassing of each regular
election. The mayor pro-tem shall act as mayor during the disability or absence of the mayor. When acting in the capacity of mayor,
the mayor pro-tem shall have the rights and responsibilities and be subject to the limitations conferred on the mayor by this Section.
Section 3.07. Vacancies.
In the event of a single vacancy in the City Council, if there are 365 days or more remaining on the term of the vacated Mayoral or
City Council position, the City Council shall call a special election to fill such vacancy. If there are less than 365 days remaining in
the term of the vacated Mayoral or City Council position, the City Council may, by majority vote of the remaining Councilmembers,
at its discretion, appoint a new Mayor or Councilmember to fill such vacancy or call a special election to fill such vacancy.
Section 3.08. Removal from Office.
(a) Reasons: Any member of the council may be removed from office for any of the following reasons:
1. Failure to maintain the qualifications for office required by sections 3.03 and 5.02 of this charter.
2. Violation of any express prohibition of this charter or the Code of Ethics adopted under Section 11.05.
3. Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude.
4. Failure to attend three consecutive regular city council meetings without being excused by the council.
5. Violation of Section 3.09(c) of this Charter.
6. Violation of Section 11.03 of this Charter.
(b) Initiation: Removal proceedings shall be initiated when a sworn written complaint charging a member of the council with an
act or omission that is a reason for removal is presented to the mayor or, if the complaint is against the mayor, to the mayor pro-tem.
The person receiving the complaint shall file it with the city secretary, who shall provide a copy to the member complained against
and all other council members. The mayor or the mayor pro-tem shall set a time and date for a hearing on the complaint.
(c) Hearing and decision:
1. All hearings held under this subsection shall be conducted in open session, except that the City Council may conduct
a closed session to get advice from its attorney pursuant to the Texas Open Meetings Act;
2. The officer holder subject to any investigation and/or hearing under this section shall be entitled to written notice of
the allegations of Removal;
3. A special meeting shall be called to hold the hearing;
4. A member of City Council who initiated or is the subject of the investigation or hearing shall not sit at the dais and
shall not participate in deliberation or vote;
5. City Council shall adopt by ordinance rules of order to be followed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/422
6. The City Council shall state the nature of the hearing and the allegations to be considered, shall be provided the
results of any investigation and a presentation of the evidence against the office holder including, but not limited to
testimony from individuals;
7. The individual who is subject to the hearing is entitled to representation at the hearing, shall be provided an
opportunity to respond to the allegations, cross-examine all witnesses and present any relevant evidence including, but not
limited to, testimony from individuals;
8. City Council may ask questions of any individual;
9. No public comment shall be allowed unless agreed to by a majority vote of the voting members of City Council
present. Rules for public comment shall be set by City Council;
10. If City Council determines by an affirmative vote of the majority of the voting members of the City Council that
removal is warranted, it shall declare a vacancy to be filled no sooner than the next regular meeting and in accordance
with section 3.07;
11. In addition to removal, City Council may, by a majority vote of the voting members of City Council, take any
action it determines to be appropriate including, but not limited to, directing further investigation, requesting further
information, or taking a vote of censure.
Section 3.09. Prohibitions.
(a) Holding other office: No member of the council shall hold other city office or employment or provide other compensated
and/or contracted services to the city during his term of office and no former member of the council shall hold any compensated
appointive city office or employment or provide other compensated and/or contracted services to the city until at least two years after
the expiration of his term of office.
(b) Appointments and removals: Neither the city council nor any of its individual members shall require the appointment or
removal of any city officer or employee that the city manager or his subordinate is authorized to appoint. This provision shall not
limit the right of the city council to express and to freely and fully discuss with the city manager its views pertaining to the
appointment and removal of city officers and employees.
(c) Interference with administration: Unless making inquiries or conducting an investigation under section 3.19, the city council
and its individual members shall work through the city manager in dealing with city officers and employees who are under the
direction and supervision of the city manager. No member of the council shall exert any direct control over city officers and
employees or shall give orders to or direct the actions of city officers and employees, publicly or privately, except as may be
permitted by this charter.
Section 3.10. City Council Meetings.
The city council shall meet at least once each month and may hold as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the
business of the city. Days and times of regular meetings shall be set by resolution. All meetings shall be posted and conducted in
accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Government Code. The city council shall meet with
each board or commission on an as needed basis.
Section 3.11. Quorum.
Four members of city council, including the mayor shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transacting business. Except as
otherwise provided by this charter or state law, the affirmative vote of a majority of those members present and voting shall
constitute valid action by the city council.
Section 3.12. Rules of Procedure.
The city council shall determine its own rules and order of business by resolution. Rules of procedure shall ensure that citizens of the
city have a reasonable opportunity at any meeting to address the council regarding matters under consideration. The council shall
provide for minutes to be kept of all meetings and, except for records of discussion held in executive session, the minutes shall be
public records.
Section 3.13. Voting.
Voting on all motions regarding official actions of the council shall be by roll call, and each member's vote shall be recorded in the
minutes. Except as prohibited by conflict of interest laws or this charter, all members of the city council shall vote “yes” or “no” on
every action, resolution, or ordinance requiring a vote. The nature of a conflict of interest requiring an abstention shall be concisely
stated in the minutes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/422
Section 3.14. Action Requiring an Ordinance.
In addition to other acts required by law or by specific provision of this charter to be done by ordinance, the city council shall adopt
ordinances in order to:
1. Authorize the borrowing of money.
2. Convey or lease or authorize the conveyance or lease of any city land.
Acts other than those specifically enumerated above may be done either by ordinance or resolution.
Section 3.15. Ordinances, In General.
(a) Form: The council shall legislate only by ordinance that contains an enacting clause stating, “Be it ordained by the City
Council of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.” Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in the written or printed form required for
adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which shall be clearly expressed in its title; however, general
appropriations ordinances may contain various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated.
Once adopted, no ordinance may be amended or repealed except by adoption of another ordinance amending or repealing the original
ordinance. Except when an ordinance is repealed in its entirety, the amending or repealing ordinance shall set out in full the
ordinance, sections, or subsections to be amended or repealed and shall clearly indicate the proposed amendments, additions, or
deletions.
(b) Procedure: Any member of the council may offer an ordinance in writing after it has been approved as to form by the city
attorney and placed on the agenda of a regular council meeting. At least one week before first reading, copies of the proposed
ordinance in the form required for adoption shall be furnished to members of the council and the caption of the proposed ordinance
shall be posted at the city hall. On request of any citizen, the city secretary shall furnish a copy of any proposed ordinance, the
caption of which is posted for public review. Amendments to any proposed ordinance shall be subject to the same notice, posting,
and copy requirements so long as the proposed ordinance is before the council.
The city attorney shall review all proposed ordinances before first reading and provide any suggestions or objections to the council in
writing.
Except as specified below, a proposed ordinance shall be read at two council meetings with at least seventy-two hours elapsing
between readings. A proposed ordinance may be amended on first reading; however, if an amendment is made at second reading,
final adoption shall be postponed until a subsequent meeting. An emergency ordinance shall be adopted in accordance with section
3.16 of this charter; a budget ordinance shall be adopted in accordance with section 9.03 of this charter; an appropriations ordinance
shall be adopted in accordance with section 9.04 of this charter; an ordinance pertaining to borrowing shall be adopted in accordance
with section 9.05 of this charter; and a tax ordinance shall be adopted in accordance with section 9.08 of this charter.
(c) Reading: Reading aloud the caption of an ordinance shall satisfy the requirement for reading, provided that printed copies of
the ordinance in the form required for adoption are in front of all council members present and a reasonable number of copies are
available to citizens present at the meeting. If three council members request, a proposed ordinance shall be read aloud in its entirety.
(d) Effective date: Every ordinance shall be effective upon adoption, or at any later time specified in the ordinance; however, no
ordinance imposing a penalty, fine, or forfeiture shall become effective until the caption of the ordinance, which shall summarize the
purpose of the ordinance and the penalty for violating the ordinance has been published one time on the city's official website or
other electronic media that is readily accessible to the public. An ordinance passed on first reading by at least three affirmative votes
may become effective after first reading provided the motion so specifies, but the ordinance shall be posted and adopted at a
subsequent meeting as required by section 3.15(b).
Section 3.16. Emergency Ordinances.
(a) Purpose and limitations: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or the public peace, the council may adopt
emergency ordinances; however, ordinances that levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rates charged by a
public utility for its services; or, except as permitted by section 9.05, authorize the borrowing of money shall not be adopted as
emergency ordinances.
(b) Form and procedure: An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form required for ordinances and shall be clearly
designated in its caption as an emergency ordinance. Immediately after the enacting clause, it shall contain a declaration stating that
an emergency exists and describing it in clear and specific terms. The affirmative vote of a majority of council members shall be
required to approve an emergency clause. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, amended, and rejected at the same meeting at
which it is introduced, and the affirmative vote of a majority of council members is required for adoption. After adoption, it shall be
numbered as any other ordinance with the designation of “E” following the number and shall be published and become effective in
the manner required for any other ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/422
(c) Expiration: Any emergency ordinance, except one authorizing borrowing as provided by section 9.05, shall be automatically
repealed sixty-one days after becoming effective, but this provision shall not prevent re-adoption of the ordinance using the
procedure required for any other ordinance.
Section 3.17. Code of Technical Regulations.
The city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by adopting an ordinance that incorporates the code by
reference. The procedure for adopting such an ordinance shall be as prescribed in section 3.15 of this charter, except that the
requirement for distribution and posting of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of the technical regulations
proposed for adoption by reference, as well as the adopting ordinance. Copies of an adopted code of technical regulations shall be
available from the city secretary for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price.
Section 3.18. Bonded Employees.
The city council shall require all municipal officers and employees who receive and disburse city funds, including the city manager,
to be bonded in an amount determined by the city council. The city shall bear the cost of the bonds.
Section 3.19. Inquiries and Investigations.
The city council may, upon majority vote, make investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any city department,
division, or office and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of
evidence. By ordinance, the council may provide that any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of
these powers shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to a fine set by that ordinance.
ARTICLE IV. ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES
Section 4.01. City Manager.
(a) Appointment and qualifications: The city council shall appoint a city manager by affirmative vote of at least four members.
The council shall determine a method of selection that ensures orderly, nonpartisan action in securing a competent and qualified
person to fill the position. The city manager shall be chosen based on executive and administrative training, experience, and ability.
Within 180 days after appointment, the city manager shall become a resident of the city. An affirmative vote of a majority of the
voting members of the city council shall be required to terminate a city manager.
(b) Term and compensation: The city manager shall be employed for a term and compensation and upon conditions determined by
the city council.
(c) Powers and duties: The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city
council for the proper administration of all city matters. In fulfilling that administrative responsibility, the city manager shall:
1. Implement the general policies established by the City Council[.]
2. See that all state laws and city ordinances are effectively enforced.
3. Appoint, suspend, or remove department heads in accordance with the city's established policies and procedures,
except as otherwise provided in this charter.
4. Attend all city council meetings unless excused by the council.
5. Prepare the annual budget and submit it to the city council in accordance with section 9.03 of this charter and be
responsible for administration of the budget after its adoption.
6. Prepare and submit to the city council at the end of each fiscal year a complete report on the finances and
administrative activity of the city for the preceding year.
7. Submit to the city council a monthly budget report; keep the council informed regarding the city's financial condition
and future needs; and make financial recommendations.
8. Provide reports concerning the operation of city departments, offices, commissions, boards and agencies, as required
by the city council.
9. Serve as officer for public records in accordance with the Texas Open Records Act, Chapter 552, Government Code,
and the custodian of records under the Local Government Records Act, Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code.
10. If authorized by the city council, sign any contract, conveyance or other document.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/422
11. Assist each board or commission that must make recommendations to the city council regarding the expenditure of
funds or capital improvements in the preparation or amendment of a five-year plan to submit to the council.
12. Perform the duties prescribed by this charter and other duties as may be required by the city council, consistent with
this charter.
13. Annually submit a five-year capital improvements plan to the city council, at least one hundred twenty days before
the beginning of the budget year. The plan must list projects in order of preference with a recommendation for the year of
construction for each project.
14. Meet with, on no less than a quarterly basis, the representative of the association selected by a majority of the
police officers of the police department of the city as the exclusive representative for the police officers to discuss police
officer working conditions and compensation, unless a majority of the police officers withdraw the recognition. If a
question is raised as to whether an association is the majority representative of the employees of a department, it shall be
resolved by a fair election conducted according to procedures agreed on by the parties. If the parties are unable to agree
on fair election procedures, any party may request the American Arbitration Association to conduct the election and
certify the results. Certification of the results of an election under this section shall resolve the question regarding
representation. Any and all of the parties seeking representative status shall pay the expenses of any election equally.
(d) Acting city manager: Within sixty days after the city manager takes office, the city council, on recommendation of the city
manager, shall appoint a qualified administrative officer of the city to serve as acting city manager in the manager's absence or
disability. No member of the city council may serve as acting city manager.
Section 4.02. Municipal Court.
(a) Establishment: A municipal court for the City of Pflugerville is established and shall be maintained for the trial of
misdemeanor offenses. The municipal court shall have all the powers and duties of municipal courts prescribed by State law.
(b) Municipal judge and associate judges: The city council shall appoint a municipal judge, who shall be an attorney licensed to
practice law in Texas and a resident of the City, and shall fix the compensation for that office. The city council, in its discretion, may
appoint additional associate municipal judges, who shall not be required to be attorneys. All municipal judges shall serve at the will
of the council and shall receive compensation fixed by the city council.
(c) Municipal court clerk: The city manager shall appoint a clerk of the municipal court and deputies, as needed, who shall have
power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the court, and perform any of the usual and necessary
acts performed by clerks of courts in issuing process and conducting the business of the court.
(d) Finances: All costs, fees, special expenses, and fines imposed by the municipal court shall be deposited to the city treasury for
the use and benefit of the city, except as otherwise required by state law.
Section 4.03. City Attorney.
The city council shall appoint a city attorney, who shall be a competent attorney, duly licensed to practice law in Texas. The city
attorney shall serve at the will of the council and shall receive compensation as fixed by the council. The city attorney shall be the
legal advisor and attorney for the city and all its departments and officers in the conduct of city business and shall represent the city
in all litigation; however, the city council may retain special counsel at any time it deems necessary or advisable.
Section 4.04. City Secretary.
The city manager shall appoint the city secretary and may appoint assistant city secretaries, as needed. The city secretary shall serve
at the will of the city manager and shall perform the following duties:
1. Post or cause to be posted notice of city council and city board or commission meetings, as required by the Texas
Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Government Code.
2. Keep or cause to be kept minutes of city council meetings and ensure that minutes of city board or commission
meetings are kept.
3. Authenticate by personal signature and record or cause to be recorded in full, in a book indexed for this purpose, all
ordinances and resolutions.
4. Serve as an agent of the officer of public records in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Open Records
Act, Chapter 552, Government Code, and the records management officer under the Local Government Records Act,
Subtitle C, Title 6, Local Government Code.
5. Perform all duties prescribed by this charter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/422
6. Perform other duties as required by the city council or assigned by the city manager.
Section 4.05. Personnel Policies.
(a) The City Manager, subject to the approval of the City Council, shall develop policies and procedures to govern the hearing and
redress of employee grievances regarding wages, hours of work, and conditions of work and to provide for the annual evaluation of
all City employees.
(b) All full time employees shall be required to complete an initial probationary period.
(c) Any regular full-time employee who has been promoted or appointed from within the City ranks to a position as department
head, assistant department head or assistant city manager may be demoted to his previous rank/classification by the City Manager
with or without cause and without right to appeal to the Board. However, if a department head, assistant department head or assistant
city manager had not been employed by the City immediately prior to the time of appointment, demotion does not apply.
(d) Personnel Appeal Board. All commissioned peace officers that are regular, full-time employees or regular, part-time employees
of the City (excluding the Police Chief and any other commissioned peace officers that do not report to the Police Chief or any
contract employees) who have completed their initial probationary period, may appeal a disciplinary action resulting in a placement
on suspension greater than 15 calendar days, a demotion to a lower rank or classification, or a termination of employment to a threemember
Personnel Appeal Board panel. The following procedures apply to the Personnel Appeal Board:
1. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint not less than five (5) individuals to serve
on the Personnel Appeal Board for up to 3 years. Any given panel will consist of three (3) of the appointed members. The
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall establish the procedures for the conduct and recording of
the Personnel Appeal Board hearings and outcomes. Members of the Personnel Appeal Board must be at least 21, have no
criminal record, no prior employment with the City, and be a resident of the City of Pflugerville for at least 3 years.
2. The employee shall notify the City Manager in writing within ten (10) working days after the employee receives a
written notice of suspension, demotion, or termination that he/she will be requesting the Personnel Appeal Board to hear
the appeal. The written notice must include a sworn and notarized statement acknowledging the employee is voluntarily
waiving the right to pursue any claims in any state or federal court.
3. Unless the employee agrees to an alternative date, the Personnel Appeal Board panel shall conduct a hearing and
render a decision within thirty (30) calendar days from the time the written appeal has been presented to the City
Manager.
4. The Board shall not be given any documents or materials or take part in any discussion regarding the appeal prior to
the hearing. All hearings shall be open to the public unless otherwise requested by the employee.
5. The City shall carry the burden of proof by a preponderance of the evidence to show that the disciplinary action was
for just cause. The panel is not required to use Rules of Evidence, but the hearing shall be fair and impartial. If the
employee makes a written request to the City Manager within ten (10) calendar days before the hearing, he/she shall be
allowed to review all documents, statements, and records used to determine the disciplinary action at least seven (7)
calendar days before the hearing. The employee shall be allowed to introduce evidence or call witnesses. The employee
has the right to cross-examine and confront all witnesses. In addition, the party that calls a witness is responsible for
paying any charges incurred for that person.
6. The Personnel Appeal Board panel may adjourn to discuss and review the evidence. The panel shall provide a
written decision based on the facts presented. The decision shall be announced in an open meeting. The panel has the
authority to uphold, reduce, or set aside suspension, demotion or termination. The panel has the authority to reinstate the
employee with or without loss of wages, benefits or rank. The decision of the Personnel Appeal Board panel is final and
binding on the City and the employee. The employee automatically waives his/her rights to appeal to a state or federal
court unless the panel's decision was without jurisdiction or exceeded its jurisdiction or was influenced by fraud,
collusion, or other unlawful means.
Section 4.06. Administrative Departments.
Administrative departments other than those established by this charter, may only be established by an ordinance adopted by the city
council; however, the council shall not affect the administrative organization of the city until it has heard the recommendations of the
city manager regarding proposed changes.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, administrative departments shall be under the direction of the city manager, who shall
appoint the head of each administrative department, subject to approval of the city council. All department heads shall serve at the
will of the city manager. The head of each department shall have supervision and control over the department. Two or more
departments may be headed by the same person, and the city manager may head one or more departments.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/422
ARTICLE V. NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Section 5.01. City Elections.
(a) Schedule: Regular city elections shall be held annually on the uniform Election Day designated by the State of Texas as
designated by resolution of the City Council.
(b) Special elections: The city council by resolution may order a special election to fill vacancies on the city council and for bond
issues, ordinances, charter amendments, recall, initiative or referendum, or other purposes deemed appropriate by the council.
(c) Conduct and regulation of elections: All city elections shall be governed by the State constitution, the Election Code, this
charter, and city ordinances and resolutions. The city council by resolution shall fix the time and polling places for all elections,
provide the means for conducting them, and appoint election officials.
Section 5.02. Filing for Office.
(a) Eligibility: A candidate for elective city office shall be a registered voter of the city who for at least twelve months prior to the
election has resided within the corporate limits of the city, including territory annexed prior to the filing deadline.
(b) Limitations: No candidate may file for more than one office or council place at the same election. A city employee seeking city
elective office is deemed to have resigned from city employment immediately upon filing for a place on the ballot.
Section 5.03. Official Ballots.
Ballots in all city elections shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 52, Election Code.
Section 5.04. Canvassing.
The city council shall canvass the returns and declare the results in accordance with state election law. The returns of every
municipal election shall be recorded in the minutes of the meeting at which the vote is canvassed by totals for each candidate or “for”
and “against” each issue submitted.
Section 5.05. Election by Majority and Run-off Election.
To be elected, a candidate must receive a number of votes greater than one-half the total number of valid ballots cast for the office. If
no candidate receives a majority vote or if there is a tie vote, the council shall call a run-off election between the two candidates who
received the greatest number of votes to be held according to the requirements of the Election Code.
Section 5.06. Taking Office.
The term of a candidate who is elected shall begin when he takes the oath of office, as required by the Texas Constitution. Unless
unforeseen circumstances prevent it, the oath of office shall be taken within fourteen days following the date of canvassing and
declaring results or following the meeting at which the appointment was made. Before taking the oath of office, a candidate who is
elected shall verify via signature that he or she has read this Charter or been made aware of its provisions and promises to abide by
them. The oath shall be administered by the mayor, mayor pro-tem, city secretary, or other person authorized by law to administer
oaths. If a city board or commission member is elected or appointed to city office, the member is deemed to have resigned from the
board or commission immediately upon being elected or appointed to city office.
ARTICLE VI. RECALL OF OFFICERS
Section 6.01. Scope of Recall.
Any elected city official, whether elected to office or appointed by the city council to fill a vacancy, shall be subject to recall and
removal from office by the qualified voters of the city.
Section 6.02. Recall Petition Required.
Before submitting the question of recalling an official to the voters, a petition, signed by at least ten percent of the qualified voters of
the city registered to vote at the last regular city election and demanding the question be submitted, shall be filed with the city
secretary. Each person signing the petition shall personally sign his own name in ink or indelible pencil and the petition shall include
each signer's voter's registration number or date of birth, name, residence address and the date of signing. The petition shall contain a
general statement of the grounds for which removal is sought.
Section 6.03. Initiating Recall Petition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/422
(a) Affidavit: Any registered voter of the city may make and file with the city secretary an affidavit containing the name of the city
official whose removal is sought and a statement of the grounds for removal. The city secretary shall immediately inform the city
official and all other council members in writing that the affidavit has been filed and of the stated grounds for removal.
(b) Petition forms: Within two working days after the affidavit is filed, the city secretary shall make available to registered voters
copies of petition blanks demanding that the question of removal of the officer be submitted to the voters. The city secretary shall
keep a sufficient supply of printed petition blanks on hand for distribution. The printed blanks shall bear the city secretary's signature
and shall be in the form prescribed in section 6.04. When issued, blanks shall be numbered, dated, and indicate the name of the
person to whom issued.
(c) Records: The city secretary shall maintain a record kept in the secretary's office of the name of registered voters to whom
petition blanks were issued and the number issued to each voter.
Section 6.04. Recall Petition Form.
A recall petition shall be addressed to the City Council of the City of Pflugerville and shall distinctly and specifically state each
ground for removal in sufficient detail to give the city official who is the subject of the petition reasonable notice of the matters and
things with which he is charged. A recall petition shall be in substantially the form that follows and may consist of one or more
copies or lists circulated separately. Verifications as required below may be made by more than one petitioner and parts or copies of
the petition may be filed separately by different persons.
We the undersigned voters of the City of Pflugerville demand the question of removing (name of person) from the office of (name of
office) be submitted to a vote of the registered voters of the city. The charges and specifications upon which this demand for removal
is predicated are as follows:
NAME SIGNATURE VOTER'S REGISTRATION
# OR DATE OF BIRTH
ADDRESS DATE
___________ ____________ ________________ ____________ ___________
The signature shall be verified by oath in the following form:
“STATE OF TEXAS
COUNTY OF TRAVIS
I,___________ , being first duly sworn, on oath depose and say that I am one of the signers of the above petition;
and that the statements made therein are true, and that each signature thereto was made in my presence on the date it
purports to have been made, and I solemnly swear that the same is the genuine signature of the person whose name
it purports to be.
_________________________
(Signature)
_________________________
(Printed Name)
Sworn and subscribed to before me this _____ day of , 20___.
_________________________
Notary Public
State of Texas
Section 6.05. Certification of Petition.
To be valid, a signature must be placed on a petition no more than one hundred eighty-two days after the original affidavit is filed
with the city secretary as described under section 6.03. Certification procedures described in section 7.04 shall be followed for recall
petitions.
Section 6.06. Presentation to City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/422
The city secretary shall present a certified petition to the city council at the next regular council meeting following certification.
Section 6.07. Public Hearing on Recall Petition.
Within five days after a certified recall petition is presented to the city council, the city official sought to be removed may request
that a public hearing be held to allow him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the recall petition. The city council
shall order a public hearing to be held not fewer than five days nor more than fifteen days after receipt of a request for a public
hearing.
Section 6.08. Calling Recall Election.
If the city official whose removal is sought does not resign, the city council shall order an election on the question to be held at the
earliest possible date as allowed by state election law.
Section 6.09. Recall Election Results.
If the majority of votes are against the recall of the person(s) named on the ballot, he shall continue in office for the remainder of the
term, subject to recall as before. If a majority of votes are for the recall of the person(s) named on the ballot then, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, he shall be deemed removed from office, and the vacancy shall be filled as required by Section
3.07. A city official removed from office by recall election shall not be eligible to succeed himself; nor shall he be a candidate for
any city elective office during the two-year period following the date of the election at which he was removed from office.
Section 6.10. Restrictions on Recall.
No recall petition may be filed against a city official during the six months following his election or appointment or during the six
months following an election for that city official's recall.
Section 6.11. Failure to Call Election.
If a certified petition for recall is presented to the city council and it fails or refuses to accept the petition or call the required election
or discharge any other duty pertaining to this article, the County Judge of Travis County, Texas, shall discharge those duties.
ARTICLE VII. INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM
Section 7.01. General Authority.
(a) Initiative: The qualified voters of the city shall have the power to propose ordinances to the city council that are not in conflict
with this charter, state law, or the state constitution, but this power shall not extend to ordinances appropriating money, levying taxes,
or relating to zoning. If the city council fails to adopt the proposed ordinance, the voters may approve or reject it at a city election.
(b) Referendum: The qualified voters of the city shall have the power to require council reconsideration of any adopted ordinance,
but this power does not extend to an ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes, or zoning; nor does referendum
authority extend to the budget, the capital program, an emergency ordinance, or bonds issued pursuant to an election. If the council
fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the voters may approve or reject it at a city election.
(c) Nonbinding referendum: The qualified voters of the city may petition the council to hold a nonbinding referendum election on
any issue that affects the city, but this power does not extend to an ordinance relating to appropriation of money, levy of taxes,
zoning, the budget, the capital program, an emergency ordinance, or bonds issued pursuant to another election. The city council is
not required to call an election if a petition for a nonbinding referendum is submitted. The city council may call a nonbinding
referendum election on any issue on its own motion.
Section 7.02. Petitioners' Committee and Affidavit.
Any five qualified voters may begin initiative, referendum or nonbinding referendum proceedings by filing an affidavit with the city
secretary stating that they will constitute the petitioners' committee and be responsible for circulating the petition and filing it in
proper form. The affidavit shall state their names and addresses, their voter's registration numbers and the address or addresses to
which all notices to the committee shall be sent. The affidavit shall set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance, cite the ordinance
sought to be reconsidered, or the question proposed to be submitted to the voters at a nonbinding referendum election. When the
affidavit is filed, the city secretary shall, by the next business day, issue the appropriate petition blanks to the committee.
Section 7.03. Petitions.
(a) Number of signatures: Initiative, referendum and nonbinding referendum petitions must be signed by least fifteen percent of
the number of qualified voters registered to vote at the last regular city election.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/422
(b) Form and content: All papers of a petition shall be of uniform size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for
filing. Each person signing the petition shall personally sign his own name in ink or indelible pencil and the petition shall also
include each signer's name, voter's registration number or date of birth, residence address and the date of signing. Petitions shall
contain or have attached to them throughout their circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered, or
the question proposed to be submitted at a nonbinding referendum election.
(c) Circulator's affidavit: When filed, each paper of a petition shall have attached to it an affidavit executed by the circulator
attesting (1) that he personally circulated the paper, (2) the number of signatures on the paper, (3) that all the signatures were made in
his presence, (4) that he believes them to be the genuine signatures of the persons whose names they purport to be, and (5) that each
signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance or proposition at issue.
(d) Time for filing referendum petitions: Petitions must be filed within one hundred eighty days after issuance of the appropriate
blanks to the petitioners' committee. Additional time as specified in section 7.04 shall be allowed for amending petitions.
Section 7.04. Determining Sufficiency of Petition.
(a) Certificate of city secretary: Within ten days after a petition is filed, the city secretary shall complete a certificate as to its
sufficiency. If the petition is found to be insufficient, the certificate shall specify the particulars of its defects. When the certification
is complete, the city secretary shall by next business day, send a copy of the certificate to each member of the petitioners' committee
by certified mail.
(b) Sufficient petition, final determination: If the petition is certified sufficient, the city secretary shall present the certificate to the
city council at the next regular council meeting. The certificate shall be a final determination of the sufficiency of the petition.
(c) Insufficient petition, final determination: If the petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not pursue
its options under subsections (d) and (e), the city secretary shall present the certificate to the city council at the next regular council
meeting. The certificate shall be a final determination of the insufficiency of the petition.
(d) Insufficient petition, appeal: If the petition is certified insufficient and the petitioners' committee does not file notice of
intention to amend as provided in subsection (e) within two working days after receipt of the certificate, the committee may file a
request that the city council review the certificate. The council shall review the certificate at its next regular meeting after the request
is filed and shall approve or disapprove the certificate. The council's determination shall be a final determination of the sufficiency of
the petition.
(e) Insufficient petition, amendment: If the petition is certified insufficient because it lacks the required number of valid
signatures, it may be amended one time only. The petitioners' committee shall file notice that it intends to amend the petition with the
city secretary within two working days after receipt of the certificate. A supplementary petition with additional signatures and in a
form that complies with sections 7.03(b) and (c) must be filed within two weeks after receipt of the certificate.
Within five days after an amended petition is filed, the city secretary shall complete a certificate as to its sufficiency. Within twentyfour
hours of completion, the city secretary shall send a copy of the certificate to each member of the petitioners' committee by
certified mail. The final determination of the sufficiency of an amended petition shall be as prescribed by subsections (b), (c), and (d)
of this section. An amended petition shall not be amended again.
(f) Court review; new petition: A final determination of the sufficiency of a petition is subject to judicial review. A final
determination that the petition is insufficient, even if sustained by a court, shall not prevent the filing of a new petition for the same
purpose.
Section 7.05. Effect of Ordinance Suspended.
If a referendum petition is determined to be sufficient, the ordinance that is the subject of the petition shall be suspended until the
council repeals or amends the ordinance as requested by the petition or until the ordinance is upheld by election.
Section 7.06. Action on Petitions.
(a) Council action: Within thirty days after the date an initiative or referendum petition is certified as sufficient, the city council
shall either (1) adopt a proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance, or (2) repeal a referred ordinance, or (3) call
an election on the proposed or referred ordinance according to subsection (b).
(b) Election on proposed or referred ordinance: An election shall be held at the next uniform election date in accordance with state
law but not earlier than 30 days after the date the council calls the election. If a regular city election falls within the specified period,
the ordinance election shall be included on the ballot. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be available at the polls.
Special elections for initiated or referred ordinances shall not be held more often than once each six months. Further, if an initiated
ordinance is rejected or a referred ordinance is sustained in an election, no ordinance that is substantially the same may be the subject
of an initiative or referendum petition within two years from the date of that election.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/422
(c) Publication of proposed or referred ordinance: The city secretary shall publish the proposed or referred ordinance on the city's
official website or other electronic media that is readily accessible to the public for the fifteen days preceding the election. The
caption of the proposed or referred ordinance shall also be posted at city hall for at least fifteen days preceding the election, and
copies shall be available at city hall upon request.
(d) Petition withdrawn: The petitioners' committee may withdraw an initiative or referendum petition at any time before a final
determination that it is sufficient by filing a request to withdraw with the city secretary. The request shall be signed by at least four
members of the petitioners' committee. When a request is filed, the petition shall have no further force or effect and all related
proceedings shall be terminated.
Section 7.07. Election Results.
(a) Initiative: If a majority of votes cast are in favor of a proposed ordinance, it shall be considered adopted and shall be effective
from the date the election results are certified just as if it had been adopted by the city council. If conflicting ordinances are approved
at the same election, both ordinances shall be given effect to the extent possible; however, the ordinance receiving the greatest
number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of the conflict.
(b) Repeal or amendment of initiated ordinance: An ordinance adopted by initiative shall not be repealed or amended for two years
after its effective date.
(c) Referendum: If a majority of votes cast are against the referred ordinance, it shall be considered repealed, and the repeal shall
be effective from the date election results are certified. If a majority of votes cast are in favor of the referred ordinance, it shall
remain in effect and the referendum petition shall become void.
(d) Readoption of referred ordinance: An ordinance repealed by referendum shall not be re-enacted for two years from its repeal.
ARTICLE VIII. BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Section 8.01. Boards and Commissions in General.
In addition to the boards and commissions established by this charter, the city council by ordinance may establish any boards and
commissions it deems necessary for the conduct of city business and the management of municipal affairs. The functions, authority,
and responsibilities of such boards and commissions shall be set out in the ordinances establishing them. All boards and commissions
in existence at the time this charter is adopted shall continue according to the ordinances or other acts under which they were created,
except as otherwise provided in this charter, until the city council abolishes, modifies, or alters the ordinances or acts under which
they exist. Notwithstanding any other provision of this charter, the city council retains full authority over the budget, appropriation of
funds, expenditures, purchase and sale of property, and accounting procedures for all boards and commission, consistent with this
charter and the State constitution and laws.
Section 8.02. Membership Qualifications.
Except as otherwise provided in this charter, each candidate for appointment as a member of a board or commission shall be a
registered voter of the city who has resided within the corporate city limits, or within territory annexed prior to the appointment, for
at least twelve months preceding the appointment. Board or commission members shall serve without compensation and shall not be
employed by or hold any other position in city government. In addition to any other requirements prescribed by the council, members
shall maintain the qualifications established by this section while in office.
Section 8.03. Membership Disqualification.
No member of a board or commission shall remain in his position after being elected or appointed to city office.
Section 8.04. Term Limits.
Members of a board or commission shall be limited to three consecutive full terms in office. A person who has served three
consecutive full terms as a board or commission member may not again hold the same office until at least one term out of office has
passed.
Section 8.05. Vacancies.
Board or commission members shall actively participate in the commission's activities, and any member who is absent for three
consecutive meetings without valid excuse, as determined by the board or commission, shall automatically be dismissed from
membership. The membership shall at once notify the council that a vacancy exists. Any vacancy on the board or commission, for
any reason, shall be filled for the unexpired term by council appointment within thirty days of the vacancy.
Section 8.06. Officers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/422
Each board or commission must annually elect a chairman and a vice-chairman and may elect a secretary.
Section 8.07. Texas Open Meetings Act.
The City of Pflugerville shall conduct all its meetings in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
Section 8.08. Planning and Zoning Commission.
(a) Composition and term: The city council shall appoint a planning and zoning commission of seven members who shall be
appointed to two-year terms and shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified.
(b) Rules of procedure: The commission shall establish its own rules of procedure, which shall require that a quorum consists of at
least four members of the commission and that an affirmative vote of a majority of those present shall be necessary to act on pending
questions. The chairman shall be permitted to vote on any question.
(c) Powers and duties: The commission shall exercise the following powers:
1. Make, amend, extend, and add to the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and recommend
the comprehensive plan to the city council for approval.
2. Make recommendations to the city council regarding zoning proposals.
3. Approve or disapprove plats of proposed subdivisions submitted to the city. In considering plats, the commission
shall require the proposed subdivision to meet, so far as is practicable, all the standards of layout and street and sidewalk
construction applicable to comparable property within the city's corporate limits. Further, it shall require restriction on the
use of the property consistent with the restrictions on comparable property within the city's corporate limits.
4. Draft rules and regulations governing platting and subdividing of land that are consistent with the state constitution
and laws and recommend them to the city council for adoption.
5. Annually recommend an annexation plan to the city council.
6. Annually submit a five-year capital improvements plan regarding parks, transportation and utilities to the city
council, at least one hundred twenty days before the beginning of the budget year. The plan must list projects in order of
preference with a recommendation for the year of construction for each project.
7. Perform other duties and be vested with other powers as the city council shall from time to time prescribe.
(d) Liaison with city council: The city manager or his representative shall attend planning and zoning commission meetings and
shall serve as liaison between the commission and the city council.
Section 8.09. Board of Adjustment.
(a) Composition and term: The city council shall appoint a board of adjustment consisting of five regular members and two
alternate members to serve two-year terms. Alternate members may participate in meetings and vote on matters in the absence of
regular members when requested to do so by the city manager. The city council may remove a member for cause set out in a written
charge and as determined by the council after a public hearing on the charges[.]
(b) Rules of procedure: The presiding officer shall call meetings at least quarterly and may administer oaths to witnesses and
compel attendance of witnesses. Cases shall be heard in open meeting by at least four members and not more than five members. The
minutes of meetings shall be public records of the board's examinations, official actions, and other proceedings and shall reflect each
member's vote, absence, or failure to vote on each question.
(c) Powers: The board of adjustment shall exercise the following authority:
1. Hear and decide an appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an
administrative official in enforcing zoning laws or ordinances.
2. Hear and decide special exceptions to terms of zoning ordinances when the ordinance so requires, provided that
exceptions granted shall be consistent with the general purpose and intent of the ordinance and in accordance with any
applicable rules contained in the ordinance.
3. In specific cases, authorize a variance from the terms of a zoning ordinance, provided that the variance is not
contrary to the public interest and that, due to special conditions, literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in
unnecessary hardship. In authorizing variances, the board shall ensure that the spirit of the ordinance is observed and
substantial justice is done.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/422
4. Hear and decide other matters authorized by city zoning ordinances.
(d) Appeals procedure: Appeals to the board of adjustment shall be conducted in accordance with the requirements of § 211.010,
Local Government Code.
(e) Board determination: The board may reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order or decision that is the
subject of an appeal under subsection (c)(1). The concurring vote of at least four members is necessary to: reverse an order,
requirement, decision, or determination of an administrative official; decide in favor of an applicant on a matter which the board is
required to pass under the zoning ordinance; or authorize a variation from the term of the zoning ordinance.
(f) Judicial review: Any person dissatisfied with the board of adjustment's decision on an appeal may petition a court of record for
further action in accordance with the requirements of § 211.011, Local Government Code.
Section 8.10. Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
(a) Composition and term: The city council shall appoint a parks and recreation advisory board consisting of seven members as
needed to facilitate specific parks development projects or activities. The length of term in which members serve will be determined
on the time necessary to complete the specific project and will not be continuous. Should city council consist of five city council
members and the mayor then each councilmember will be responsible for appointing one member and the mayor shall appoint two
members to the board. Should city council consist of six city council members and the mayor, then each council member and the
mayor shall be responsible for appointing one member.
(b) Powers and duties: The board shall exercise the following powers:
1. The board shall be responsible for making recommendations to the City Manager specific to the project in which
they were appointed.
2. Any other matters designated by the city council.
Section 8.11. Library Board.
(a) Composition and term: The city council shall appoint a library board consisting of seven regular members, to serve two-year
terms, and one alternate member, to serve a one-year term. The alternate member may vote if a regular member is absent. Liaisons to
the board will include the President of the Friends of the Pflugerville Community Library, the Director of the Library and a student
from a high school in the Pflugerville Independent School District. Liaisons may advise the board but may not vote on any matter.
(b) Rules of procedure: The commission shall establish rules of procedure consistent with city ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations. The commission shall meet at least monthly, and absence from three consecutive meetings without valid excuse, as
determined by the commission, shall result in automatic removal from office.
(c) Powers and duties: The commission shall exercise the following powers:
1. By January 31st of each year, review, update and submit a five-year comprehensive library plan to the city council
and city manager. The plan must list projects in order of preference with a recommendation for the year of construction
for each project.
2. Make recommendations periodically to the city council and city manager concerning matters of library procedure
and policy.
3. Make recommendations to the city council and city manager concerning promotion of the library's programs and
services in the greater Pflugerville community.
4. Make recommendations to the city council and city manager concerning grants and fund-raising activities.
5. Any other matters designated by city ordinance.
ARTICLE IX. BUDGET AND FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATION
Section 9.01. Fiscal Year.
The fiscal year of the city shall begin on the first day of October and end on the last day of September.
Section 9.02. Public Record.
The budget shall be a public record and copies shall be made available to the public upon request.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/422
Section 9.03. Annual Budget.
(a) Content: The budget shall provide a complete financial plan of all city funds and activities and, except as required by law or
this charter, shall be in a form that the manager deems desirable or that the council may require. A budget message explaining the
budget both in fiscal terms and in terms of city programs shall be submitted with the budget. The budget message shall (1) outline the
proposed financial policies of the city for the coming fiscal year, (2) describe the important features of the budget, (3) indicate any
major changes from the current year in financial policies, expenditures, and revenues, with reasons for such changes, (4) summarize
the city's debt position, and (5) include other material as the manager deems necessary or desirable.
The budget shall begin with a clear general summary of its contents and shall show in detail all estimated income, based on the
proposed property tax levy and all proposed expenditures, including debt service, for the coming fiscal year. The proposed budget
expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated income and any fund balances available from prior years. For every budget
adopted after the 1997-1998 fiscal year budget, except in the event of an emergency under Section 9.04(b), the adopted budget must
include an unencumbered general fund balance that is at least sufficient to cover three months of the city's budgeted general fund
operation and maintenance expenses. This fund balance may be used for emergency appropriations in accordance with Section
9.04(b). The budget shall be arranged to show comparative figures for the current fiscal year's actual and estimated income and
expenditures, the preceding fiscal year's actual income and expenditures, and the estimate of income and expenditures for the
budgeted year. It shall include in separate sections:
1. An itemized, estimate of the expense of conducting each department, division, and office.
2. Reasons for proposed increases or decreases in specific expenditures, compared with the current fiscal year.
3. A separate schedule for each department, indicating tasks to be accomplished by the department during the year, and
additional desirable tasks to be accomplished if possible.
4. A statement of the total probable income of the city from taxes for the period covered by the estimate.
5. Tax levies, rates, and collections for the preceding five years.
6. All anticipated revenue from itemized sources other than the tax levy.
7. The amount required for interest on the city's debts, for the sinking fund, and for maturing serial bonds.
8. The total principal amount of outstanding city debts, with a consolidated schedule of debt service requirements.
9. Anticipated net surplus or deficit for the coming fiscal year of each utility owned or operated by the city and the
proposed method of its disposition. Subsidiary budgets for each utility, with detailed income and expenditure information
shall be attached as appendices to the budget.
10. A capital program, which may be revised and extended each year to indicate capital improvements pending or in
process of construction or acquisition, that includes the following items:
a. a summary of proposed programs;
b. a list of all capital improvements proposed to be undertaken during the next five fiscal years, with appropriate
supporting information regarding the necessity for the improvements, including the five-year plan related to that
particular type of capital improvement;
c. cost estimates, methods of financing, and recommended time schedules for each improvement; and
d. the estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
11. Other information required by the council.
(b) Submission: On or before the first day of July of each year, the manager shall submit to the council a proposed budget and an
accompanying message. The council shall review the proposed budget and revise it as the council deems appropriate prior to general
circulation for public hearing.
(c) Public notice and hearing: The council shall post in the city hall and on the city's official website or other electronic media that
is readily accessible to the public a general summary of the proposed budget and a notice stating the times and places where copies
of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public and the time and place for a public hearing on the budget. The
public hearing must be held not fewer than ten or more than thirty days after publication of the notice.
(d) Amendment before adoption: After the public hearing, the council may adopt the budget with or without amendment. In
amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/422
expenditures required by law or for debt service or for estimated cash deficit; however, no budget amendment shall increase the
authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income, plus funds available from prior years.
(e) Adoption: The council shall adopt its annual budget by ordinance, on one reading, by the fifteenth day of September, or as soon
thereafter as practical. Adoption of the budget shall require an affirmative vote of at least a majority of all members of the council.
Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriations of the amounts specified as expenditures from the funds indicated.
Section 9.04. Amendments After Adoption.
(a) Supplemental appropriations: If, during the fiscal year, the manager certifies that there are revenues available for appropriation
in excess of those estimated in the budget, the council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the
amount of the excess.
(b) Emergency appropriations: To meet a public emergency created by a natural disaster or manmade calamity affecting life,
health, property, or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations by emergency ordinance in accordance with
the provisions of this charter. If there are no available unappropriated revenues or general fund balances to meet such appropriations,
the council may by emergency ordinance authorize the issuance of renewable emergency notes sufficient to fund the appropriation.
The three-month general fund operating reserve requirement may be suspended by a resolution approved by Council. The resolution
should reference the extenuating/emergency situation that created the expending of reserves below the three-month level; and, should
also provide a proposed process and timeline for rebuilding the three-month reserve.
(c) Reduction of appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears probable to the manager that the revenues available
will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, he shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of
the deficit, any remedial action taken by him, and his recommendations for any other steps to be taken. The council shall take further
action as it deems necessary to prevent or minimize any deficit and, for that purpose, it may by ordinance reduce one or more
appropriations.
(d) Transfer of appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered
appropriation balance among programs within a department, division, or office. Upon written request by the manager, the council by
ordinance may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance from one department, office, or agency to another.
(e) Limitations: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred. No appropriation may be reduced below any
amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance.
(f) Effective date: Supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this
section may be made effective immediately upon adoption of the enacting ordinance.
Section 9.05. Borrowing.
(a) Borrowing: The city shall have the power, except as prohibited by law, to borrow money by whatever method the council
deems to be in the public interest.
(b) General obligation bonds: The city shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the city and to issue general
obligation bonds for permanent public improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by the constitution and laws of
the State of Texas, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds of the city previously issued. All bonds shall be issued
in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas.
(c) Revenue bonds: The city shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving,
extending, or repairing public utilities, recreational facilities, or any other self-liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the
constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue revenue bonds to evidence the obligation. Revenue bonds shall be a charge
upon and payable from the properties, or interest pledged in the bonds, or the income from the bonds, or both. Holders of the revenue
bonds shall never have the right to demand payment out of monies raised or to be raised by taxation. All revenue bonds shall be
issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas.
(d) Bonds incontestable: All bonds of the city, after they have been issued, sold, and delivered to the purchaser, shall be
incontestable. All bonds issued to refund in exchange for outstanding bonds previously issued shall, after the exchange, be
incontestable.
(e) Election to authorize bonds: Bonds payable from ad valorem taxes, other than refunding bonds, shall not be issued unless the
bonds have been authorized by majority vote at an election held for that purpose.
(f) Ordinance authorizing borrowing: A copy of the proposed ordinance shall be furnished to each member of the city council, to
the city attorney, and to any citizen, upon request to the city secretary, at least seven days before the date of the meeting at which the
ordinance is to be considered. Any ordinance pertaining to borrowing may be adopted and finally passed at the meeting at which it is
introduced.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/422
(g) Public hearing before ordinance authorizing borrowing is adopted: The city council must hold a public hearing before adopting
an ordinance authorizing borrowing money. The city must publish notice of the public hearing at least one week before the public
hearing unless a public emergency exists that requires immediate action by the city council.
Section 9.06. Lapse of Appropriations.
Every unexpended or unencumbered appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the
fiscal year. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been
accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three years pass without any
disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation.
Section 9.07. Administration of Budget.
(a) Payments and obligations prohibited: No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation
unless the manager or his designee certifies there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in the allotment or appropriation and that
sufficient funds are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any payment
authorized or obligation incurred in violation of this provision shall be void; any payment made in violation of this provision shall be
illegal. Making unauthorized payments or obligations shall be cause for removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made
such a payment or incurred such an obligation. Furthermore, the person making the payment shall also be liable to the city for any
amount illegally paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making
of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants, certificates of
indebtedness, or certificates of obligation, or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end
of the fiscal year, provided that the action is made or approved by ordinance.
(b) Financial reports: The city manager shall submit a report each month that describes the financial condition of the city by
budget item, and shows budgeted and actual income and expenditures for the preceding month and the fiscal year to date. The
financial records of the city will be maintained on a basis consistent with generally accepted accounting procedures.
(c) Independent audit: At the close of each fiscal year, and at any other times deemed necessary, the council shall call for an
independent audit of all city accounts to be conducted by a certified public accountant. The certified public accountant selected shall
have no personal interest, direct or indirect, in the city's financial affairs, or in any of its officers and, in any event, the same certified
public accountant shall not perform the city's audit for more than five consecutive years. The audit shall contain all information
required by any covenants contained in any bond ordinance of the city. Upon completion of the audit, and presentation of the
auditor's report to the city council, the summary of the audit results shall be made available in the city secretary's office as a public
record, and a copy of the audit shall also be forwarded to each of the two primary bond rating agencies, as determined by the city's
financial advisor, at their principal offices.
Section 9.08. Taxation.
The city council shall annually establish the annual rate of taxation of the city, and city taxes shall be levied and collected on all
property taxable by the city which is not exempt from taxation under the State constitution or State law. The council shall adopt a tax
levy ordinance, on one reading, by the 15th day of September of each year, or as soon after the certification of the appraisal rolls of
the city as practical. Failure of the council to enact a tax levy ordinance for a particular year shall not invalidate the collection of
taxes for that year and, in such event, the tax levy ordinance last enacted shall remain in effect until the next tax levy ordinance is
adopted by the council.
Section 9.09. Sales and Purchasing.
All sales of city property, purchases made and contracts executed by the city shall be made in accordance with the requirements of
the constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE X. FRANCHISES AND PUBLIC UTILITIES
Section 10.01. Limits on Transfer of Use of Public Property.
The right of control or use of city public property can be transferred only by ordinance. No act or omission by the city council or by
any officer or agent of the city shall be construed to grant, renew, extend, or amend any right, franchise, or easement affecting city
public property, except in accordance with this charter.
Section 10.02. Granting Franchises.
The city council may grant, renew, or extend franchises of public utilities operating in the city. Franchises may be amended by the
council, with the agreement of the franchise holder. All franchises shall be for a definite term of not more than twenty years.
Section 10.03. Enacting Franchise Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/422
An ordinance granting, renewing, extending, or amending a public utility franchise shall be read at three consecutive regular city
council meetings. Final action shall not occur until at least twenty-eight days after first reading. Within ten days after first reading of
the ordinance, the caption of the ordinance and a statement indicating where and how to obtain copies of the full ordinance shall be
published on the city's official website or other electronic media that is readily accessible to the public.
Section 10.04. Limit on Transferring Franchise.
Any transfer or assignment of a public or private utility franchise shall not be effective until approved by ordinance of the city
council.
Section 10.05. Regulating Franchises.
The city council has the right to regulate the grant, renewal, extension, or amendment of public utility franchises in the following
manner, regardless of whether the ordinance granting the franchise provides for it:
1. Forfeiting the franchise by ordinance for failure of the franchise holder to comply with the terms of the franchise.
Before exercising this right, the council shall provide written notice to the franchise holder stating how the holder has
failed to comply and shall set a reasonable time for correcting the failure. Forfeiture will occur only after a hearing and
expiration of a reasonable time for correction.
2. Imposing reasonable regulation to ensure safe, efficient, and continuous service to the public.
3. Requiring expansion, enlargement, and improvement of plant and facilities necessary to provide adequate service to
the public.
4. Requiring franchise holders to furnish, at no cost to the city, full information regarding the location and precise
description of all the holder's facilities in, over, or under the city and regulating and controlling the location, relocation,
and removal of the facilities.
5. Collecting from public utilities in the city a proportionate part of increased city cost of operations and services
attributable to the utility's occupancy or use of public property and required as a result of damage to or disturbance of
public property caused by the utility and compelling the utility to make and bear the cost of repairs or other operations
made necessary by the utility's occupancy or use of, or damage to or disturbance of, public or private property.
6. Requiring one franchise holder to allow other holders to use its facilities, if the city council considers that joint use is
in the public interest. The owner may impose reasonable terms of joint use and be paid a reasonable rental by the other
holders; however, the inability of franchise holders to agree on terms and rentals shall be an excuse for failure to comply
with a joint use requirement.
7. Requiring franchise holders to keep records that accurately reflect the value of their own or other property used in
rendering its service to the public and that reflect the franchise holder's expenses, receipts, and profits of all kinds.
8. Examining and auditing the franchise holder's accounts and other records.
9. Requiring reports on the utility's operations, in the form and containing the information directed by the city council.
Section 10.06. Nonexclusive Grants.
No grant, renewal, or extension of a franchise to construct, maintain, or operate a public utility shall be exclusive.
Section 10.07. Utility Regulation.
The city council may regulate the operation, services, rates, charges, and fares of public utilities operating in the city by ordinance
and in accordance with state and federal law. Rates may only be adopted after reasonable notice and hearing.
ARTICLE XI. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 11.01. Public Records.
All records of every office, department, or agency of the city shall be open to inspection by the public, except as may be withheld
from public disclosure under the Texas Open Records Act, Chapter 552, Government Code. During regular office hours, any person
shall have the right to examine and make copies of any public records of the city in accordance with reasonable rules and regulations
prescribed by the city council.
Section 11.02. Official Notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/422
All ordinances, notices, and other matters required to be published by this charter, city ordinances, or the State constitution or laws
shall be published on the city's official website or other electronic media that is readily accessible to the public.
Section 11.03. Nepotism.
Except as permitted by Chapter 573, Government Code, no officer of the city nor any member of any city board or commission shall
participate in the deliberation of or voting upon the appointment or confirmation of any person related to them within the second
degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to any office, position, clerkship, employment, or duty of the city.
Section 11.04. Nondiscrimination.
The city shall not discriminate in the provision of and access to city facilities, programs, and services because of a person's race,
color, religion, sex, national origin, age or disability.
Section 11.05. Code of Ethics.
(a) Purpose and policy: The city council by ordinance shall adopt a code of ethics to establish guidelines for high ethical standards
in official conduct by city officials and employees. The code of ethics shall establish the policy that city officials and employees shall
conduct themselves in a manner consistent with sound business and ethical practices, ensuring that the public interest is always
considered in conducting city business. The code of ethics shall provide guidance to city officials and employees in order to instill
and maintain a high level of public confidence in the professionalism, integrity, and commitment to the public interest of those in
public service. At a minimum, the code of ethics shall include (1) standards of conduct related to public administration and offenses
against public administration, as set out in Chapter 36, Penal Code; (2) a travel and expense policy regulating the expenditure of
public funds for travel, conferences, and entertainment; and (3) restrictions on city officials' or employees' serving as surety for the
performance of any person doing business with the city or as surety for any city officer or employee required to make a surety bond.
(b) Penalties: The council shall adopt ordinances providing that a person removed from office or dismissed from employment
because of violations of the code of ethics shall be ineligible to hold city office or employment for five years after removal or
dismissal, in addition to any other penalty that may be provided by law.
Section 11.06. Conflict of Interest.
All elected or appointed members of the city council or of any city board or commission shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter
171, Local Government Code, regarding conflict of interest and, by affidavit filed with the city secretary, shall disclose the nature
and extent of any substantial interest in any business entity or in any real property, as defined and required by that chapter, which
would be affected by any official action taken by the body of which such person is a member and shall abstain from any discussion
or vote on any such matter.
Section 11.07. Assignment, Execution, and Garnishment.
Neither the real nor the personal property of the city shall be liable to be sold or appropriated under any writ of execution or cost bill.
No city funds, in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall be liable to garnishment, attachment, or sequestration; nor shall
the city be liable to garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may have on hand or owe to any person.
Neither the city nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any writ of garnishment. The city shall, however,
recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents, or contractors.
Section 11.08. Power to Settle Claims.
The city council shall have the authority to compromise and settle any and all claims and suits in favor of or against the city, except
suits by the city to recover delinquent taxes.
Section 11.09. Charter Construction.
(a) General rule: This charter shall be construed as a general grant of power and as a limitation of power on the government of the
city in the same manner as the Constitution of Texas is construed as a limitation on the powers of the Legislature. Except as
expressly prohibited by this charter, each and every power under the Constitution of Texas which would be competent for the people
of Pflugerville to expressly grant to the city shall be construed to be granted to the city by this charter.
(b) Internal references: In this charter, a reference to section without further identification is a reference to a section of this charter,
and a reference to a subsection, subdivision, or paragraph without further identification is a reference to a unit of the next larger unit
of the section in which the reference appears. A reference to a statute is a reference to all re-enactments, revisions, or amendments of
the statute.
Section 11.10. Charter Amendment.
This charter may be amended in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/422
Section 11.11. Charter Review.
(a) Charter review commission: Two years after the adoption of this charter and every five years thereafter, the council shall
appoint a Charter Review Commission composed of not fewer than thirteen nor more than twenty members who meet the
requirements of section 8.02. Appointment shall be made at the first regular meeting following the anniversary date of the charter's
adoption. The Charter Review Commission shall serve for six months, or a longer term if extended by the city council, and shall
meet at least once each month during its term. The mayor shall appoint three members and each council member shall appoint two
members to serve on the Charter Review Commission. Remaining members shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council.
(b) Rules of procedure: The commission must establish its own rules of procedure, which must require that a quorum consists of a
majority of its members and that an affirmative vote of a majority of all members present is necessary to act.
(c) Powers and duties: The Charter Review Commission shall:
1. Inquire into the operations of city government and review the city charter to determine whether it requires revision.
Public hearings may be held and the commission shall have the power to compel the attendance of city officers or
employees and to require the submission of city records necessary to its inquiry and review. The Commission shall hold a
minimum of six (6) and a maximum of eight (8) meetings, two (2) of which shall be jointly held with the city council to
discuss proposed amendments.
2. Propose any recommendations it deems desirable to ensure compliance with charter provisions by city departments.
3. Propose any charter amendments it deems desirable to improve the effective application of the charter to current
conditions.
4. Make a written report of its findings and recommendations to the city council.
(d) Council action: The council shall receive and have published in the city's official newspaper the Charter Review Commission's
final report. It shall consider any recommendations and, if any amendments are presented, shall order the amendment or amendments
submitted to the voters of the city.
Section 11.12. Pending Matters and Preservation of Rights.
All codes, ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations in force on the effective date of this charter, and not in conflict with this
charter, shall remain in force until altered, amended or repealed by the council. All taxes, assessments, liens, encumbrances, and
demands, of or against the city, that are fixed or established before the effective date of this charter, or for which the proceedings to
fix or establish have begun at that date, shall be valid when properly fixed or established either under the law in force at the time of
the beginning of such proceedings or under the law after the adoption of this charter.
All rights, claims, actions, orders, ordinances, resolutions, contracts, franchises, and legal or administrative proceedings existing
before the adoption of this charter shall continue except as modified by this charter and shall be maintained, carried on, or dealt with
by the city department, office or agency appropriate under this charter. All renewals or new rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts,
franchises, and legal or administrative proceedings arising after the adoption of this charter shall be conducted pursuant to this
charter.
Section 11.13. Transfer of Powers, Duties, Property, and Records.
(a) Departments and agencies: If a city department, office, or agency is abolished by this charter, the powers and duties of that
department or agency shall be transferred to the city department, office, or agency designated in this charter or, if this charter makes
no provision, as designated by the city council.
(b) Property and records: Property, records, and equipment of all city departments, offices or agencies existing before this charter
is adopted shall be transferred to the departments, offices, or agencies assuming the respective powers and duties. If the powers or
duties are discontinued or are divided among more than one department, office, or agency or if a conflict arises concerning the
transfer, the property, records, and equipment shall be transferred to departments, offices, or agencies designated by the city council.
Section 11.14. Conforming Ordinances.
The city council shall adopt, amend, or repeal ordinances as necessary to conform to the requirements of this charter within six
months after this charter is adopted and effective.
Section 11.15. Severability.
If any section or part of a section of this charter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, that
holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force, or effect of any other section or part of a section of this charter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/422
CODE OF
ORDINANCES
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
This codification of ordinances by and for the municipality of Pflugerville will be designated as the Code of Pflugerville and may be
so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
Unless otherwise provided herein, by law or implication required, the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall
govern the interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this
code unless otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and section numbers are employed for reference purposes only
and will not be deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
(A) General Rule. Words and phrases will be taken in their plain, or ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and
phrases having a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their technical import.
(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this code, the following definitions will apply, unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
CITY. The City of Pflugerville, Texas.
CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of
new titles, chapters, or sections.
COUNTY. Travis County, Texas.
MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
MONTH. A calendar month.
OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words
SWEAR and SWORN shall be equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office, employee, commission, or department of
this municipality unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation, partnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to any unincorporated entity means the
partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/422
SHALL or MUST. The act referred to is mandatory.
SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
STATE. The State of Texas.
SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the
body of the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading. Not all chapters have subchapters.
WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
All ordinances of this municipality will be construed according to the following rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant
to the intent of the City Council or of the context of the ordinance:
(A) And or Or. Either conjunction includes the other as if written “and/or,” if the sense requires it.
(B) Acts by Assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be done which, by law, an agent or deputy as
well may do as the principal, that requirement will be satisfied by the performance of the act by an authorized agent or
deputy.
(C) Gender, Singular and Plural, Tenses. Words denoting the masculine gender will be deemed to include the feminine
and neuter genders; words in the singular will include the plural, and words in the plural will include the singular; the use
of a verb in the present tense will include the future, if applicable.
(D) General Term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms is not to be limited to the class enumerated
unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, that invalidity
will not affect other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
Whenever in one section of this code reference is made to another section, that reference will extend and apply to the section referred
to as subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter is changed or materially altered by the
amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
Reference to a public office or officer will be deemed to apply to any office, officer, or employee of this municipality exercising the
powers, duties, or functions contemplated in the provision, even if the functions have been transferred or the official title of the
functionary has been changed.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express
the intention of the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be attached; or the use of a word or
words when another word or words was clearly intended, the spelling will be corrected and the word or words supplied, omitted, or
substituted to conform with the manifest intention, and the provisions will have the same effect as though the correct words were
contained in the text as originally published. No alteration may be made if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of the
error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, may be the official time within this municipality for the transaction
of all municipal business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
(A) If an ordinance requires an act to be done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice means the time that is necessary for a prompt performance of act or the giving of notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/422
(B) The time within which an act is to be done will be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day is
a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, it will be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
This code, from and after its effective date, will contain all of the provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects included.
All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects included in this code will be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances pertaining to subjects not included in this code will remain in
full force and effect unless repealed either expressly or by implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
All ordinances passed by the City Council requiring publication will take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless
otherwise expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication will take effect from their passage, unless otherwise expressly
provided.
§ 10.16 ]REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
(A) Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance is repealed or modified by a subsequent ordinance, the repealed or modified
ordinance or part of an ordinance will continue in force until the ordinance repealing or modifying it becomes effective.
(B) No suit, proceeding, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted, created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance prior
to its repeal will in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted, enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the
ordinance had continued in force unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
(C) When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision is itself repealed, the repeal will not be construed to
revive the former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
(A) If the City Council wishes to amend any existing chapter or section of this code, the chapter or section will be specifically
repealed and a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its place.
(B) Any ordinance which is proposed to add a new chapter or section to the existing code will indicate, with reference to the
arrangement of this code, the proper number of that chapter or section. In addition, a caption or title will be shown in concise form
above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
(A) As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage date of the original ordinance, and the three most recent
amending ordinances, if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10, passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15,
passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am. Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
(B) (1) If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates that the text of the section reads substantially the
same as the statute. Example: (Tex. Gov't Code, Chapter 552)
(Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-85).
(2) If a statutory cite is set forth as a “statutory reference” following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader
should refer to that statute for further information. Example:
§ 39.01 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
This municipality shall make available to any person for inspection or copying all public records, unless otherwise
exempted by state law.
Statutory references–Public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 201.009; public information, V.T.C.A., Government
Code, ch. 552.
§ 10.19 ENFORCEMENT.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/422
This code of ordinances shall be enforced by police officers, code enforcement officers, animal control officers, building official,
building inspectors, health inspectors and fire marshal of the city and each shall have the authority to issue citations for any violation
of this code.
(Ord. 892-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
(A) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense
or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be
unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided, the violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be
punished by:
(1) A fine not to exceed $2,000 in all cases arising under any rule, ordinance, or police regulation that governs fire
safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse; and
(2) A fine not to exceed $500 in all other cases.
(B) Each day any violation of this code or of any ordinance continues will constitute a separate offense. If any such violation is
designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, the nuisance may be summarily abated by the City Manager or the Chief
of Police or their assigns. (Ord. 260-87-08-11, passed 8-11-87)
(C) A culpable mental state is not required for the commission of an offense under this code unless the provision defining the
conduct expressly requires a culpable mental state.
(Ord. 756-04-09-28, passed 9-28-04)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec.
12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
CHAPTER 11: CITY STANDARDS
§ 11.01 ACCEPTING PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW; ADOPTION OF CHARTER.
The city will operate as a home-rule municipality, as authorized by Article XI, Section 5, of the Texas Constitution, under the charter
adopted November 2, 1993, as subsequently amended.
CHAPTER 12: CHARTER REQUIREMENTS
CITY CHARTER REMOVAL HEARING PROCESS
§ 12.01 TITLE AND PURPOSE.
This subchapter shall be titled and may be cited as the City Charter Removal Hearing Process ordinance. The purpose of this
Subchapter is to establish rules and procedures as required by Section 3.08(c) of the City's Charter that will be utilized if a member
of City Council becomes subject to removal under Section 3.08(a) of the City Charter.
(Ord. 1308-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
§ 12.02 APPLICABILITY.
In accordance with the City Charter, this subchapter shall only apply to proceedings initiated in accordance with Section 3.08(b) of
the City Charter and solely for the reasons established in Section 3.08(a) of the City Charter.
(Ord. 1308-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
§ 12.03 DEFINITIONS.
COMPLAINANT. The person initiating a proceeding under this subchapter by presenting a sworn written complaint to the Mayor or
Mayor pro tem, as applicable, charging a member of the City Council with an act or omission that is a reason for removal under
Section 3.08(a) of the City Charter.
RESPONDENT. The City Council member about whom a complaint is presented under this subchapter by the Complainant.
(Ord. 1308-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/422
§ 12.04 HEARING PROCESS AND PROCEDURE.
(A) Open meetings. All hearings held under this subchapter shall be conducted in open session in accordance with the Texas Open
Meetings Act, Texas Government Code, Chapter 551, except that the City Council may conduct a closed session to get advice from
its attorney pursuant to and in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(B) Removal process initiation.
(1) Initiation. A proceeding under this subchapter is initiated when a sworn written complaint charging a member of the
City Council with an act or omission that is a reason for removal under Section 3.08(a) of the City Charter is presented by
the Complainant to the Mayor or, if the complaint is against the Mayor, to the Mayor pro tem. The person receiving the
complaint shall file it with the city secretary within two (2) business days of receipt, who shall provide a copy to the
Respondent and all other City Council members at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting. The Mayor or the
Mayor pro tem, as applicable, shall set a time and date for a hearing on the complaint at the same regularly scheduled
meeting that the complaint has been distributed to City Council members.
(2) Hearing date and meeting form. The hearing date set shall be held no sooner than twenty (20) days, nor later than
forty-five (45) days following the date of distribution of the complaint at the regularly scheduled meeting provided above
and shall be called as a special meeting of City Council in accordance with Section 3.08(c)(3) of the City's Charter.
(3) Written notice to respondent officer. Distribution of the sworn and written complaint to the Respondent subject to
any investigation and/or hearing under this subchapter by the City Secretary shall be deemed as compliance with Section
3.08(c)(2) of the City's Charter.
(4) Investigation and subpoenas.
(a) Following the setting of the date of the hearing, City Council, upon an affirmative majority vote of the voting
members of City Council present, which shall exclude any member of City Council who initiated or is the subject of
the investigation or hearing who shall not sit at the dais and shall not participate in deliberation or vote, shall
determine whether it is necessary to direct the City Manager, City Attorney and/or the Chief of Police to investigate
the matter, as authorized by Section 3.19 of the City Charter.
(b) Upon an affirmative majority vote of the voting members of City Council present, which shall exclude any
member of City Council who initiated or is the subject of the investigation or hearing who shall not sit at the dais
and shall not participate in deliberation or vote, City Council, through the Mayor or Mayor pro tem, as applicable,
may issue any subpoenas for witnesses or documentary evidence deemed necessary by City Council and shall issue
subpoenas for witnesses or documentary evidence when requested by the Complainant or the Respondent, provided
that such written request is submitted to the City Secretary no less than ten (10) business days prior to hearing date
established. A subpoena issued in accordance with this subchapter shall have the same authority as a subpoena
issued by the City's municipal court.
(C) Hearing process and rules of order.
(1) Preliminary matters.
(a) Call to order. The Mayor or Mayor pro-tem, as applicable, who shall be deemed the “Presiding Officer” for
purposes of this subchapter, shall call the hearing to order.
(b) Participation prohibited. Neither a member of City Council who initiated an investigation or hearing under
this subchapter, nor the Respondent shall sit at the dais or participate in deliberation or vote.
(c) Statement of hearing. Following the call to order, the Presiding Officer shall issue a statement regarding the
nature of the hearing and the allegations to be considered, as required by Section 3.08(c)(6) of the City Charter.
(d) Public comment. Next the Presiding Officer will determine whether public comment will be allowed as part of
the hearing. No public comment shall be allowed unless agreed to by a majority vote of the voting members of City
Council present in accordance with City Charter Section 3.08(c)(9). If it is determined that public comment will be
allowed, such public comment will be governed by the rules established in subsection (E) of this subchapter.
(e) Rules of evidence. The admissibility of evidence is within the discretion of the Presiding Officer, who is not
bound by any court rules or rules of evidence. Under the direction of the Presiding Officer, City Council shall not
consider or debate questions of law or admissibility, but shall consider all evidence provided by either party that the
City Council deems helpful and/or appropriate to admit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/422
(f) Oaths. The Presiding Officer shall swear in the Complainant, the Respondent and witnesses by administering
oaths regarding the person's intention to tell the truth, such oath to be stated as “Do you solemnly affirm that the
testimony you will give is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, under penalty of perjury?,” which
may be given to all individuals collectively at the beginning of the hearing or individually as testimony is received.
(g) Burden of proof. The Complainant is deemed to have the burden of proof in proving all allegations asserted
by a complaint filed under this subchapter and City Council shall consider whether such burden was satisfied prior
to making a determination under this subchapter.
(h) Representation. The Respondent is entitled to be represented through legal counsel during a hearing held
under this subchapter.
(i) Exclusion of witnesses. In accordance with Texas Government Code § 551.084, the City Council, upon a
majority vote of the voting members of City Council present, may exclude a witness or witnesses from a hearing
during the examination of another witness.
(2) Proceedings.
(a) Opening statements. Following completion of the preliminary matters by the Presiding Officer, each party
shall be afforded an opportunity to make an opening statement, which shall be limited to a maximum of five (5)
minutes. The Complainant shall make its statement first and the Respondent's statement shall follow.
(b) Complainant presentation of evidence and witnesses. Following the completion of the Respondent's opening
statement, the Complainant shall present evidence to the Presiding Officer for City Council consideration and may
call witnesses to provide testimony. If a witness is called by the Complainant, the Respondent and then the City
Council will be afforded an opportunity to cross-examine the witness following Complainant's questioning.
(c) Respondent presentation of evidence and witness. Following the completion of the Complainant's presentation
of evidence and witnesses, the Respondent shall present evidence to the Presiding Officer for City Council
consideration and may call witnesses to provide testimony. If a witness is called by the Respondent, the
Complainant and then the City Council will be afforded an opportunity to cross-examine the witness following
Respondent's questioning.
(d) Presentation of investigation results/evidence and witnesses of city council. Following the completion of
Respondent's presentation of evidence and witnesses, the Presiding Officer shall, if applicable as directed under
subsection (B)(4)(a), request a presentation of investigation results from the City Manager, City Attorney, and/or
Chief of Police, as applicable. Following this presentation, the Respondent and then the Complainant shall be
afforded an opportunity to cross-examine the presenter of the investigative results and any witness called by the
presenter. Following this process, the Presiding Officer may present evidence and call witnesses subpoenaed under
subsection (B)(4)(b) of this subchapter. The Respondent and then the Complainant shall be afforded an opportunity
to cross-examine any such witness called.
(e) Public comment. If City Council has determined that public comment will be permitted during the hearing in
accordance with subsection (C)(1)(d) of this subchapter, the Presiding Officer will allow public comment in the
order of individuals signed up to speak at the hearing in accordance with the rules provided under subsection (D) of
this subchapter. Following each public comment, the Respondent and then the Complainant shall be afforded an
opportunity to cross-examine each person commenting.
(f) Closing arguments. Following the conclusion of public comment, if any, the Complainant shall be afforded
three (3) minutes to present a closing argument to City Council. The Respondent's closing argument shall follow
with the Respondent also being afforded three (3) minutes.
(g) City council deliberations. Following closing arguments, City Council shall deliberate either publicly or, upon
majority vote of the voting members of City Council present, privately in closed session under any applicable Texas
Open Meetings Act provision providing for executive session, such as 551.074 Personnel or 551.071 Legal Advice,
as applicable. Upon completion of deliberations, City Council shall make a determination in open session in
accordance with subsection (E) below and the hearing will be deemed complete.
(D) Public comment. If City Council determines that public comment will be received in accordance with subsection (C)(1)(d) of
this section, the following rules shall apply to all public comments:
(1) Public comment rules announcement. Immediately before the opening of the Public Comment section of the
hearing proceeding process, at the direction of the Presiding Officer, the City Secretary shall summarize the rules
governing public comment and the City Secretary shall take the names of those interested in making a comment
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/422
pertaining to hearing. The Presiding Officer will recognize those persons desiring to address the City Council on the
hearing matter in the order that the City Secretary received the names.
(2) Advanced registration. Persons wishing to comment are encouraged to register in advance. Any person wishing to
make a comment at the hearing should register with the City Secretary before the hearing commences. Any person who
has not registered in advance may be permitted to speak upon recognition by the Presiding Officer and a majority vote of
the voting members of City Council present.
(3) Time limits/conclusion of public comment. Public comments may be limited to a maximum time limit and/or
concluded by a majority vote of the voting members of City Council present. In all cases, the Presiding Officer shall
announce the time limits and/or conclusion of public comments. Each person will speak only one time during the hearing,
unless specifically requested to comment further or while under cross-examination as provided in subsection (C)(2)(e) in
this subchapter.
(4) Comment scope limitation. Any comments received shall be limited in scope to the matter before the City Council.
The Presiding Officer shall have the power to terminate the presentation of any comment that is not limited to the matter
before the City Council.
(5) Preservation of order. The Presiding Officer shall preserve order and decorum and, if necessary, shall cause to be
silenced or removed from the hearing, any person speaking out of order or disrupting the order of the hearing, being
verbally or physically abusive, or using inappropriate language.
(E) Determination of city council. In accordance with Section 3.08(c)(10) and (11) of the City Charter, following the completion
of the hearing process provided in this subchapter, City Council, upon majority vote of the voting members of City Council present,
may:
(1) Determine that the Respondent has not violated Section 3.08(a) of the City's Charter;
(2) Determine that the Respondent has violated Section 3.08(a) of the City's Charter and that removal of the
Respondent is warranted and that a vacancy shall be declared to be filled no sooner than the next regular meeting of City
Council, and in accordance with Section 3.07 of the City's Charter;
(3) Determine that further investigation or further information is necessary prior to making a determination regarding
removal, in which case City Council shall identify the scope of the additional investigation and further information and
direct the City Manager to conduct or secure the same for City Council's subsequent consideration;
(4) Determine that a vote of censure of the Respondent is warranted; or
(5) Take such other action as City Council determines appropriate.
(F) Penalty. Any person that fails to obey a subpoena issued by the Mayor or Mayor pro tem, as applicable, under subsection (B)
(4)(b) of this subchapter or who violates an oath taken under subsection (C)(1)(f) of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor,
which shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
(Ord. 1308-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 30: CITY OFFICIALS*
§ 30.01 FIRE MARSHAL.
(A) Establishment. The office of Fire Marshal for the city is hereby established, and shall be independent of other city
departments.
(1) The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council, and shall receive such
compensation as may be fixed from time to time by the City Council.
(2) The term of office of the Fire Marshal shall be two years and begin on October 1 of each odd numbered year.
(B) Functions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/422
(1) The duties of Fire Marshall shall include the following:
(a) Enforce the Fire Code of the city.
(b) Investigate the cause, origin, and circumstances of every fire in which property has been destroyed or
damaged within 24 hours of the occurrence of such fire, provided that Sundays and official city holidays shall not be
included in the calculation of the 24-hour period.
(c) If indicated, as a result of the investigation conducted under division (B)(1)(b) above, he shall:
(i) Advise the proper authorities of any suspicion of arson, or attempted arson, conspiracy to defraud, or
criminal conduct in connection with such fire; and
(ii) Furnish all evidence to the proper prosecuting attorney, together with the names of witnesses and all
pertinent information and material testimony taken during such investigation.
(d) Conduct, and be responsible for, fire prevention inspections to insure compliance with city ordinances, rules,
and regulations and with the Uniform Fire Code on the following bases:
(i) Annual inspections of all buildings being used for other than private residential purposes or for a family
group;
(ii) Random inspections, as deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal; and
(iii) Reinspection to monitor corrections of deficiencies found during an inspection.
(e) Maintain a record of:
(i) All fires, together with all facts, statistics, and circumstances, including the origin of such fires and the
amount of loss, as is determined by his investigation; and
(ii) Each inspection and reinspection, indicating the date of such inspection or reinspection, any deficiencies
found, and any corrective action which may be necessary.
(f) Make reports to the State Fire Marshal at the end of each month related to existing hazardous conditions and
each fire occurring in the city during such month.
(2) The Fire Marshal is authorized and empowered to:
(a) Summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is a subject of inquiry and
investigation.
(b) Require the production of any book, paper, or document deemed pertinent to any investigation.
(c) Administer oaths to any person appearing as a witness before him.
(d) Enter upon and examine, at any time of the day or night, any building or premises where a fire has occurred or
any building or premises adjoining or near the location of a fire.
(e) Enter any building or premises within the city, during a reasonable hour, for the purpose of fire prevention
inspection.
(C) Noncompliance with Fire Marshal's Order; Other Violations. It shall be deemed a violation of this section to:
(1) Fail to make the corrections deemed necessary by the Fire Marshal pursuant to his inspection under the provisions
of this section within the prescribed time period.
(2) In connection with an investigation or inquiry of the Fire Marshal:
(a) Refuse to be sworn, to appear, or to testify; or
(b) Disobey any lawful order of the Fire Marshal; or
(c) Fail or refuse to produce any book, paper, or document related to any matter under examination.
(3) Maintain a building, structure, or premises, in such a condition or want of repair so as to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/422
(a) Render it liable to fire;
(b) Endanger the buildings or property of others; or
(c) Create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants of such buildings, structures, or premises.
(D) Construction.
(1) Wherever in the fire code of the city there is given to any city agency or official any rights, duties, or
responsibilities for enforcement or administration of the fire code, the reference to the agency or official shall be deemed
to be a reference to the Fire Marshal to the extent that such construction is reasonable.
(2) This section shall, to the extent reasonable, be construed in a manner which is consistent with the fire code of the
city. In the event of an irreconcilable conflict between this section and the fire code, this section shall prevail.
(Ord. 218-85-11-12, passed 11-12-85)
Cross-reference–Uniform Fire Code adopted as part of Construction Code, see § 150.02.
OFFICE OF CITY ENGINEER
§ 30.10 TITLE.
This subchapter will be known, and may be cited, as the City Engineer's Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
§ 30.11 OFFICE OF CITY ENGINEER.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created the office of City Engineer. The City Manager will supervise the City Engineer.
(B) Qualifications. The City Engineer must be a registered professional engineer in the State of Texas. The City Manager will
supervise the City Engineer.
(C) Funding.
(1) Funds for the City Engineer will be allocated in the city budget for each fiscal year.
(2) The City Manager will submit to the City Council a monthly statement of all the City Engineers receipts and
disbursements in sufficient detail to show the office's exact financial condition.
(3) The City Manager will make timely recommendations to the City Council for the budgeting of the City Engineer's
funds in the preparation of the fiscal year budget.
(Ord. 483-98-01-27, passed 1-27-98)
ACTING CITY MANAGER
§ 30.20 TITLE.
This subchapter will be known, and may be cited as the Acting City Manager's Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 1309-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
§ 30.21 ACTING CITY MANAGER.
(A) Appointment of administrative officers. Pursuant to Section 4.01(d) of the City Charter, the City Council hereby appoints the
following administrative officers of the City to serve as Acting City Manager(s) in the absence or disability of the City Manager.
(1) Assistant City Manager for Development Services.
(2) Assistant City Manager for Finance and Administration.
(3) Assistant City Manager for Community Services.
(4) Police Chief.
(5) Public Information Officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/422
(6) City Engineer.
(B) Designation. Upon foreknowledge of absence or disability which requires an Acting City Manager, it shall be the duty of the
City Manager to give notice to the City Council which designated individual will act in such capacity and for what time frame if such
is determinable.
(C) Inability to designate. In the case of absence or disability which requires an Acting City Manager for which such notice is not
possible or not given, the Acting City Manager shall be the above named person(s) sequentially beginning at the top of the list as
stated above, depending on availability.
(D) This subchapter is in no way intended to affect the Police Command structure in the case of a bona fide emergency.
(Ord. 1309-17-06-13, passed 6-13-17)
§ 30.99 PENALTY.
Any person found to be violating visions set out in § 30.01(C) will be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
subject to a fine of up to the maximum allowed by law. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty
shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(Ord. 218-85-11-12, passed 11-12-85)
Cross-reference–General penalty based on state law, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 31: DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS*
LIBRARY BOARD
§ 31.01 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Library Board Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
§ 31.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
BOARD. The Library Board of the city.
CITY. The City of Pflugerville.
DEPARTMENT. The Library Department of the city.
DIRECTOR. The Director of the library of the city.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
§ 31.03 CREATION; MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created the Library Board of the city.
(B) Membership.
(1) The Board shall be composed of seven regular members and one alternate member who may serve in the absence of
a regular member. Membership shall be limited to registered voters of the city who have resided within the city's
incorporated city limits (including any annexed territory) for at 12 months preceding their appointment. Liaisons to the
Board shall include the President of the Friends of the Pflugerville Community Library, the Director of the Library, and a
student from a high school in the Pflugerville Independent School District. Liaisons to the Board shall advise the Board,
but shall not be entitled to vote on any matter coming before the Board. (Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03)
(2) All Board members shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve without compensation. Liaisons shall not
be appointed by the City Council, but shall also serve without compensation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/422
(C) Terms of Office. The term of office of Board members shall commence on the first day of January following the date of their
appointment. The terms of the Board members appointed June 1, 2003 shall expire on December 31, 2005; the terms of Board
members appointed June 1, 2002 shall expire on December 31, 2004. Board members shall thereafter be appointed to serve two-year
terms. The term of the alternate is for one year, commencing on January 1, of each year; the term of the alternate Board member
appointed June 1, 2003 shall expire on December 31, 2004.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94; Am. Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03)
§ 31.04 ORGANIZATION.
(A) Officers. The Board shall elect from its members, at the first meeting of the Board held on or after January 1 of each year, a
chairman, vice-chair, and secretary. Such officers shall hold office for terms of one year, or until their successors take office. The
chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Board. The vice-chair shall preside in the absence of the chairman. The secretary
shall keep a record of proceedings of all meetings and shall be the custodian of all Board records.
(Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03)
(B) Rules of procedure.
(1) The Board shall adopt, subject to the approval of the City Council, such rules and regulations governing its
proceedings as it may deem proper. These rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the charter,
ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the city.
(2) A motion by a member shall require a second. After a motion has been made and duly seconded, discussion of the
motion will ensue for a reasonable time. Discussion by members, or by opponents or proponents of a question before the
Board, shall terminate whenever a member shall call for a vote upon the question, or whenever the chairman shall so rule,
provided that, with respect to public hearings required by statute or ordinance, full opportunity to be heard has been given
to interested persons.
(3) Whenever any question of procedure or qualification is raised at a Board meeting, the chairman shall rule thereon.
A member may move to overrule the chairman's decision, which motion must be approved by a majority vote of the
members present in order to carry.
(C) Voting. Voting shall be by roll call vote. The chairman shall be entitled to vote on any matter before the Board.
(D) Department Report. The Board shall take no final action on any matter before it without first obtaining reports from the city
departments concerned.
(E) Press Releases. Releases and statements to the public and press in the name of the Board shall be made only by the chairman.
(F) Questions of Procedure. Any question of order or procedure not covered by this section shall be decided according to the latest
edition of Robert's Rules of Order, insofar as it may be applicable.
(G) Minutes. Minutes and records shall be kept of all proceedings by the secretary, who shall forward all records of meetings to
the City Secretary for distribution to the City Council.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
§ 31.05 DISMISSAL; ABSENCES.
(A) Dismissal. Members of the Library Board shall be subject to dismissal by the Council for cause in accordance with the
following provisions:
(1) Before the Council may take action to dismiss any member of the Board, such member shall first receive notice of
the proposed dismissal and notice of the Council meeting at which the dismissal will be considered.
(2) Any member of the Board proposed to be dismissed may request a hearing before the City Council, prior to such
dismissal becoming effective, by filing with the City Secretary a written request for hearing within five (5) days from the
date of notification of the City Council's proposed action.
(3) Upon filing of request for hearing, the member shall be provided with a bill of particulars which specifies the basis
for the proposed dismissal and the date and time of hearing thereon, which shall be at least five days after receipt of the
bill of particulars.
(4) Dismissal from the Board shall become automatically effective and final if no request for hearing is received by the
City Secretary by the end of such five-day period.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/422
(B) Absences. Absences from three consecutive regular meetings of the Board, or moving one's residence outside the city limits,
shall automatically create a vacancy on the Board with respect to the position held by such Board member.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
§ 31.06 MEETINGS.
(A) Regular Meetings. The Board shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and shall fix regular meeting dates at a
regular meeting place.
(B) Quorum. A majority of the Board members serving shall constitute a quorum.
(C) Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called as necessary for the receipt of public input. Special meetings may be held
upon call of the chairman, Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney or upon request of three or more members of the Board.
(D) Compliance with Open Meetings Act. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Texas Open Meetings Act, being Tex.
Gov't Code, §§ 551.001 et seq., as it now exists, or as the same may hereafter be amended. Every regular or special meeting of the
Board shall be open to the public, except as may be authorized by the Texas Open Meetings Act.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
§ 31.07 RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) Advisory Board.
(1) The Board shall serve in the capacity of a citizens' advisory committee to the City Council regarding matters of
library procedure and policy.
(2) The Board shall recommend and offer counsel to the City Council about decisions regarding the library.
(3) The Board shall promote the library's programs and services in the greater Pflugerville community.
(B) Funding. With the approval of the City Council, the Board shall seek grants and, when necessary, conduct fund-raising
activities. The Board may accept donations, legacies or bequests for the improvement or maintenance of the library. All monies
derived from such donations, legacies or bequests shall be delivered to the city and deposited to the credit of the Department, to be
used in the same manner as funds normally appropriated.
(Ord. 392-94-03-08, passed 3-8-94)
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 31.20 ESTABLISHMENT.
There is hereby established and recognized a Police Department for the city which shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
members as may be provided for by the City Council.
(Ord. 164-83-7-5, passed 7-5-83)
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
§ 31.30 TITLE.
This subchapter will be known, and may be cited, as the Planning Department Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 450-96-12-03, passed 12-3-96)
§ 31.31 DEFINITIONS.
For purposes of this subchapter, the following definitions will apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city.
DEPARTMENT. The Planning Department of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/422
DIRECTOR. The Director of the Planning Department of the city.
(Ord. 450-96-12-03, passed 12-3-96)
§ 31.32 PLANNING DEPARTMENT.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created a Planning Department of the city. The Planning Director will oversee the Department.
(B) Director. The position of Planning Director of the city is hereby established. The City Manager will supervise the Director.
(C) Funding.
(1) Funds for the operation of the Department will be allocated in the city budget for each fiscal year.
(2) The City Manager will submit to the City Council and the Commission a monthly statement of all the Department's
receipts and disbursements in sufficient detail to show the Department's exact financial condition.
(3) The Commission will make timely recommendations to the City Council for the budgeting of the Department funds
in the preparation of the fiscal year budget.
(Ord. 450-96-12-03, passed 12-3-96)
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
§ 31.40 TERMS OF PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION.
The term of office of Commission members shall commence on the first day of January following the date of their appointment. The
terms of the Commission members appointed October 1, 2003 shall expire on December 31, 2005; the terms of Commission
members appointed October 1, 2002 shall expire on December 31, 2004. Commission members shall thereafter be appointed to serve
two-year terms.
(Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03)
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
§ 31.50 TERMS OF BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
Each member of the Board of Adjustment shall be appointed for a term of two years, except that three regular members and two
alternate members appointed initially shall be appointed for terms of only one year. Board members shall thereafter be appointed to
serve two-year terms. The term of office of members of the Board of Adjustment shall commence on the first day of January.
(Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 856-07-01-09, § 1, passed 1-9-07)
CHAPTER 32: EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT*
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN
§ 32.01 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT DIRECTOR.
(A) There is hereby established an office of Emergency Management Director of the city which office shall be held by the Mayor
in accordance with state law.
(1) An Emergency Management Coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the Director.
(2) The Director shall be responsible for establishing a program of comprehensive emergency management within the
city and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this chapter. The Director may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the Coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the Director.
(3) The operational Emergency Management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the
city so designated by the Director in the city's emergency management plan, as well as organized volunteer groups. The
functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers, employees and volunteer groups in
accordance with the terms the city's emergency management plan.
(B) The duties and responsibilities of the Emergency Management Director shall include the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/422
(1) Conduct an on-going survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property within the city and an
on-going program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to
prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city, and recommending, or
adoption by the City Council, all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. Such a declaration may not be continued or renewed for a period in
excess of seven days except with the consent of the City Council. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing, or
terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the City
Secretary.
(4) Issuance of proclamations, regulations, or directives which are necessary for carrying out the purposes of this
chapter. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated promptly by means calculated to bring their
content to the attention of the general public and, unless circumstances related to a disaster prevent or impede such action,
promptly filed with the City Secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the emergency management organization, as well as of the training of
emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management
organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of communications with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal emergency
management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all personnel, equipment, or supplies from any department of the city which may be necessary to aid
in the implementation of the provisions of the city's emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the
state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and of the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an
agreement with the county in which the city is located and with other municipalities within the county, for county-wide
coordination of emergency management efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of, all necessary supplies and equipment, including
acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within
the city.
(11) Authorizing agreements, after approval by the City Attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and
other purposes.
(12) Determining the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies, and services which could be used during a
disaster, as provided herein.
(13) Other duties and responsibilities as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975, Tex. Gov't Code Chapter 418.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.02 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT PLAN.
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained by the city. The plan shall set forth the form of
organization; establish and designate divisions and functions; assign responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers; and designate officers
and employees to carry out the provisions of this chapter. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria
established by the State Division of Emergency Management of the State of Texas. Insofar as possible, the form of organization,
titles, and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the State Division of Emergency Management. When such plan is
approved, it shall be the duty of all city departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their
portion of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The city's emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this chapter and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.03 INTERJURISDICTIONAL PROGRAM.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to join with the County Judge of the County of Travis and the mayors of the other cities in the
county in the formation of an interjurisdictional emergency management program for the County of Travis, and to cooperate in the
preparation of an interjurisdictional emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint Emergency Management
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/422
Coordinator. The Mayor is further granted such powers as may be necessary for the city to participate in a county-wide program of
emergency management insofar as the program may affect the city.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.04 ADOPTION OF NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).
The National Incident Management System (NIMS) dated March 1, 2004 is hereby adopted.
(Ord. 796-05-09-27, passed 9-27-05)
§ 32.05 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated under this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede
and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.06 LIABILITY.
This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health, and safety and
neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or
trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or
regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of
said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensations grants to the
city a license of privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate, and use the whole or any part of such real estate or
premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending, or practice enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster
shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such
real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.07 COMMITMENT OF FUNDS.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized
by this chapter without prior approval by the City Council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract,
agreement, or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the City Council unless during a declared disaster. During a declared
disaster, the Mayor may expend and/or commit public funds of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of
health, life, or property.
(Ord. 410-94-12-14, passed 12-13-94)
§ 32.08 VIOLATIONS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management
organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter.
(B) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry, or display any emblem, insignia, or any other means of
identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city unless authority to do so has been granted to such
person by the proper officials.
(C) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or the termination of a
warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 410-94-12, passed 12-13-94; Am. Ord. 796-05-09-27, passed 9-27-05)
CHAPTER 33: FINANCE AND TAXATION
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 CITY CREDIT CARD.
(A) The City Manager is hereby authorized to apply for a business credit card account on behalf of the city, with a maximum
credit limit of $5,000.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/422
(B) The City Manager and the heads of city departments shall be authorized to sign on the city's credit card account. Each
authorized user shall be issued a card imprinted with the name of the city and the name of the authorized user. Each authorized user
shall use his or her credit card solely for the payment of expenses incurred in the conduct of city business.
(Ord. 399-94-04-12, passed 4-12-94)
§ 33.02 TAXATION OF CERTAIN PROPERTY.
All of the property described in the Texas Constitution, Article VIII, Section 1-j, shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation in the city
beginning August 7, 2007.
(Ord. 309-89-11-28, passed 11-28-89; Ord. 898-07-08-07, passed 8-7-07)
§ 33.03 CONTINUATION OF TAXES AUTHORIZED BY LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ACT.
The City of Pflugerville, by the majority vote of its governing body, hereby votes to continue the taxes authorized by the Municipal
Sales and Use Tax Act (TEX. TAX CODE, §§321.001 et seq.) on the receipts from the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental
of, and the use, storage, or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by Section 6 of House Bill No.
1, Acts 1978, 65th Legislature, Second Called Session.
(Ord. 104-78-10-9, passed 10-9-78)
§ 33.04 AUTHORIZATION OF PAYMENT BY CREDIT CARD.
The City Manager or the City Manager's designee(s) may accept payment for any fee, fine, or court-charged cost by credit card.
(Ord. 829-06-05-09, passed 5-9-06)
§ 33.05 CREDIT CARD HANDLING FEE.
(A) There is hereby created and established a credit card handling fee pursuant to Chapter 132 of the Local Government Code.
(B) The credit card handling fee will be charged for all fines, fees, special expenses, and charges paid via credit card to the
Municipal Court. The credit card handling fee will not be charged for any fee, fine, or charge that is not associated with the
Municipal Court.
(C) The credit card handling fee is five percent of the amount of the fee, fine, court cost or other charge paid to the city for
Municipal Court costs.
(Ord. 104-78-10-9, passed 10-9-78; Am. Ord. 829-06-05-09, passed 5-9-06)
§ 33.06 ANNUAL OCCUPATION TAX ON COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PERMITS.
(A) The city hereby levies and assesses and shall collect an annual occupation tax on any coin-operated amusement machines in
the city in the amount of one-fourth of the amount of the fee payable to the state, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code
§§2153.401 and 2153.451. Upon payment of the annual occupation taxes levied by the owner, the city shall issue the proper machine
permits. The machine permits shall be prepared in a form approved by the city and made suitable for placement on the coin-operated
amusement machine for which the permit was issued. It shall be the duty of the operator to attach such permit to the coin-operated
amusement machine for which the permit was issued.
(B) The Chief of Police, or his or her duly designated representative, shall seal any coin-operated machine on which the tax has
been levied and not been paid. A fee of $15.00 shall be charged for the release of any machine sealed as provided herein for
nonpayment of tax.
(C) Before any machine permit shall be issued by the city, the applicant shall furnish appropriate evidence to show that the
applicant has been issued a registration certificate (if required) by the State Comptroller of Public Accounts. Before any occupation
tax permit shall be issued by the city, the applicant shall furnish appropriate evidence to show that the applicant has been issued a
license (if required) by the State Comptroller of Public Accounts. All state licenses and city occupation tax permits shall terminate at
the same times and in the same manner as all state certificates and licenses issued pursuant to V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2153.
In addition all of the provisions of V.T.C.A., Occupations Code ch. 2153, as presently enacted or as hereinafter amended, are hereby
adopted and made a part of this section.
(D) It shall be a violation of this section to:
(1) Allow the operation of a coin-operated amusement machine governed by this section without the required permit;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/422
(2) Break the seal affixed in the name of the city or exhibit, display or remove from location any machine on which the
seal has been broken; or
(3) Attach a tax permit to a coin-operated amusement machine that is exhibited or displayed if the machine is not
registered with the city under this section.
(E) A person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor
more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter
6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with.
(Ord. 870-07-04-10, passed 4-10-07)
HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX
§ 33.21 DEFINITIONS.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
CONSIDERATION. The price of, or value received for, the right to use a sleeping room, bed, or dormitory space or other sleeping
facility in a hotel, and includes the price of conveniences customarily provided in connection with sleeping accommodations,
including mattress, sheets, bedspreads, pillows, pillow cases, bed frames, air conditioning, electricity, lighting, water, soap, towels,
washcloths, toilet tissue, shower or bath facilities, lavatory, chairs, trash receptacles, plus any other goods or services which are not
ordinarily subject to sales tax. The consideration paid for a sleeping room or facility shall not include the price of food served, nor
the price of personal services rendered to the occupant which are unrelated to cleaning and readying a room for occupancy, nor any
sales tax, nor occupancy tax assessed by other governmental agencies, provided that these charges are stated separately on the folio
or invoice of the occupant. Charges not stated separately shall be presumed to be part of the consideration paid for occupancy of a
sleeping room or sleeping facility, and shall be taxed under this subchapter.
DIRECTOR. The director of finance or the director's designated representative.
HOTEL. Has the meaning assigned by § 156.001 of the Tax Code, as may be amended.
INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION. Has the meaning assigned by § 61.003 Education Code, V.T.C.A.
OCCUPANCY. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed or other facility
in a hotel for any purpose.
OCCUPANT. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room in a hotel under any lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than a permanent resident as hereinafter defined.
PERMANENT RESIDENT. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period.
PERSON. Any individual, company, corporation, or association owning, operating, managing, or controlling any hotel.
QUARTER. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of January, February and
March; the second quarter being the months of April, May and June; the third quarter being the months of July, August and
September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October, November and December. The municipal fiscal quarters are
composed of the same months, but the first quarter is composed of the months of October, November and December.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.22 TAX AUTHORIZED; TAX RATE; EXCEPTIONS TO TAX.
(A) There is hereby levied a tax upon the price of occupancy of any room or space furnished by any hotel located within the city
limits, where such cost of occupancy is at the rate of two dollars ($2.00) or more per day, such tax to be equal to seven (7) percent of
the price for occupancy.
(B) No tax shall be imposed hereunder upon a permanent resident.
(C) No tax shall be imposed under this subchapter upon foreign diplomatic personnel.
(D) This article does not impose a tax on the United States, this state, or an agency, institution, board, or commission of this state
other than an institution of higher education.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/422
(E) This article does not impose a tax on an officer or employee of a governmental entity described by subsection (D) of this
section when traveling on or otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.23 REGISTRATION OF LODGING PROVIDER; FORM AND CONTENTS; EXECUTION; CERTIFICATE OF
AUTHORITY.
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the director on
a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than thirty (30) days after the date that
this subchapter becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth that name under which such person transacts business or intends
to transact business, the location of his/her place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration
of the tax as prescribed by the finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership
by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The director shall,
after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A
separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and
location of the business to which it is applicable.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.24 COLLECTION; PAYMENT TO CITY; FEE FOR COLLECTION.
(A) Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel located within the city limits shall collect the tax imposed
under this subchapter and pay same to the director with the returns required hereinafter.
(B) The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each guest, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts
of this and other tax applicable.
(C) This tax shall be due from the guest, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected.
(D) The lodging provider shall be liable for any amount of tax that he/she fails to collect appropriately; and must remit to the city
any amount of tax collected in excess of that which should have been collected.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.25 PAYMENTS AND REPORTS.
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required hereby to collect the tax imposed by this
subchapter shall file a report with the director showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the
amount of tax collected on the city's behalf on such occupancies, and any other information as the director may reasonably require.
Such persons shall pay over the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. There shall also be furnished to the
director of the city at the time of payment of such tax, a copy of the quarterly tax report filed with the state comptroller in connection
with the state hotel occupancy tax.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.26 RULES AND REGULATIONS; ACCESS TO BOOKS AND RECORDS.
The director shall adopt such procedures, rules and regulations as are reasonably necessary to effectively collect the tax levied herein,
and shall, upon request of any person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel, furnish a copy of such procedures, rules
and regulations for the guidance of such person and facilitate the collection of such tax as such collection is required herein. The
director shall be permitted to have access to books and records during reasonable business hours as shall be necessary to enable the
director to determine the correctness of the amount due under the provisions of this subchapter, or to determine whether or not a
report should have been filed and the amount, if necessary, of taxes due.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.27 USE OF PROCEEDS.
(A) The proceeds of the hotel occupancy tax levied by this subchapter shall be used by the city council for the purpose of
advertising and encouraging the growth of tourist and convention activity in the city, including the finance support of the civic center,
and those purposes set forth in Texas Tax Code § 351.101, as amended; provided, however, that the city shall use a minimum of
fifteen (15) percent of the total hotel occupancy tax revenue for advertising and promoting the city to directly impact tourism and the
hotel and convention industry. The enhancement of the arts and cultural organizations and programs [sic]. Additionally, the city shall
use a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total hotel occupancy tax revenue for the maintenance and improvement of the currently
operating civic center and/or funding of historical restoration and/or preservation projects and/or programs which enhance the arts
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/422
and/or preservation of the historic downtown area and other buildings with historic significance and/or solely city operated and
controlled promotional programs that are allowed by state law. The remaining seventy (70) percent of the proceeds of the hotel
occupancy tax shall be allocated by contract in accordance with the provisions of the city charter and the Texas Tax Code, as
amended which limits the revenue allocation for the promotion of the arts to fifteen (15) percent of the total hotel occupancy tax
revenue. Any future contract or contracts may be for a period of time not to exceed five (5) years in duration.
(B) No later than sixty (60) days after the end of each calendar year, all recipients of any hotel occupancy tax receipts under this
subchapter, other than the amounts authorized by city council and used by the city departments, shall submit an audited report to the
city council, showing in detail the disbursement and use of all such amounts paid to each and the services or goods and/or
merchandise received for the same.
(C) Thirty (30) days prior to the end of the contract period, each recipient shall forward the city manager evidence of justification
for the granting of a new contract by the city council for the future contract period. The receipt of any funds by any recipient shall
not imply any right of automatic renewal of such contract for the ensuing years; such option under the charter of the city and the laws
of the state shall rest exclusively with the city council.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.28 PENALTY FOR VIOLATION.
If any person required by the provisions of this subchapter to collect the tax, make reports as required herein, and pay to the tax
collector the tax imposed herein shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such reports, or shall fail to pay such tax, or if any such
person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by fine not to
exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00). [sic] basis of exemption, or such other information as the finance director may prescribe.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.29 PENALTY FOR FAILURE TO FILE REPORTS OR PAY TAXES WHEN DUE; INTEREST ON DELINQUENT
TAXES.
If any person shall fail to file a report as required herein or shall fail to pay to the tax collector the tax as imposed herein when such
report or payment is due, he shall forfeit five (5) percent of the amount due as a penalty, and after the first thirty (30) days he shall
forfeit an additional five (5) percent of such tax. Provided, however, that the penalty shall never be less than one dollar ($1.00).
Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six (6) percent per annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date due.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.30 SUIT TO ENJOIN HOTEL OPERATIONS.
The director shall refer any hotel occupancy tax account that has a delinquent balance older than sixty (60) days to the city attorney
for the purpose of filing a suit to enjoin the hotel owner, operator, manager, and other persons in control from operating any hotel in
the city until the tax is paid and/or the report filed. This remedy shall be in addition to the remedy of a collection suit and in addition
to the municipal court criminal complaint that may be filed for each violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
§ 33.31 SURETY BOND IN LIEU OF INJUNCTION SUIT.
The director shall not refer a delinquent account to the city attorney for the purpose of enjoining the hotel operators from doing
business in the city if the owner, manager, operator, or other persons in control provides an acceptable surety bond in an amount
equal to the city hotel occupancy tax collected by the subject hotel in the six (6) best net revenue months of the twelve (12) full
calendar months immediately prior to the acquisition of the bond, said bond to ensure payment for a one-year period, and be updated
and approved by the director annually if said hotel operators desire to continue such protection from business-closing during a period
of delinquency.
(Ord. 1178-14-05-27, passed 5-27-14)
CHAPTER 34: CITY RECORDS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Record Retention Ordinance of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/422
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
State law references–Public access to records, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 201.009; public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 552.
§ 34.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
DEPARTMENT HEAD. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates
or receives records.
ESSENTIAL RECORD. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in an emergency
or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the
people of the city.
MUNICIPAL RECORD. Any document, paper, letter, book, map, photograph, sound or video recording, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristics and regardless of whether
public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees
pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business.
PERMANENT RECORD. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULE. A document prepared by or under the authority of the Records Management Officer listing the
records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management
program may require.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT. The application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation,
and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of record keeping. The term includes the
development of records control schedules, the management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and
permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of
forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER. The person designated in § 34.30 of this chapter.
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN. The plan developed under § 34.31 of this chapter.
RETENTION PERIOD. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of
certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, § 201.003) (Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.03 MUNICIPAL RECORDS DECLARED PUBLIC PROPERTY.
All municipal records are declared to be the property of the city. No city official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any
personal or property right to such records even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized
destruction, removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.04 PUBLIC POLICY.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over the creation,
distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated
procedures for the management of records from their creation to their ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the
Local Government Records Act, Tex. Loc. Gov't Code §§ 201.001 et seq., and accepted records management practice.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
RECORDS CONTROL
§ 34.15 RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES.
(A) The Records Management Officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a
department by department basis listing all records created or received by the department and the retention period for each record.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/422
Records control schedules shall also contain such other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records
management plan may require.
(B) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the Records Management Officer on a regular
basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the record
keeping procedures and needs of the department and the records management program of the city.
(C) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule must be:
(1) Submitted to and accepted for filing by the Director and Librarian of the Texas State Library as provided by state
law, if a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended, made acceptable for filing, and resubmitted to
the Director and Librarian.
(2) Approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.16 IMPLEMENTATION OF RECORDS CONTROL SCHEDULES.
A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under § 34.31 shall be implemented by department
heads according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.17 DESTRUCTION OF RECORDS UNDER SCHEDULE.
(A) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed, subject to division (B), below,
unless an open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the
department head requests in writing to the Records Management Officer that the record be retained for an additional period.
(B) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be
obtained by the Records Management Officer from the City Council.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.18 DESTRUCTION OF UNSCHEDULED RECORDS.
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved
in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the Records Management Officer has submitted to and
received back from the Director and Librarian of the Texas State Library an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.19 RECORDS CENTER.
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by § 34.31, above, shall be under the direct control and supervision of the
Records Management Officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of the records center shall be contained in
the records management plan developed under § 34.31.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 34.30 RECORDS MANAGEMENT OFFICER.
(A) The City Secretary, and the successive holders of said office, shall serve as Records Management Officer for the city. As
provided by state law, each successive holder of the office shall file his or her name with the Director and Librarian of the Texas
State Library within 30 days of the initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(B) In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, the Records Management Officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/422
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each city office and
department to ensure maximum availability of the records in order to re-establish operations quickly and with minimum
disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for record keeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system
for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all city departments by preparation of a manual or manuals of
procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives
Commission to determine if the records management program and the municipal records control schedules are in
compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the City Council and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules
relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct department heads and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records management plan and
their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct department heads or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in preparation for the
development of records control schedules as required by state law and this chapter;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of municipal records is
carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of
state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules, the volume of
records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition;
(14) Report annually to the City Council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of
the city, including summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under division (13) above; and
(15) Bring to the attention of the City Council noncompliance by department heads or other city personnel with the
policies and procedures of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
State law reference–Duties of records management officer, see Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, sec. 203.023.
§ 34.31 RECORDS MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(A) The Records Management Officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the City Council.
The plan must contain policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of record keeping, to
adequately protect the essential records of the city, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The
plan must be designed to enable the Records Management Officer to carry out his or her duties prescribed by state law and this
chapter effectively.
(B) Once approved by the City Council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions,
programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored,
or microfilmed in accordance with such records management plan.
(C) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or record keeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the
department head or the records in the department head's care from the application of this chapter and the records management plan
adopted under it; nor may the department head use state law as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program
of the city.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
§ 34.32 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT HEADS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/422
In addition to other duties assigned in this chapter, department heads shall:
(A) Cooperate with the Records Management Officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city
for the efficient and economical management of municipal records and in carrying out the requirements of this chapter.
(B) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and duties for which the
department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
(C) Maintain the municipal records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction, or
other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 314-90-03-13, passed 3-13-90)
CHAPTER 35: PERSONNEL POLICIES
TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
§ 35.01 ELECTION TO PARTICIPATE; ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
(A) Election to participate in the TMRS. On behalf of the city, the City Council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the
city and all of the employees of all departments participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter “TMRS”) as
provided in Tex. Gov't. Code, §§ 851.001 et seq. as amended; and all of the benefits and obligations of such system are hereby
accepted.
(Ord. 147-82-8-16, passed 8-16-82)
(B) Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Benefits Fund. The City Council elects to have the employees of all
participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code, §§ 851.001 et seq.; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said
fund are hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(Ord. 149-82-8-16, passed 8-16-82)
(C) Election to participate in the TMRS Supplemental Death Benefits Fund. The City Council elects to have the employees of all
participating departments of the city participate in and be covered by the Supplemental Death Benefits Fund of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System, as provided by Tex. Gov't Code, § 852.004; and all the benefits and obligations of participation in said fund are
hereby accepted by the city as to such employees.
(Ord. 148-82-8-16, passed 8-16-82)
(D) Adoption by reference. Ordinances effecting the plan for participation in the TMRS, employee contributions, updated service
credits, increases in benefits and retirement annuities and any other applicable legislation of the city and state are adopted by
reference into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth herein and shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk.
Editor's note–See Ordinance No. 760-04-10-26, passed 10-26-04, regarding additional rights of employees.
§ 35.02 PRIOR SERVICE CREDITS.
(A) On the terms and conditions set out in Tex. Gov't Code, § 853.305 (of Subtitle G of Title 8), as amended (hereafter referred to
as the “TMRS Act”), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereafter referred to as the “System”) who is now or
who hereafter becomes an employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service credit for service previously performed as an
employee of any incorporated city or town in the United States or of any Council of Governments in this state for which the person
has not otherwise received credit service in this System, including combined service credit under Tex. Gov't Code, Ch. 803. The
service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length of service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary
value in computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including
computation of updated service credits.
(B) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this section must take the action required under Tex. Gov't
Code, § 853.305 while still an employee of this city.
(C) This section shall be and become effective on January 1, 1995, provided that the Board of Trustees of the System grants its
approval.
(Ord. 413-94-12-13, passed 12-13-94)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/422
Editor's note–See Ordinance No. 649-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01, for updated service credits.
§ 35.03 PARTICIPATION BY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION.
(A) The city hereby consents to the participation of the employees of the corporation in the System on the same basis upon which
employees of the city now and hereafter participate in the System.
(B) All persons who, on or after the effective date of this ordinance, receive compensation from the corporation and are engaged in
an appointive office or position with the corporation that normally requires services from the person for not less than 1,000 hours per
year shall be and are hereby required to become members of the System.
(C) All credit authorized under this ordinance shall be treated as if it were performed for the city, and all sums of money that may
be computed by the System's actuary as being necessary to fund the credit hereby granted shall constitute a charge against the city's
account in the municipality accumulation fund of the System. (Ord. 989-09-03-24, passed 3-24-09)
CODE OF ETHICS AND TRAVEL AND EXPENSE POLICY
§ 35.20 DEFINITIONS.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Code, shall mean the following:
CITY. The City of Pflugerville, Texas.
CITY BOARD OR COMMISSION. City commissions, committees, boards, tasks forces, or other city bodies, the members of which
are appointed by the City Council.
CITY CHARTER. The Home Rule Charter of the City of Pflugerville, Texas, adopted November 2, 1993, as hereafter amended from
time to time.
CITY COUNCIL. The legislative and governing body of the City, consisting of the Mayor and Council members.
CODE. This Code of Ethics, and Travel and Expense Policy, as hereafter amended from time to time.
CONFERENCE. A conference, seminar, educational gathering, meeting to discuss City business or other fact-finding meeting
authorized in accordance with § 35.22 of this Code.
EMPLOYEE. Any person employed by the City, including those individuals employed on a part-time basis, but shall not mean any
independent contractor hired by the City.
OFFICIAL. The Mayor, members of the City Council, the City Manager, Assistant City Managers, the City Secretary, and the head
of any City department, whether such person is salaried, hired, appointed or elected; and members of City Boards or Commissions.
REGION. The geographic area designated as Region 10 by the Texas Municipal League.
(Ord. 400-94-04-12, passed 4-12-94; Am. Ord. 510-98-10-27, passed 10-27-98)
§ 35.21 CODE OF ETHICS.
(A) Purposes. This code of ethics has been adopted for the following purposes:
(1) To comply with the requirements of Sec. 11.05 of the City Charter;
(2) To establish guidelines for high ethical standards in official conduct by City Officials and Employees; and
(3) To provide guidance to City Officials and Employees in order to instill a high level of public confidence in the
professionalism, integrity and commitment to the public interest of those in public service.
(B) Policy. It is the policy of the City that all City Officials and Employees shall conduct themselves in a manner consistent with
sound business and ethical practices, ensuring that the public interest is always considered in conducting City business.
(C) Conflicts of Interest.
(1) No City Official or Employee shall transact any business in his official capacity with any person with whom or
business entity in which he has any personal pecuniary interest, whether direct or indirect.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/422
(2) No City Official or Employee shall represent, directly or indirectly, himself or any other person, business entity,
group or interest before the body of which he is a member, except in of purely public concern and when doing so without
compensation.
(3) An Official or Employee may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter in which he has a personal pecuniary
interest or when his participation is prohibited by law.
(4) Nothing in this Section shall prohibit any member of the City Council from participating in a vote or decision
relating to travel budgets of City Council members.
(D) Disclosure of Conflict of Interest.
(1) All members of the City Council and all members of City Boards or Commissions shall disclose the existence of
any personal pecuniary interest which he may have in a matter which would be affected by a vote or decision of the body
of which he is a member.
(2) In the event of a conflict of interest, a member of the City Council or a City Board or Commission shall, prior to the
vote or decision on the matter, file an affidavit with the City Secretary stating the nature and extent of his conflict of
interest. Thereafter, the member shall leave the dais and abstain from participation in the discussion on the matter in
which he has a conflict of interest and, if the matter is discussed in executive session, he shall not be physically present
for such discussion.
(3) An Employee shall notify his supervisor in writing of any personal pecuniary interest which he may have in a
matter which would be affected by an exercise of discretionary authority by the Employee. Upon receipt of such notice,
his supervisor shall reassign the matter.
(E) Gifts. A City Official or Employee may not accept a benefit, as defined in Section 36.01, Texas Penal Code, from any person
or entity if the acceptance of such a benefit is prohibited by law. As of the date of adoption of this Code, Section 36.08 of the Texas
Penal Code sets forth the prohibitions against acceptance of gifts by public officials. Nothing in this § 35.21 shall be deemed to
prohibit an Official or Employee from accepting a benefit permitted under Section 36.10, Texas Penal Code.
(F) Bribery. A City Official or Employee shall not intentionally or knowingly offer, confer or agree to confer, or solicit, accept or
agree to accept, any benefit, as defined in Section 36.01, Texas Penal Code, as consideration, when to do so is prohibited by law. As
of the date of adoption of this Code, Section 36.02 of the Texas Penal Code lists the actions which are considered to constitute
bribery when committed by public officials.
(G) Prohibition against Serving as Surety. No Official or Employee shall serve as a surety on any official bond required of an
Official or Employee of the City, or as a surety for any person or entity doing business with the City.
(Ord. 400-94-04-12, passed 4-12-94; Am. Ord. 510-98-10-27, passed 10-27-98)
§ 35.22 TRAVEL AND EXPENSE POLICY.
(A) Purpose. The City wishes to establish an equitable and reasonable policy to cover the reimbursement of City Councilmember
and employee necessary and reasonable expenses incurred in the authorized conduct of City business. All requests for reimbursement
of expenses shall be subject to requirements of documentation and reasonableness. This Policy is established to set forth a travel and
expense procedure meeting the criteria set forth in Section 3.04 of the City Charter, to comply with Section 11.05(a)(2) of the City
Charter and to both conform to IRC Code section 162 and qualify for the Safe Harbor provisions provided by law to ensure
reimbursements are not treated as taxable compensation by the IRS.
(B) Adoption of Accountable Plan. To comply with IRS fiscal accounting requirements, the city declares its reimbursement plan is
an Accountable Plan expense reimbursement policy pursuant to IRC Code section 162, and relevant IRS regulations and procedures,
as more specifically set out below.
(C) Implementation. Any City Councilmember may be reimbursed for approved expenses which are necessary, incurred in the
performance of official duties, and which are approved by the City Council pursuant to this section. Any city employee may be
reimbursed for approved expenses which are necessary, incurred in the performance of official duties, and which are approved by the
City Manager pursuant to this section. Any approved travel or expenses necessary and reasonable in the authorized conduct of city
business may be prepaid by the City.
(D) Statement of Expenditures. Reimbursements may only be made pursuant to this policy.
(1) To be eligible for reimbursement, any city employee or City Councilmember shall present a statement of the
expenses to the finance department within 30 days of the expense, together with supporting receipts, invoices and mileage
records.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/422
(2) Any reimbursement paid, if determined to be unsubstantiated within a reasonable period of time, or determined to
be an overpayment, shall be paid back to the city within a reasonable period of time, but no later than 120 days after the
expense is reimbursed.
(3) Any overpayment if not returned within 120 days, may be interpreted by the U.S. Internal Revenue Service as
compensation to the employee or City Councilmember. In such an event, the City may be obligated to seek appropriate
withholdings from the employee or Councilmember in accordance with IRS rules.
(E) Qualifying Reimbursable Expenses. City Councilmember expenses which are necessary, incurred in the performance of
official duties, and which are approved by the City Council are eligible for reimbursement as set forth below. Employee expenses
which are necessary, incurred in the performance of official duties, and which are approved by the City Manager are eligible for
reimbursement as set forth below. Any City Councilmember expense not listed below may be approved by the City Council by
separate action, either prior to or subsequent to the expense. However, the City Council has no obligation to approve any
reimbursement request that, in the opinion of a majority of the City Council, is not a necessary expense incurred in the performance
of official duties of the City Councilmember. City Councilmembers reimbursement for expenses incurred by official capacity
participation in activities, may be reimbursed as provided:
(1) Approved expenses include items such as:
(A) Meals.
(B) Lodging (see details below).
(C) Mileage reimbursement for transportation at the maximum nontaxable rate allowed by the Internal Revenue
Service at the time mileage is incurred applying the shortest distance between destinations. Reimbursement
payments for the use of private automobiles by City Councilmembers shall be made monthly upon submission to the
Finance Department of a statement of approved expenditures.
(D) Airfare (Coach rates).
(E) Rental car (including the expenses of rental company optional insurance coverage).
(F) Train fare (regular passenger rates).
(G) Taxi fare.
(H) Bus fare.
(I) Non-valet parking expenditures; unless price of valet is commensurate.
(2) Disallowed expenses include those related to:
(A) Any expense of a personal nature.
(B) Any expense for the accompaniment of a spouse, child or guest.
(C) Social activities.
(D) The purchase of alcoholic beverages.
(E) Laundry services.
(F) Tipping or services charges exceeding 20%.
(G) Parking violations.
(H) Traffic violations.
(I) Entertainment.
(J) Any expense not approved by City Council.
(F) Conference Registration Expenses. Registration expenses for all local government continuing education conferences shall be
eligible for reimbursement. A written report summarizing the information obtained by the City Councilmember attending the
conference shall be submitted to the City Council by the City Councilmember after the conclusion of the conference. The report shall
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/422
be placed on the next regular City Council agenda for consideration before any eligible expenses arising from attending the
conference may be reimbursed.
(G) Lodging Expenses. Lodging reimbursement for conferences shall not exceed the official Conference rate, if conference rate
lodging is available. Lodging reimbursement for other events shall be reasonable. Reimbursable lodging expenses include lodging
expense for the night before the commencement of the event and the night of the final meeting day of the event.
(Ord. 400-94-04-12, passed 4-12-94; Am. Ord. 510-98-10-27, passed 10-27-98; Ord. 937-08-02-26, passed 2-26-08; Ord. 1312-17-
08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 35.23 COMPLAINT PROCEDURE; VIOLATIONS.
(A) Procedure for Complaints Against City Officials and Employees.
(1) All complaints or allegations of a violation of this Code against an Official or Employee shall be made in writing,
sworn to before a notary public; and filed of record with the City Attorney. A complaint shall describe in detail the act or
acts complained of and the specific section(s) of this Code alleged to have been violated. Neither general complaints
lacking in specific detail, as determined by the City Attorney, nor anonymous complaints shall be sufficient to invoke the
procedures set forth in this section.
(2) Within five (5) business days after receipt of a complaint, the City Attorney shall make the initial determination as
to whether or not the facts alleged in the complaint, if true, would at face value constitute a violation of this Code. If it is
determined by the City Attorney that the facts as alleged would not constitute a violation, the City Attorney shall present
a written report describing in detail the nature of the complaint and the findings of the City Attorney to the City Council
at the Council's next regularly scheduled meeting. A majority of those City Council members not named in the complaint
shall consider such report and either invoke the investigatory procedure contained in this section or reject the complaint.
(3) If the City Attorney determines that the facts alleged could constitute a violation of this Code, the City Attorney
shall, within five (5) business days after receipt of the complaint, notify the Mayor and members of the City Council of
the existence and nature of the complaint. At the next regularly scheduled Council meeting, the City Attorney shall
present a written report to the City Council describing in detail the nature of the complaint and his findings and
conclusions as to a possible violation of this Code.
(4) The City Council shall consider the findings of the report at the meeting at which it is presented, at which time the
person(s) accused shall have the right to a full and complete hearing with the opportunity to call witnesses and present
evidence, with the right to be represented by counsel at their own expense. No final action, decision, or vote with regard
to any matter shall be made except in a meeting which is open to the public.
(B) Violations - Council Members.
(1) The failure of any City Council member to comply with one or more of the applicable standards of conduct set forth
in this Code shall constitute grounds for reprimand or removal from office. Any reprimand or removal shall require the
affirmative vote of three (3) City Council members.
(2) Any City Council member removed from office because of violations of this Code shall be ineligible to hold City
office or employment for five (5) years after removal, in, addition to any other penalty provided by law.
(C) Violation - Officials and Employees.
(1) The failure of a City Official to comply with one (1) or more of the standards of conduct set forth in this Code shall
constitute grounds for expulsion, reprimand, or removal from office to the extent allowed by law.
(2) The failure of a City Employee to comply with one (1) or more of the standards of conduct set forth in this Code
shall constitute grounds for reprimand, suspension or termination to the extent allowed by law. All disciplinary action and
any appeals therefrom shall be in conformity with applicable procedures established by the City Charter and personnel
policies of the City.
(3) Any City Official removed from office or Employee dismissed from employment because of violation of this Code
shall be ineligible to hold City office or employment for five (5) years after removal, in addition to any other penalty
provided by law.
(Ord. 400-94-04-12, passed 4-12-94; Am. Ord. 510-98-10-27, passed 10-27-98)
CHAPTER 36: ELECTIONS
§ 36.01 ELECTIONS IN ACCORDANCE WITH STATE LAW.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/422
The city shall conduct elections in accordance with Chapter 52 of the Texas Election Code and all other applicable state law.
§ 36.02 CONTRACT WITH TRAVIS AND/OR WILLIAMSON COUNTIES.
The city may contract with Travis and/or Williamson Counties for the provision of election services.
§ 36.03 ELECTION PRECINCTS AND POLLING LOCATIONS.
(A) The city's election precincts may be designated and established as determined by the city in consultation with the appropriate
county.
(B) The polling places for elections shall be at the locations established by the city in consultation with the appropriate county.
(Ord. 221-86-1-14, passed 1-14-86; Am. Ord. 355-92-6-09, passed 6-9-92; Ord. 773-05-01-25, passed 1-25-05; Ord. 814-06-02-14,
passed 2-14-06; Ord. 863-07-02-13, passed 2-13-07)
CHAPTER 37: MUNICIPAL COURT FUNDS
§ 37.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FUND.
(A) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Technology Fund, known as the “Technology Fund”, pursuant to
Article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(B) The Technology Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
§ 37.02 ESTABLISHMENT OF AMOUNT OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT TECHNOLOGY FEE, ASSESSMENT AND
COLLECTION.
(A) The Municipal Court Technology Fee (“Technology Fee”) shall be in the amount of $4.00.
(B) The Technology Fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in the
Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(C) The Technology Fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after adoption of this chapter.
(D) The clerk of the court shall collect the Technology Fee and pay it to the municipal treasurer of the City of Pflugerville, who
shall deposit the fee into the Technology Fund.
§ 37.03 DESIGNATED USE OF THE TECHNOLOGY FUND AND ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The Technology Fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements and maintenance of
technological resources for the Municipal Court of the City of Pflugerville, Texas, including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(B) The Technology Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/422
§ 37.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FUND.
(A) There is hereby created and established a Municipal Court Building Security Fund, known as the Building Security Fund,
pursuant to Article 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(B) The Building Security Fund may be maintained in an interest bearing account and may be maintained in the general revenue
account.
§ 37.05 ESTABLISHMENT OF AMOUNT OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT BUILDING SECURITY FEE, ASSESSMENT
AND COLLECTION.
(A) The Municipal Building Security Fee (the “Building Security Fee”) shall be in the amount of $3.00.
(B) The Building Security Fee shall be assessed and collected from the defendant upon conviction for a misdemeanor offense in
the Municipal Court as a cost of court. A defendant is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(C) The Building Security Fee shall be collected on conviction for an offense committed after adoption of this chapter.
(D) The clerk of the court shall collect the Building Security Fee and pay it to the municipal treasurer of the City of Pflugerville,
who shall deposit the fee into the Municipal Court Building Security Fund.
§ 37.06 DESIGNATED USE OF THE BUILDING SECURITY FUND AND ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The Building Security Fund shall be used only to finance the purchase of security devices or services for the buildings that
house the Municipal Court of the City of Pflugerville, Texas including:
(1) The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Handheld metal detectors;
(3) Walkthrough metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing
appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, alarms, or similar security devices;
(10) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass; or
(11) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel.
(B) The Building Security Fund shall be administered by or under the direction of the City Council of the City of Pflugerville,
Texas.
§ 37.07 EXPIRATION PROVISION AND ADMINISTRATION OF FUNDS.
This chapter shall remain in effect in accordance with Articles 102.0172 and 102.017 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and if the
assessment and collection of the Technology Fee or Building Security Fee should expire, the purpose and the use of any funds
remaining in the Technology Fund or Building Security Fund shall continue to be used and administered as required by this chapter
and for that purpose, this ordinance shall remain in effect.
(Ord. 713-03-08-26, passed 8-26-03; Am. Ord. 773-05-01-25, passed 1-25-05; Ord. 828-06-05-09, passed 5-9-06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/422
CHAPTER 38: CONTRACTING WITH THE CITY
§ 38.01 CONTRACTS.
Any person, partnership, corporation or limited liability partnership or corporation that enters into a contractual relationship with the
city shall certify that the person or entity does not have an existing delinquent financial liability, lien or judgment owing to the city,
Travis County, Williamson County, the state or any other political subdivision of the state. The contractor shall acknowledge that the
agreement may be terminated and payment may be withheld if this certification is inaccurate. The city council and the city manager
are prohibited from entering into any contracts with a person or entity that has an existing delinquent financial liability, lien or
judgment to the city, Travis County, Williamson County or the state.
§ 38.02 REPRESENTATIONS AND WARRANTIES BY CONTRACTOR.
If a contractor is a corporation, limited liability company, partnership or limited liability partnership, the contractor shall certify that
it is duly organized, validly existing and in good standing under the laws of the state of its incorporation or organization and is duly
authorized and in good standing to conduct business in the State of Texas, that it has all necessary power and has received all
necessary approvals to execute and deliver the agreement, and the individual executing the agreement on behalf of contractor has
been duly authorized to act for and bind the contractor. The contractor shall acknowledge that the agreement may be terminated and
payment may be withheld if this certification is inaccurate.
§ 38.03 FRANCHISE TAX CERTIFICATION.
A corporate or limited liability company contractor shall certify that it is not currently delinquent in the payment of any franchise
taxes due under Chapter 171 of the Texas Tax Code, or that the corporation or limited liability company is exempt from the payment
of such taxes, or that the corporation or limited liability company is an out-of-state corporation or limited liability company that is
not subject to the Texas Franchise Tax, whichever is applicable. The contractor shall acknowledge that the agreement may be
terminated and payment may be withheld if this certification is inaccurate.
§ 38.04 PAYMENT OF DEBT OR DELINQUENCY TO THE LOCAL OR STATE GOVERNMENT.
All contractors shall agree that any payments owing to the contractor under an agreement with the city may be applied directly
toward any debt or delinquency that contractor the owes the state, Travis County, Williamson County, the city or any other political
subdivision of the state regardless of when it arises, until such debt or delinquency is paid in full.
§ 38.05 CHILD SUPPORT CERTIFICATION.
All contractors shall certify that they are not delinquent in their court ordered child support obligations and shall acknowledge that
any agreement with the city may be terminated and payment may be withheld if this certification is inaccurate.
§ 38.06 PRODUCTS AND MATERIALS PRODUCED IN THE STATE.
If the contractor will provide services under an agreement, the contractor shall covenant and agree that in performing its duties and
obligations under the agreement, the contractor shall purchase products and materials produced in the state when such products and
materials are available at a price and delivery time comparable to products and materials produced outside of the state.
§ 38.07 WARRANTS.
The city council and the city manager are prohibited from entering into a contractual relationship with any person who has an
outstanding warrant for their arrest from any local, state or federal law enforcement agency or court.
(Ord. 932-08-02-12, passed 2-12-08)
CHAPTER 39: TRADEMARK AGREEMENT
§ 39.01 GENERAL POLICY.
(A) Trademark agreement. The city hereby approves the trademark permit and license agreement to be required to be executed by
any third parties prior to their use of the city's trademarks.
(B) Rate. The city hereby adopts as detailed herein to allow the city to charge a flat-rate fee of twenty-five ($25.00) per year per
trademark agreement.
(Ord. 1392-19-04-09, passed 4-9-19)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/422
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
CHAPTER 50: ELECTRICITY
§ 50.01 JURISDICTION OF PUBLIC UTILITY COMMISSION OF TEXAS.
(A) The city does hereby elect to have the Public Utility Commission of Texas exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over electric
utility rates, operations, and services within the existing and future incorporated limits of the city.
(B) The city hereby expressly retains the exclusive original jurisdiction over the rates, operations, and services of water and sewer
utilities within the existing and future incorporated limits of the city.
(Ord. 137-82-1-18, passed 1-18-82)
State law reference–Public Utility Regulatory Act, see Public Utility Regulatory Act, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 11 et seq.
CHAPTER 51: NATURAL GAS
§ 51.01 GENERAL SERVICE RATE.
SEE Table of Special Ordinances, Table IX
(Ord. 201-85-4-30, passed 4-30-85, Am. Ord. 640-01-07-10, passed 7-10-01)
§ 51.02 DRILLING OF OIL AND GAS WELLS.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to drill or maintain an oil or gas well within six hundred (600)
feet of a residence, religious institution, hospital building, school, public park or a place where children commonly gather within the
city limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(B) Any person, partnership or corporation who shall recklessly violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply
therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than
$2,000.00. Each day that the violation occurs may constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 1041-10-03-09, passed 3-9-10)
CHAPTER 52: SOLID WASTE
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
BAGS. Plastic sacks, secured at the top, designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when
lifted by the top. Total weight of a bag and its contents shall not exceed 40 lbs.
BULKY ITEMS. Any item measuring in excess of either forty-eight (48) inches in length, four (4) inches in diameter, or two (2) cubic
yards, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, washing machines, water tanks, chairs, couches and other similar household
items.
BUNDLES. Items not measuring in excess of either forty-eight (48) inches in length or forty (40) pounds in weight and which are
securely fastened together, including, but not limited to, brush, newspapers, Christmas trees, and tree trimmings.
BUSINESS DAY. Any day that is not a Saturday, a Sunday or other day on which City offices are closed.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMER. A person, group of persons, or entity responsible for the operations, including the
arrangement of and/or payment for refuse collection service, of a commercial or industrial unit.
COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL REFUSE. All Bulky Items, Construction and Demolition Waste, Garbage, rubbish, and Stable
Matter generated by a Producer at a Commercial or Industrial Unit.
COMMERCIAL SERVICE PROVIDER. A person who engages in the business of providing refuse collection services to Commercial
and Industrial Customers or Units within the corporate limits of the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/422
COMMERCIAL UNIT. Any nonmanufacturing commercial facility that generates and accumulates Municipal Solid Waste,
Construction and Demolition Waste, or Recyclable Materials during, or as a result of, its business, including, but not limited to,
restaurants, stores, and warehouses.
CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE. Solid waste resulting from construction or demolition activities or that is directly or
indirectly the byproduct of such activities. (Some of these items may include, but are not limited to, cartons, concrete, excelsior,
gypsum board, metal, paper, plastic, rubber and wood products.) Construction and Demolition Waste does not include Hazardous
Waste, Solid Waste, Recyclable Materials, or Bulky Items.
CONTAINER. Any receptacle, including, but not limited to, dumpsters, Roll-offs and Roll-outs, provided to the City by the service
provider and utilized by a Commercial, Industrial or Residential Unit for collecting Solid Waste, Construction and Demolition Waste
or Recyclable Materials. Containers are designed to hold between thirty (30) gallons and forty (40) cubic yards of Solid Waste.
DEAD ANIMALS. Animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except
those slaughtered or killed for human use.
GARBAGE. Any and all dead animals of less than ten pounds in weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every
accumulation of waste (animal, vegetable and/or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in,
handling, packing, canning, storage, transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal
or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of limitation, used tin cans and other food containers; and all putrescible or easily
decomposable waste animal or vegetable matter which is likely to attract flies or rodents); except (in all cases) any matter included in
the definition of Bulky Items, Construction and Demolition Waste, Dead Animals, Hazardous Waste, or Stable Matter.
HAZARDOUS WASTE. Waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the United States Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) under the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
of 1976, as amended, or so classified by any federal or state statute, rule, order or regulation.
HOLIDAYS. The following days:
(1) New Year's Day (January 1st).
(2) Thanksgiving Day.
(3) Christmas Day (December 25th).
INDUSTRIAL UNIT. Any manufacturing, mining or agricultural facility that generates and accumulates Municipal Solid Waste,
Construction and Demolition Waste, or Recyclable Materials during, or as a result of, its operations.
LANDFILL. Any facility or area of land receiving Municipal Solid Waste or Construction and Demolition Waste and operating under
the regulation and authority of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) within the state, or the appropriate
governing agency for landfills located outside the state.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE. Solid Waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional or
recreational activities, or manufacturing, mining, or agricultural operations. Municipal Solid Waste does not include Construction
and Demolition Waste or Hazardous Waste.
PREMISES. Any apartment, business, industrial or institutional building or residence where persons work or reside, where animal or
vegetable food is prepared or served, or Solid Waste accumulates or occurs.
PRODUCER. An occupant of a Commercial and Industrial Unit or a Residential Unit who generates refuse.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS.
(1) Newspapers, magazines, and catalogs, and other paper items such as mail, paper bags, office paper, envelopes,
cereal and soda drink boxes, corrugated cardboard, phone books or other paper;
(2) Glass bottles and jars (excluding mirrors, windows, ceramics, light bulbs, dishes, cups, and other glass products);
(3) Metal cans composed of tin, steel or aluminum, metal lids from glass jars, empty aerosol cans (excluding scrap
metal); and
(4) Plastic containers including all varieties of the types designated as #1, #2, #3, #4, #5, #6, and #7.
RECYCLING CONTAINER. A container with at least ninety-five (95) gallons of capacity and provided by the service provider for
the collection of Recyclable Materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/422
RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any residential dwelling that is designed for, and inhabited by, a single person or family unit and that
generates and accumulates Municipal Solid Waste and Recyclable Materials.
ROLL-OFF. A Container with twenty (20) cubic yards to forty (40) cubic yards of capacity.
ROLL-OUT. A Container with ninety-five (95) gallons of capacity.
SINGLE-STREAM RECYCLING. A recycling process in which all Recyclable Materials are commingled and collected with no
sorting required.
SOLID WASTE. As defined by the EPA under 40 C.F.R. 261.2(a)(1), or by the state under the Solid Waste Disposal Act 361.003(34)
whether such waste is mixed with or constitutes Recyclable Materials.
SPECIAL NEEDS RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Any Residential Unit that is inhabited by persons, all of whom are physically unable to
place Municipal Solid Waste or Recyclable Materials at the curbside, and that generates and accumulates Municipal Solid Waste and
Recyclable Materials. The identities of the members of a Special Needs Residential Unit shall be certified by the City Manager and
agreed to by the service provider.
STABLE MATTER. All manure and other waste matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animal, livestock or poultry
enclosure, and resulting from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
UTILITY BILL. Any bill sent in accordance with § 53.102.
WHITE GOOD. Any item measuring in excess of three (3) cubic feet in size and that is manufactured primarily from metal,
including but not limited to, a bath tub, heater, hot water heater, refrigerator, sink or washer and dryer.
YARD WASTE. All grass clippings and tree, shrub, or brush trimmings.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord, 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.02 DUTIES OF RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMERS.
Every Residential customer within the corporate limits of the City must use City residential refuse collection services and is
encouraged to use City Single-Stream Recycling and must:
(A) Securely keep all residential refuse that may accumulate upon such premises within provided Containers.
(B) Bundle tree trimmings, brush, Christmas trees or limbs in lengths not exceeding forty-eight (48) inches in length,
four (4) inches in diameter, or two (2) cubic yards.
(C) Maintain and keep Containers in a location and in such a manner on the premises so as not to constitute a public
nuisance or give an undesirable appearance.
(D) Place provided Containers, Recycling Containers and Bundles at the edge of such premises adjacent to the street by
7:00 a.m. on the days assigned by the City Council for pickup and removal of residential refuse and recyclable materials,
and return same to their respective places of keeping after pickup on the same day as pickup.
(E) Place, or cause to be placed, all refuse which may accumulate upon such premises into required Containers;
provided, however, that as far as practicable, all water and liquid have been eliminated therefrom.
(F) Promptly report the presence of any dead animals upon any premises or streets or alleys to the Chief of Police.
(G) Promptly clean up any solid waste which becomes scattered by whatever means on such premises.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 505-98-09-22, passed 9-22-98; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 UNLAWFUL CONDUCT.
It shall be unlawful for any person in possession or control of any premises located within the corporate limits to:
(A) Pour liquid over solid waste or into required containers.
(B) Deposit any dangerous or hazardous substance into required containers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/422
(C) Remove the cover from any required container, except when depositing or removing the contents, or in any manner
interfere with the receptacle or the contents thereof.
(D) Place dead animals into required containers.
(E) Remove or carry away any solid waste from premises other than one's own without having first obtained
permission from the City Council.
(F) Burn, or permit to be burned, any solid waste.
(G) Throw or scatter solid waste onto any premises, vacant lot, public street, alley, or sidewalk within the corporate
limits.
(H) Use any container other than one's own for disposing of solid waste or place one's container at a curbside other than
one's own without obtaining prior consent of such other person.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09) Penalty, see § 52.99
§ 52.04 MAXIMUM WEIGHT.
No container placed for collection by a residential customer shall exceed 40 pounds. No bundle shall exceed 40 pounds.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.05 RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION FUNDING.
The cost of residential collection service shall be paid by the City out of the municipal general fund and shall be funded by the
charges set forth in § 52.06.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.06 RATES AND CHARGES.
(A) The rate charged by the City for removing residential refuse from the premises of each residential customer and for Single-
Stream Recycling services for each residential customer will be as set forth in a separate ordinance. (See Table IX of the Table of
Special Ordinances).
(Ord. 505-98-09-22, passed 9-22-98; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
(B) The City shall not be obligated to provide solid waste collection services or Single-Stream Recycling services for any premises
other than that of a residential customer.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
(C) Upon the written request of a residential customer, the City Manager, or a designated representative, after reviewing the
evidence presented, may in his or her discretion exempt the residential customer from the rate charged by the City for removing
residential refuse from the premises provided the residential customer does not utilize the City's residential refuse collection service
and pays for commercial refuse collection services at the same location or an adjacent location.
(Ord. 514-08-11-10, passed 11-10-98; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.07 BILLING AND COLLECTION.
The charges specified in this chapter shall be placed on the monthly utility bill of the residential customer and shall be due and
payable in the same time and manner as all other charges for other utility services. If the charges prescribed on the utility bill are not
paid when due, any or all services may be discontinued until such time as the charges are paid, in accordance with the procedures set
forth in §§ 53.095 through 53.104. Where residential refuse and/or recyclable material collection service is required at premises not
served with other utilities, the person requiring such service shall execute a written agreement for such service, and shall deposit the
sum set forth in a separate ordinance to be held as security for payment of monthly charges accruing in the future.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.08 FRANCHISE REQUIRED FOR COMMERCIAL COLLECTION.
The City is hereby authorized to grant, and it shall be unlawful for a commercial service provider to operate within the City or to
occupy or use the streets of the City to provide service to commercial or industrial customers, unless the commercial service provider
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/422
has been issued a franchise which is in force and effect.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.09 TERMS OF FRANCHISE.
(A) Non-exclusivity. The franchise shall be non-exclusive.
(B) Franchise fee/late fee. In consideration of the grant of the franchise, the commercial service provider agrees to pay the City a
franchise fee equal to six percent (6%) of gross revenues for services provided in the City. The franchise fee shall be paid each
quarter, within thirty (30) days after the end of the quarter. The City may inspect the books of a commercial service provider with or
without previous notice, at any time during regular business hours. A ten percent (10%) penalty will be assessed on delinquent
amounts. An additional ten percent (10%) penalty will be added for every month or portion thereof that said payment is late.
(C) Termination. The franchise may be terminated by mutual agreement of the parties at any time or may be terminated upon sixty
(60) days' notice by either party to the other.
(D) Notices. All notices from a commercial service provider to the City concerning the franchise shall be addressed to the City
Manager, City of Pflugerville, P. O. Box 589, Pflugerville, Texas 78691.
(E) Non-waiver. A commercial service provider shall not be excused from complying with any of the terms and conditions of the
franchise by any failure of the City upon any one or more occasions to insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms or
conditions.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.10 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CUSTOMERS.
(A) Applicability. Except where exempted in subsection (B) below, Commercial and Industrial Customers existing at the effective
date of this chapter shall comply with the following standards concerning screening and enclosure of Containers.
(B) Exemption from Standards.
(1) Commercial and Industrial Customers located in the General Industrial District.
(2) Screening is not required for Containers with a capacity of less than or equal to 90 gallons unless more than two
such Containers are used.
(3) The City Manager has the authority to waive these standards if it can be established that compliance with Container
placement and screening is not feasible. The waiver must be requested in writing with clearly established reasons for
noncompliance.
(C) Standards.
(1) Containers shall observe the same front and side setbacks as existing buildings located on the site.
(2) Containers larger than 90 gallons shall be located on a hard surface such as concrete, asphalt paving or compacted
base material.
(3) Customers with reasonable access to alleys shall have Container enclosures located and designed for alley access,
providing for the use of side-loading Containers when necessary.
(4) Containers that utilize alley access shall screen only the sides of the Container visible from adjacent streets.
(5) Containers not utilizing alley access shall be screened on four sides, using an enclosure that screens the Container
from view at the property line.
(6) Screening, where required, shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height and shall be comprised of:
(a) Brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry materials; or
(b) Redwood, cedar, preservative pressure-treated wood, or other similar materials; and
(c) All fence posts shall be rust-protected metal, concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars; and
(d) Six-inch concrete filled steel pipes shall be located to protect the enclosure from truck operations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/422
(7) Container enclosures shall have access doors with spring-loaded hinges or the equivalent and fasteners to keep them
closed. When in use, tie-backs should be used to secure the access doors in the open position.
(8) Container screening and the approach to Containers shall be maintained by the owner at all times.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Am. Ord. 825-06-04-25, passed 4-25-06; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.11 COMMERCIAL COLLECTION RULES AND PROCEDURES.
(A) Operation Hours. Collection may not occur before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m.
(B) Vehicle Condition. All vehicles must be maintained in proper operating condition, and vehicles with an unsafe or unhygienic
appearance may not be operated within the City. Any spill of hydraulic fluid, oil or other substance from the commercial service
provider's vehicles must be promptly and diligently cleaned up and remediated. All vehicles must be clearly identified with the
commercial service provider's identity and telephone number on each side of the vehicle. All vehicles must be properly and
adequately covered, and no refuse or waste may be permitted to blow out of the vehicles or containers.
(C) Property Condition. The commercial service providers must take all steps necessary to ensure that areas where refuse is
collected are left in a neat and litter-free condition, and skid marks are not left on the street as a result of vehicles routinely stopping
too abruptly. Use of air brakes to stop near residences is prohibited, except in emergency conditions.
(D) Safety. Drivers must observe all safety laws, including speed limit and traffic-control signs.
(E) Disposal. The collected waste shall be disposed of in a manner complying with all City ordinances, state laws and regulations
and all federal laws and regulations pertaining to the disposal of solid waste. No waste shall be burned, except in an incinerator
complying with all applicable state and county laws and regulations and federal laws and regulations.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.12 COMMERCIAL BUILDING PERMIT CONDITIONS.
Before a building permit shall be issued for construction of any commercial or industrial unit, plans for the adequacy, location and
accessibility of Containers and enclosure structures must be approved by the City. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
such approval has been obtained.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.13 INSURANCE, INDEMNITY AND BOND.
(A) Insurance. A commercial service provider must secure and maintain in effect insurance to protect the commercial service
provider, its employees, and the City from claims for bodily injuries, death or property damage which may arise out of the
commercial service provider's performance or nonperformance of its duties under the franchise, whether that performance or
nonperformance is by the commercial service provider or one directly or indirectly employed by the commercial service provider.
The following minimum levels of coverage are required:
(1) Public liability and property damage (no pollution exclusion endorsement is permitted):
(a) General Liability: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(b) Property Damage: $1,000,000 per occurrence.
(c) Automobile Liability: $1,000,000.
(2) Umbrella Liability: $1,000,000.
(3) Worker's Compensation: As required by law.
(4) Employer's Liability: $500,000.
Certificates of insurance confirming coverage and naming the City as an additional insured must be provided to the City on or before
the date of the granting of the franchise, and renewal certificates must be provided to the City at least 15 days prior to the date of
expiration of any required coverage. A commercial service provider's failure to maintain any required insurance or to furnish any
required certificate will be grounds for termination of the franchise. All insurance certificates must confirm that the insurance may
not be terminated or materially changed without 30 days prior notice to the City.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/422
(B) Indemnity. The commercial service provider shall also execute an agreement providing that, to the fullest extent permitted by
law, the commercial service provider will and does hereby indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers, directors, agents
and employees from and against all claims, damages, losses and expenses, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees, arising out of
or resulting from the performance or failure to perform the work required under the franchise. This obligation will not be construed
to negate or reduce any other right or obligation of indemnity that would otherwise exist. This indemnification requirement will not
be limited by any limitation on the amount or type of damages, compensation or benefits payable by or for the commercial service
provider under any workers compensation acts, disability benefit acts or other employee benefit acts.
(Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 1033-09-12-08, passed 11-24-09)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
Any person found to be violating the provisions of §§ 52.02, 52.03, 52.08, 52.10, 52.11 or 52.13 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00. Each day of such violation shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the City may have.
(Ord. 412-94-11-22, passed 11-22-94; Am. Ord. 790-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 825-06-04-25, passed 4-25-06; Ord. 1033-09-
12-08, passed 11-24-09)
CHAPTER 53: WATER AND SEWERS*
CONNECTION WITH WATER SYSTEM
§ 53.001 CONNECTION REQUIRED.
(A) Each house and building within the limits of the city shall be separately and independently connected only with the city water
system and no other source of water where there is a city water main within 100 feet of any lot line on which such house or building
is situated. An auxiliary building or buildings to the main house or building on any lot may receive water service from the same
connection that services the main house or building on a lot.
(B) It is further provided that the sale, delivery, purchase, receipt or use of private well water, from or to any property served by
the city water system, is prohibited and shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter. This shall not be construed as prohibiting the
use of such private well water for non-household purposes by the property on which such well is situated.
(Ord. 54-7-15-74, passed 7-15-74; Am. Ord. 62-1-20-75, passed 1-20-75) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.002 APPLICATION AND DEPOSIT, FEES.
(A) No new connection to the system shall be made unless and until an application and deposit shall have been made in
accordance with rules and regulations to be promulgated by the City Council; provided that provisions may be made in such rules
and regulations for refund of deposit upon establishment by customer of record of prompt payment. The monies collected as deposit
fees will be held in a separate account by the City Secretary to secure prompt payment of water charges, and he shall be entitled to
use such deposit in payment of delinquent accounts, and to require a new deposit before restoring service to such customer.
(B) In addition to service deposits, there shall be a tap fee which shall be charged for each new connection. The tap fee shall be
established in rules and regulations promulgated by the City Council.
(Ord. 54-7-15-74, passed 7-15-74)
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION
§ 53.003 POLICY AND PURPOSES.
(A) Policy. It is declared the policy of the City to promote the public health, safety and welfare by:
(1) Implementing the rules promulgated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality in title 30 Texas
Administrative Code, chapter 290, to comply with Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 341, subchapter C, and the
federal Safe Drinking Water Act, 42 U.S.C.A. section 300f et seq.;
(2) Establishing a cross-connection control program of uniform regulations governing the installation, testing and
certification of backflow prevention assemblies and technicians;
(3) Establishing requirements to permit and control the installation, routine maintenance and inspection of backflow
prevention assemblies.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/422
(B) Purposes. The purposes of this ordinance are to:
(1) Protect the City's potable water system from contamination or pollution by preventing contaminants and pollutants
originating from customers' water systems from entering into the City's potable water system that may jeopardize the
health, safety and welfare of the customers.
(2) Provide for a continuing program of cross-connection control and backflow prevention by requiring the installation
of approved backflow prevention assemblies or methods as required by this subchapter, the City's adopted plumbing code,
the requirements of chapter 290, title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code, and the requirements of chapter 341,
subchapter C, Texas Health and Safety Code, all as amended, and requiring the certification and operational testing of all
testable backflow prevention assemblies.
(3) Comply with the federal Safe Drinking Water Act (title 42, United States Code, chapter 6A, subchapter XII) and
state regulations as established by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (title 30, Texas Administrative Code)
related to cross-connections and backflow prevention.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.004 APPLICABILITY.
This subchapter applies to all connections to the City's potable water system, unless the customer's system is excepted hereunder,
both as system protection and as internal protection, and to all installations of backflow prevention assemblies related to the City's
potable water system, regardless of whether the connection or assembly is located within the City limits or in the City's certificated
water service area. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)).
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.005 INTERPRETATION/CONFLICTS.
This subchapter shall be liberally interpreted to achieve the policy and purposes stated in Section 53.003. If there is a conflict
between any provisions of this subchapter, any other provision of this Code or State or Federal law, including title 30 of the Texas
Administrative Code, all as amended, the most restrictive provision shall apply unless otherwise determined by the Director.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.006 DEFINITIONS.
AIR GAP SEPARATION. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere between the lowest opening from any pipe
or faucet conveying water to a tank, fixture, receptor, sink, or other assembly and the flood level rim of the receptacle. The vertical,
physical separation must be at least twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, but never less than 1.0 inch.
APPROVED ASSEMBLY. A backflow prevention assembly that has been listed approved, manufactured, tested and installed for
specific uses in accordance with the standards adopted by the AWWA (Manual M14, latest version) or approved and listed by the
University of Southern California Foundation Manual for Cross-Connection Control (latest version) and is otherwise in compliance
with this subchapter, the Plumbing and Irrigation code, and all other applicable laws.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY. Any water supply on or available to a customer's premises from a source other than directly through
the City water system. Auxiliary water supplies include all of the following:
(1) Water from another public water system.
(2) Water from a natural source, such as a well, spring, pond, river or creek.
(3) Reclaimed water.
(4) Any water supplied by a public water system, including the City water system, that has passed through a point of
delivery and is no longer controlled by the City water system.
AWWA. The American Water Works Association.
BACKFLOW. The undesirable reversal of flow of water and/or mixtures of water and other liquids, gases, or other substances from a
customer's side of the service connection into the City water system. Backflow may occur under either a backpressure or
backsiphonage condition or as a result of a cross-connection.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY OR ASSEMBLY. An approved assembly or aggregation of approved assemblies designed to
prevent backflow.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/422
BACKPRESSURE. Any situation or occurrence where the pressure in a customer's system is higher than in the city water system.
BACKSIPHONAGE. An occurrence where the pressure in the City water system becomes less than that of the customer's system due
to a vacuum in the City water system causing the flow of water to reverse its flow.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person designated as the building official in the construction code adopted in Chapter 150 of this Code.
BYPASS. A connection from the City side of a backflow prevention assembly to the customer side of the assembly for the purpose of
diverting the water around the assembly while it is being repaired or replaced.
CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER OR CERTIFIED TESTER. A person who:
(1) Holds a current professional certification as a backflow prevention assembly tester as required by 30 Texas
Administrative Code § 290.44(h)(4)(A), as amended; and
(2) Is currently registered with the City Director of water and sanitary sewer department.
CHECK VALVE. A valve that seats readily and completely in order to completely cease the flow of water.
CITY WATER SYSTEM. The entire potable water distribution system of the city, including, without limitation, all pipes, facilities,
valves, pumps, conduits, tanks, receptacles and fixtures and appurtenances between the water supply source and the point of delivery,
used by the City to produce, convey, deliver, measure, treat or store potable water for public consumption or use. This system does
not include the Customer's system defined below.
CONTAMINATION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic, radiological or biological) in water that tends to
degrade its quality so as to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water. Contamination includes both hazardous
contaminants and pollutants.
CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection between the City water system and either another supply of unknown or
questionable quality, any source which may contain contaminating or polluting substances, or any source of water treated to a lesser
degree in the treatment process, through which backflow may occur.
CUSTOMER. Any person or entity that is supplied potable water by or through the city water system and includes an owner, tenant
or lessee.
CUSTOMER SERVICE INSPECTION. An examination of the customer's system for the purpose of providing or denying water
service. This inspection is limited to the identification and prevention of cross-connections, potential contaminant hazards, and
illegal lead materials. The customer service inspector has no authority or obligation beyond the scope of the TCEQ's regulations. A
customer service inspection is not a plumbing inspection as defined and regulated by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners
(TSBPE).
CUSTOMER'S SYSTEM. The entire plumbing system, including all pipes, conduits, tanks, receptacles, fixtures, equipment and
appurtenances used to produce, convey, store or utilize potable or non-potable water between the point of delivery and the customer's
point of use.
DIRECTOR. The Director of Public Works for the City of Pflugerville or another official as designated by the Director.
HAZARDOUS CONTAMINANT. Any form of contamination that poses a health hazard with respect to the use of water for drinking
or other domestic purposes.
HEALTH HAZARD. A cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that can cause
death, illness, spread of disease, or has a high probability of causing such effects if introduced into the potable drinking water supply.
IRRIGATION CODE. The rules and regulations adopted in Chapter 113 of this Code, as amended.
NON-HEALTH HAZARD. A cross-connection, potential contamination hazard, or other situation involving any substance that
generally will not be a health hazard, but will constitute a nuisance, or be aesthetically objectionable, if introduced into the City
water system.
PERSON. Any natural person, entity, corporation, corporate body, partnership, cooperative corporation, association, public or private
organization of any character, or political subdivision of the state.
PLUMBING CODE. The version of the International Plumbing Code or other related provisions in the International Residential Code
adopted in Chapter 150 of this Code, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/422
POINT OF DELIVERY. The point at which water leaves the City water system and enters a customer's system at or near the property
line or the edge of an easement. When a water meter is installed on or near the property line or edge of an easement, the point of
delivery is the terminal end on the discharge side of the water meter.
POLLUTANT. A non-health hazard contaminant that impairs the quality of water in a manner or to a degree that does not create a
hazard to public health, but may adversely affect the aesthetic qualities of the water for domestic use.
POTABLE WATER. Water that complies with the TCEQ rules for drinking water and other domestic uses.
POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION HAZARD. A condition which, by its location, piping or configuration, has a reasonable probability
of being used incorrectly, through carelessness, ignorance, or negligence, to create or cause to be created a backflow condition by
which contamination can be introduced into the water supply. Examples include, without limitation, bypass arrangements, jumper
connections, removable sections or spools, and swivel or changeover assemblies.
SERVICE CONNECTION. The terminal end of a service connection from the City water system. If a meter is installed at the point of
delivery, the service connection means the point at which the terminal end on the discharge side of the water meter connects to the
customer's system.
TCEQ. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality or its predecessor or successor agencies.
THIRD-PARTY VENDOR. A third-party contracted by the City to provide Certified Tester registration, backflow testing notification
and data management services on behalf of the City.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.007 AUTHORITY AND RESPONSIBILITY - DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
(A) Authority and responsibility. The Director, in accordance with this subchapter and title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas
Administrative Code, both as amended, is responsible for enforcing the requirements of this subchapter and may establish policies
and procedures to implement the policies and purposes of this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code § 290.44(h)
(1)(B)(iii); Texas Health and Safety Code, chapter 341, subchapter C.)
(B) Adequate protection determination. To ensure adequate protection in individual cases, the Director may assess and determine
the degree of hazard to the City's potable water system posed in the case of individual connections, customers or users. When the
Director determines that a backflow prevention assembly is required for the protection of the City water system, the Director will
require the customer, at the customer's expense, to properly install an approved assembly at each service connection or hazard point.
Notice of such requirement shall be given in accordance with Section 53.013 of this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas
Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(A).)
(C) Certified testing required. In accordance with the TCEQ's Rules, the Director shall require a certified testing report for all
required and testable assemblies where an actual or potential hazard has been determined to exist in the following instances:
(1) Prior to providing continuous water service to new construction;
(2) On any existing service when the Director has reason to believe that cross-connections or other unacceptable
plumbing practices increase the risk of actual or potential contamination hazards entering into the City water system;
(3) After any installation, repair, relocation, alteration, or addition to a customer's system that may affect the system's
compliance with this subchapter; and
(4) At other times as provided by this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4).)
(D) Third-party vendor. The Director shall establish and maintain a contract with a third-party vendor to maintain an online
database and website for certified tester and associated equipment registrations, notifications and test result reporting and
maintenance.
(E) Testing by City. City personnel, as directed by the Director may perform periodic tests on assemblies for quality control and
assurance purposes to ensure that acceptable test standards are being followed by certified testers and adequate protection is
provided.
(F) Authority to compel report production. The Director may require from any person the submission of any records relating to the
installation, maintenance, repair or testing of backflow prevention assemblies performed in accordance with this subchapter. (State
law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)(C).)
(G) Authority to refuse or terminate service. The Director may refuse to initiate service or discontinue present service to any
customer where the Director determines that: 1) an actual or potential sanitary hazard in the customer's system exists; and/or 2)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/422
adequate protection against backflow has not been provided or reported in accordance with this subchapter. Notice of terminating
service is not required where the actual or potential threat of contamination endangers the health, safety and welfare of the City water
system and the customers the system serves. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.46(j)(2).)
(H) Authority to revoke certified tester registration.
(1) The Director may revoke a certified tester's registration in the following cases:
(a) Failure to register the serial number or have the gauge tested for accuracy annually;
(b) Use of a test gauge that did not pass the accuracy test in preparation of a City-required backflow test and
maintenance report;
(c) Two (2) testing or reporting discrepancies within a one (1) year period, beginning on the date of the first
discrepancy, including:
(i) False, incomplete, or inaccurate reporting of test completion or certification of a backflow prevention
assembly;
(ii) Use of inaccurate gauges;
(iii) Improper operational certification methods; or
(iv) Failure to comply with Sections 53.009(B) or (D) of this subchapter;
(d) Failure to maintain licensure or registration with TCEQ or the City;
(e) Failure to comply with Sections 53.009(E) or (F) of this subchapter; or
(f) Conviction of a violation of this subchapter.
(2) Revocation under this subsection is effective upon receipt of written notice from the Director sent via certified mail,
return receipt requested. Receipt is presumed to occur five (5) calendar days following the date the notice is mailed. Nonreceipt
of the notice does not affect the validity of a revocation order. Written notice under this subsection shall provide
specific written findings justifying revocation. Registrations for certified tester's that have had a registration revoked shall
not be accepted by the City or its Third-party vendor for a period of one (1) year following the effective date of
revocation.
(I) Appeal of registration revocation. A request for appeal and reconsideration of registration revocation by a certified tester shall
be delivered to the City Manager within fifteen (15) calendar days of receipt of the revocation notice and shall specifically contest or
justify the Director's findings as outlined in the revocation notice. The City Manager shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to
reconsider revocation and shall then issue a written determination via certified mail, return receipt requested. The City Manager's
decision shall constitute the City's final decision.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.008 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CUSTOMERS.
(A) Duty. Each customer has a duty to prevent contaminants from entering into the customer's system and the city water system.
This duty begins at the point of delivery and includes the customer's entire internal water system. If the Director determines that an
actual or potential hazard exists in the customer's system, this subchapter shall apply, including the requirements to implement an
adequate cross-connection control program and/or install a backflow prevention assembly at the service connection and compliance
with the applicable testing requirements. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h))
(B) Consent to allow access and survey. Each customer, as a condition of receiving water service, consents to allow City personnel
access to the customer's property during normal business hours to inspect and survey the customer's system for potential
contamination, backflow hazards and cross-connections in accordance with Section 53.013 of this subchapter. If a customer refuses
to allow access to City personnel for an inspection or survey, the Director may discontinue or refuse the customer's water service,
and/or assume that a high contamination health hazard exists and, therefore, require the highest degree of protection to be used in the
customer's system prior to providing water service. If access is denied the Director may immediately discontinue water service
without further notice and the installation and certification of such required protection shall be required prior to allowing service to
the customer.
(C) Expense. Each customer, at the customer's expense, shall install, operate, maintain and test approved backflow prevention
assemblies as required by this subchapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/422
(D) Testing requirements.
(1) Customer responsibilities. If the Director determines that an internal cross-connection program and/or a backflow
prevention assembly at the service connection is required, the customer shall: a) initiate the testing required by this
Section; b) have completed any maintenance or installation of backflow assemblies as determined by the test to be
necessary; and c) ensure that an original report is submitted to the Director and information provided to the City's Thirdparty
vendor, as required by this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290 .44(h)(4))
(2) Initial testing or testing following repair, replacement, alteration or relocation. All required backflow prevention
assemblies shall be tested by a certified tester upon installation, repair, alteration or relocation and prior to being placed
into service. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(B) and (4))
(3) Annual/Periodic testing. All required backflow prevention assemblies which are installed to provide protection
against health hazards shall be tested by a certified tester annually following installation, repair or maintenance. (State
law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(1)(B)(i) and (h)(4).)
(E) Installation, repair or maintenance. Each customer, when contracting for the installation, repair or maintenance of backflow
prevention assemblies shall employ a person, entity or contractor lawfully permitted to perform such services under state law. A
customer must apply for and obtain a permit from the Building official before installing, replacing, re-piping or relocating a backflow
prevention assembly.
(F) Recordkeeping requirements. Customers shall keep and maintain accurate copies of test and maintenance report forms for all
tests and repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies for at least three (3) years from the date of any such act, and shall provide
the Director with copies of these reports upon written request or as provided for in this subchapter.
(G) Internal System Inspections - thermal expansion. With the installation of backflow assemblies, the potential for creating a
“closed-system” occurs. This closed system could result in injury to the water system customer if adequate safety measures,
including thermal expansion valves, are not functioning properly. Thermal expansion of heated water may occur wherever potable
water is heated in a closed system. This expansion may cause damage ranging from leaking faucets to a ruptured water heater if the
condition is not addressed. It is the responsibility of the customer to eliminate the possibility of thermal expansion if a closed system
has been created by the installation of an assembly.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.009 CERTIFIED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTERS.
(A) Registration of certified testers. Each person qualified to perform services as a certified tester for a City water system
customer shall register with the City's Third-party vendor prior to performing any services regulated under this subchapter. Test
results or certification of the performance of other services shall not be accepted if the tester is not currently registered with the
Third-party vendor. The Director shall maintain a current list of registered certified testers, and will make this list available to City
water system customers upon request. Registrations will be valid for one (1) year and must be renewed annually.
(B) Testing equipment. The certified tester shall furnish the City's Third-party vendor with the serial number of the tester's test kit,
and the tester's test gauge must be tested when purchased and annually thereafter, or more frequently as required by the Director, to
be in compliance with the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-connection Control (latest edition) or the American
Water Works Association Manual of Cross-connection Control requirements (Manual M14, latest edition). The certified tester must
maintain the test gauge within a two (2%) percent accuracy deviation and retain test results for three (3) years from the date of any
such test. All test results shall be made available to the City's Third-party vendor, and to the Director upon written request or as
provided for by this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)(A) and (B).)
(C) Accountability of certified tester. The certified tester is responsible for the competency and accuracy of all tests and reports
certifying assemblies to be operating within specifications performed or submitted by the certified tester, and for all work done by
any persons under the direction or control of the certified tester. All work performed by a certified tester's assistants must be
performed in the tester's presence. Certified testers shall certify that all backflow prevention assemblies comply with the
specifications provided in the University of Southern California's Manual of Cross-connection Control (latest edition) or the
American Water Works Association Manual of Cross-connection Control requirements (Manual M14, latest edition) and that such
assemblies are otherwise in compliance with this subchapter.
(D) Reporting and recordkeeping requirements. A TCEQ backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report form (Form
TCEQ-20700) must be completed by a certified backflow prevention assembly tester for each assembly tested and each form shall
include the certified tester's test gauge serial number. The signed and dated original must be submitted to the Director for
recordkeeping purposes. Only TCEQ backflow prevention assembly test and maintenance report forms will be accepted. The
certified tester shall also enter all information into the City's Third-party vendor's database. All test and maintenance reports shall be
retained by the certified tester for at least three (3) years from the date of any such test, and shall be made available to the Director
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/422
upon written request or as provided for by this subchapter. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)(b) and
(C).)
(E) Immediate notification required from a certified tester. If a backflow prevention assembly test fails or an assembly
malfunctions and the actual or potential hazard of contamination is not immediately curable through repair or replacement, the
certified tester shall immediately turn off the portion of the Customer's system protected by the backflow prevention assembly and
immediately notify the Director and the customer in person or by telephone.
(F) Alteration of backflow assembly. It is a violation of this subchapter for a certified tester to alter the design, material, or
operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly during testing, repairing or maintaining the assembly without the prior
written approval of the Director.
(G) Qualified. Certified backflow prevention assembly testers are qualified to test and repair assemblies on any domestic,
commercial, industrial, or irrigation service. However, certified testers shall only test and repair assemblies on Fire lines if they are
permanently employed by an approved Fire line contractor as required by the state Fire Marshal's office. (State law reference: 30
Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(4)(A)(i) and (ii).)
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.010 BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE; PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) Permit and inspection required. Plumbing permits shall be obtained prior to installing, replacing, modifying or relocating
existing backflow prevention devices in accordance with Chapter 150 of this Code. In addition, plumbing inspections are required to
be requested upon completion of the above acts and no inspection shall be requested until the original backflow test results are
submitted to the City and the City's Third-party vendor in accordance with this subchapter.
(B) Testing, reporting and recordkeeping required. When a backflow prevention assembly is installed, replaced, modified or
relocated the approved assembly shall be tested prior to being placed into service. The person completing the work in Subsection (A)
of this Section shall submit copies of written reports detailing the work to the customer and original reports to the Director on Form
TCEQ-20700. The report shall include a list of the materials or replacement parts used. The person shall also enter all information
into the City's Third-party vendor's database. All test, installation and maintenance reports shall be retained for at least three (3) years
from the date of any such test, and shall be made available to the Director upon written request or as provided for by this subchapter.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.011 GENERAL STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS.
(A) Compliance required. This subchapter, the TCEQ Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems provided in title 30 of the
Texas Administrative Code, the City Plumbing and Irrigation codes and other applicable local, state and federal laws, all as amended,
will govern the design, construction, operation and maintenance of the City water system with respect to cross-connection control
and backflow prevention. Each person shall comply with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
(B) Auxiliary and reclaimed water systems. It is unlawful for a person to cause or allow water from an auxiliary water supply or
reclaimed water system to enter the City water system. Where a customer is served by an auxiliary water supply or utilizes a
reclaimed water system in addition to the City water system, all applicable TCEQ regulations shall be followed, and the Director will
determine the type of backflow prevention assembly to be used. In the event that a customer owns and operates a rainwater
harvesting system, the requirements specified by 30 Texas Administrative Code § 290.44(j) will apply to such operation and
connection to the City's water system. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code §§ 290.44(h)(1)(A) and 290.449(j).)
(C) Unlawful connections. It is unlawful for a person to make a connection from the City water system to a customer's system
where an actual or potential contamination hazard to the City water system exists and there is no air gap separation between the
drinking water supply and the source of potential contamination. Where a containment air gap is impractical and, instead, an
individual internal air gap or mechanical backflow prevention assembly is used, a backflow prevention assembly will be required at
the service connection in accordance with AWWA Standards on those establishments handling substances deleterious or hazardous to
the public health. This requirement does not apply if the customer maintains an adequate internal cross-connection control program
that includes an annual inspection by a certified tester. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code § 290.44(h)(1)(A) and (B).)
(D) Non-potable connections. It is unlawful for a person to make any connection from the City water system to any condensing,
cooling or industrial process or any other system of non-potable usage, over which City water system officials do not have sanitary
control, in a manner that does not fully comply with the requirements of Subsection (C) above. It is unlawful for any person to cause
or permit backflow from any such process to be transmitted into the City water system. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin Code
(TAC) § 290.44(h)(2).)
(E) Overhead bulk water dispensing stations. Overhead bulk water dispensing stations must be provided with an air gap between
the filling outlet hose and the receiving tank to protect against backsiphonage and cross-contamination. (State law reference: 30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/422
Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(3).)
(F) Service connections, additional protection. The use of a backflow prevention assembly at a service connection will be
considered additional backflow prevention, and does not negate the requirement of backflow prevention on internal hazards as
provided by this subchapter or Chapters 113 and 150 of this Code. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)
(5).)
(G) Unlawful bypasses. It is unlawful for a person to install, or to cause or permit the installation of, a bypass that has not been
approved in advance by the Director. All bypasses on backflow prevention assemblies must themselves include provisions for
backflow prevention as described in this subchapter.
(H) Exception. This subchapter shall not apply at any residence or facility where there is no actual or potential contamination
hazard as determined by the Director. (State law reference: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) § 290.44(h)(6).)
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.012 TYPES OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION REQUIRED.
(A) Generally. Cross-connections vary widely in degree of potential contamination hazards. Backflow may occur under many
different pressure differentials, varying from vacuum to very high pressures. The protection afforded by a backflow prevention
assembly depends upon its type, the circumstances in which it is installed, and on its proper installation, maintenance and testing.
Only approved assemblies shall be used (as defined in this subchapter).
(B) Minimum specific backflow prevention assembly required. Specific backflow prevention assembly requirements for all
affected customers and persons shall comply with this subchapter, TCEQ regulations as provided in title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas
Administrative Code and Chapter 113 (Irrigation code) and Chapter 150 (Plumbing code) of this Code, all as amended. In the event
that a conflict exists, the most stringent requirement shall control unless otherwise determined by the Director. Only approved
assemblies shall be used. The TCEQ table provided below details the types of premises and uses that are commonly subject to
compliance with this subchapter, however, notwithstanding this provision or the table below, the Director shall retain final approval
authority in each individual case.
(1) Table Insert: (State law reference: Figure: 30 Texas Admin. Code (TAC) §290.47(f))
Assessment of Hazards and Selection of Assemblies
(2) The following table lists many common hazards. It is not an all-inclusive list of the hazards which may be found
connected to public water systems.
Premises Isolation - Description of Premises Assessment
of Hazard
Required
Assembly
Aircraft and missile plants Health RPBA or AG
Animal feedlots Health RPBA or AG
Automotive plants Health RPBA or AG
Breweries Health RPBA or AG
Canneries, packing houses and rendering plants Health RPBA or AG
Commercial car wash facilities Health RPBA or AG
Commercial laundries Health RPBA or AG
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/422
Cold storage facilities Health RPBA or AG
Connection to sewer pipe Health RPBA or AG
Dairies Health RPBA or AG
Docks and dockside facilities Health RPBA or AG
Dye works Health RPBA or AG
Food and beverage processing plants Health RPBA or AG
Hospitals, morgues, mortuaries, medical clinics, dental clinics,
veterinary clinics, autopsy facilities, sanitariums, and medical labs Health RPBA or AG
Metal manufacturing, cleaning, processing, and fabrication plants Health RPBA or AG
Microchip fabrication facilities Health RPBA or AG
Paper and paper products plants Health RPBA or AG
Petroleum processing or storage facilities Health RPBA or AG
Photo and film processing labs Health RPBA or AG
Plants using radioactive material Health RPBA or AG
Plating or chemical plants Health RPBA or AG
Pleasure-boat marinas Health RPBA or AG
Private/Individual/Unmonitored Wells Health RPBA or AG
Reclaimed water systems Health RPBA or AG
Restricted, classified or other closed facilities Health RPBA or AG
Rubber plants Health RPBA or AG
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/422
Sewage lift stations Health RPBA or AG
Sewage treatment plants Health RPBA or AG
Slaughter houses Health RPBA or AG
Steam plants Health RPBA or AG
Tall buildings or elevation differences where the highest outlet is 80
feet or more above the meter Nonhealth DCVA
Internal Protection - Description of Cross-Connection Assessment
of Hazard
Required
Assembly
Aspirators Nonhealth† AVB
Aspirator (medical) Health AVB or PVB
Autoclaves Health RPBA
Autopsy and mortuary equipment Health AVB or PVB
Bedpan washers Health AVB or PVB
Connection to industrial fluid systems Health RPBA
Connection to plating tanks Health RPBA
Connection to salt-water cooling systems Health RPBA
Connection to sewer pipe Health AG
Cooling towers with chemical additives Health AG
Cuspidors Health AVB or PVB
Degreasing equipment Nonhealth† DCVA
Domestic space-heating boiler Nonhealth† RPBA
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/422
Dye vats or machines Health RPBA
Firefighting system (toxic liquid foam concentrates) Health RPBA
Flexible shower heads Nonhealth† AVB or PVB
Heating equipment
Commercial Nonhealth† RPBA
Domestic Nonhealth† DCVA
Hose bibbs Nonhealth† AVB
Irrigation systems
with chemical additives Health RPBA
without chemical additives Nonhealth† AVB, or PVB
Kitchen equipment - Commercial Nonhealth† AVB
Lab bench equipment Health or
Nonhealth†
AVB or PVB
Ornamental fountains Health AVB or PVB
Swimming pools
Private Nonhealth† PVB or AG
Public Nonhealth† RPBA or AG
Sewage pump Health AG
Sewage ejectors Health AG
Shampoo basins Nonhealth† AVB
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/422
Specimen tanks Health AVB or PVB
Steam generators Nonhealth† RPBA
Steam tables Nonhealth† AVB
Sterilizers Health RPBA
Tank vats or other vessels containing toxic substances Health RPBA
Trap primers Health AG
Vending machines Nonhealth† RPBA or PVB
Watering troughs Health AG or PVB
NOTE: AG = air gap; AVB = atmospheric vacuum breaker; DCVA = double check valve backflow prevention assembly; PVB = pressure
vacuum breaker; RPBA = reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly.
* AVBs and PVBs may be used to isolate health hazards under certain conditions, that is, backsiphonage situations. Additional area of
premises isolation may be required.
† Where a greater hazard exists (due to toxicity or other potential health impact) additional area protection with RPBAs is required.
Uses not listed in this table may require backflow prevention through air gaps or backflow prevention assemblies depending on the nature
of the use, the equipment and the plumbing system. These will be determined on an individual basis by the Director.
(C) Exceptions. A person may request approval from the Director for a proposed deviation from or exception to the requirements
of this subchapter. Upon request, the Director shall conduct a Customer Service Inspection to determine what (if any) hazards are
present and shall document what (if any) backflow protection is required and provide the same to the customer. The Director may
approve a deviation or exception if the deviation or exception does not conflict with applicable law or increase the risk of an actual
or potential contamination hazard from entering into the City water system.
(D) Criteria for selection of backflow prevention assemblies. The selection of an appropriate backflow prevention assembly
depends upon the degree of hazard involved and will be based on the following criteria:
(1) Whether the assembly could ever be subject to backpressure due to the customer's internal pumping pressures or
elevation differentials;
(2) The nature of contaminating material under the most critical circumstances;
(3) The extent to which additions may be made to the plumbing system at a later date which would affect the initial
selection of the assembly;
(4) The frequency with which a water supply could be exposed to a hazardous condition; and
(5) The degree of protection of the water supply required, as provided by this subchapter, the Irrigation code and
Plumbing code (Chapters 113 and 150 of this Code) and title 30, chapter 290 of the Texas Administrative Code, as
enforced by the Director.
(E) Highly detrimental hazards. Where an actual or potential contamination hazard is determined to be highly detrimental to the
general health of the City water system, the Director may require a total containment backflow prevention system to provide for
backflow prevention assemblies on each internal branch line. The proper backflow protection assembly shall be maintained on each
service connection or separation of internal systems. At the point of delivery, an assembly must be installed on each leg or branch
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/422
(i.e., industrial and domestic). The type of backflow prevention assembly required on each leg or branch shall be in accordance with
the highest degree of actual or potential contamination hazard found on the premises.
(F) Mobile connections. Any person connecting any part of a vehicle or other container to the City water system shall utilize an air
gap method or permanently install an approved backflow prevention assembly on the vehicle or container and shall have the
assembly tested in accordance with this subchapter prior to connecting to the City water system.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.013 PROCEDURES.
(A) New facilities.
(1) All new facilities, unless excepted from this subchapter, are required to comply with the requirements of this
subchapter. Compliance by a new City water system customer with the requirements for installation of one or more
backflow prevention assemblies shall be verified in conjunction with the customer's application for water service or with
the customer's building and plumbing permits as required by this subchapter and other chapters of this Code.
(2) The Director may require field inspection of the customer's premises in addition to building plan submittal and
review to determine the actual or potential contamination hazards and backflow prevention assembly requirements.
(3) All plumbing layouts or building plans submitted to the City shall be reviewed to assure compliance with the
requirements of this subchapter and other applicable provisions of this Code.
(B) Existing facilities, inspections.
(1) Inspection procedure. The Director or designated representative may inspect the existing facilities of City water
system customers that do not have a record of backflow prevention assembly installation or current annual (or periodic)
certified testing report(s) on file with the City and/or the City's Third-party vendor and at other times as determined
necessary by the Director in accordance with this subchapter. After the inspection is completed, the Director will provide
a written notice to the customer advising of any backflow prevention assembly requirements for the customer's system.
(2) Installation and testing required. Upon the receipt of written notice, the customer shall have thirty (30) calendar
days from the date of receipt of the notice to have the appropriate backflow prevention assemblies installed, replaced or
repaired and certification of testing submitted to the Director and the City's Third-party vendor. Notice is presumed to be
received five (5) calendar days after the notice is mailed. Upon written request of the customer and for cause, the Director
may extend this time period if an immediate threat of contamination does not exist for additional time periods.
(3) Building Plan review. Plans submitted to the City for approval of plumbing modifications, or extensions to an
existing plumbing system, may be reviewed by the Director to determine the type of backflow prevention method or
assembly required. The method and type of assembly required will be noted on the plans.
(C) Customer Service Inspections.
(1) A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service to all new facilities,
for any existing facility when the Director has reason to believe that potential cross-connections or other contaminant
hazards exists, or after any material improvement, correction, or addition to the private distribution facilities that may
affect the system's compliance with this subchapter. (State law reference: Texas Admin. Code § 290.46(j).)
(2) Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as qualified to conduct a customer service
inspection (in accordance with title 30, chapter 290.46(j) of the Texas Administrative Code):
(a) Plumbing Inspectors and Water Supply Protection Specialists that have been licensed by the Texas State Board
of Plumbing Examiners; or
(b) Customer service inspectors who have completed a TCEQ approved course, passed an examination
administered by the TCEQ, and hold current professional certification or endorsement as a customer service
inspector.
(3) The Customer Service Inspection must certify on Form TCEQ-20699 that:
(a) No direct connection between the City water system and a potential source of contamination exists and
potential sources of contamination are isolated from the City water system by a properly installed air gap or an
appropriate backflow prevention assembly;
(b) No cross-connection between the City water system and a private water source exists;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/422
(c) No connection exists which would allow water to be returned to the City water system;
(d) No pipe or pipefitting containing more than eight (8%) percent lead has been used for the installation or repair
of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use; and
(e) No solder or flux containing more than two-tenths of one percent (0.2%) lead has been used for the
installation or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one lead test
shall be performed for each inspection.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
§ 53.014 PENALTY AND DISCONNECTION.
(A) A person who violates, or causes or permits the violation of, any provision of this subchapter commits a Class C misdemeanor
which shall be punishable under Section 10.99 of this Code. A fine not exceeding two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) may be imposed
for violation of provisions in the subchapter that govern fire safety or public health and sanitation. With respect to violations of this
Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. Proof of a culpable mental state
is not required for conviction of an offense under this subchapter unless otherwise required by law.
(B) Failure or refusal on the part of a customer to comply with any provision of this subchapter will constitute grounds for refusing
or discontinuing water service.
(Ord. 1313-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17)
PRIVATE SEWAGE FACILITIES
§ 53.015 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
CITY. The City of Pflugerville.
COMMISSIONER OF SANITATION. The person that may be appointed by the Mayor, and who undertakes the duties of such
Commissioner of Sanitation, and if no person is appointed by the Mayor, then the Mayor shall act as Commissioner of Sanitation.
HOLDING TANK. A vented, watertight tank designated for temporary holding of sewage and so constructed as to prevent the
removal of the sewage except by pumping therefrom, for delivery to an approved sewage disposal system.
MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Pflugerville.
msl. The abbreviation for “mean sea level.”
NONCONTAINMENT SYSTEM. A facility other than an organized sewage disposal system and which is not a containment system.
ORGANIZED DISPOSAL SYSTEM. Any public or private sewage system for the collection, treatment, and disposal of sewage
operated in accordance with the terms and conditions of applicable regulatory authority and law.
PERMIT AUTHORITY. The person, agency or entity authorized by the City Council to inspect and conduct surveillance under the
terms of this subchapter.
SEPTIC TANK. A vented, watertight tank which serves as a sedimentation and sludge digestion chamber, which is placed between
the house sewer and the soil absorption field.
SEPTIC TANK SYSTEM. A system for disposing of sewage through soil absorption and consisting of the following components: the
house sewer, the septic tank, and the soil absorption field.
SEWAGE. Waterborne human or other domestic waste.
SEWAGE FACILITY. Septic tank, pit privy, cesspool, sewage holding tank, injection well used to dispose of sewage, treatment tank,
and any other facility, system, means, or method used for the disposal system operated under a permit issued by the Water Quality
Board of the State of Texas.
SLOPE. The difference between the highest elevation and the lowest elevation on any lot divided by the horizontal distance between
the two points.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/422
SOIL ABSORPTION FIELD. That part of a septic tank system consisting of drainage tiles and surrounding permeable soil used for
the subsurface disposal of septic tank effluent.
SUBDIVISION. A subdivision which has been platted and approved by the city and recorded with the County Clerk of Travis
County, Texas, or which is required by statute to be so platted and recorded.
WATER QUALITY BOARD. The Texas Water Quality Board or its successor agency.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.016 WATER QUALITY ZONE.
The city designates all of the area within its corporate limits and its extraterritorial jurisdiction as a water quality zone.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.017 PERMITS REQUIRED.
(A) No sewage facility or facilities may be constructed, placed, maintained, or held available for use within the water quality zone
except:
(1) Sewage facilities of an organized disposal system authorized by valid permit issued by the city;
(2) Public restrooms approved by the City Council;
(3) Private sewage facilities installed pursuant to permit issued by the city.
(B) It shall be unlawful to make, suffer, or allow sewage discharge of any kind except in accordance with sewage facilities
authorized or permitted in division (A) above.
(C) The city may enter into an agreement with the Austin-Travis County Health Department, or any other agency having
appropriate capability for same, for the surveillance, inspection of private sewage facilities in all areas of land within the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction. The city will serve as the permit authority for all new or revoked disposal systems within the corporate
limits or other areas where the city has concurrent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.018 FEES.
(A) Schedule of fees. The following schedule of fees shall be paid by applicant for permits or for reinspection under this
subchapter:
(1) Single-family units and churches:
(a) Systems existing on effective date of this subchapter and requiring inspection or testing after effective date of
this subchapter - actual cost to city plus 20%.
(b) Systems for which application for permit is made after effective date of this chapter - actual cost to city plus
20%.
(2) Commercial uses, schools, organized group facilities, office buildings, and any other type use not coming under
division (A)(1) above.
(a) Systems existing on effective date of this subchapter and requiring inspection or testing after effective date of
this subchapter - actual cost to city plus 20%.
(b) Systems for which application for permit is made after effective date of this subchapter - actual cost to city
plus 20%.
(B) Payment of fees. Fees for initial permit applications shall be paid directly to the city. Fees for inspection and tests shall be paid
to the city, and may be added to the water bill for the parcel of land for which the inspection or test was conducted, and shall be for
all purposes, considered a part of the water bill when so added. The city shall reimburse the contractor and inspecting authority for
such costs for conducting testing and inspections pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/422
§ 53.019 RULES FOR SEWAGE FACILITIES.
(A) Standards for facilities. No sewage facility may be installed without first obtaining a permit from the city in connection with
such sewage facility. No building permit will be issued unless it is demonstrated that the sewage facility will function properly and
will not pose a danger of possible pollution or injury to public health, will not cause or allow sewage or odor therefrom to go onto
neighboring property, and will comply with this subchapter.
(B) Amendment, revocation or suspension.
(1) On prior notice to the property owner, the city may revoke, modify, or suspend a private sewage facility permit:
(a) If the information submitted by or on behalf of the applicant or in connection with the application or renewal
application is materially false;
(b) If the facility is not functioning adequately or properly, or if it functions (or fails to function) so as to cause or
pose reasonable threat of pollution or potential injury to public health or so as to be a nuisance or to cause or allow
sewage or noxious odors from sewage from the property it is to serve to go on to neighboring property;
(c) If the facility fails to function substantially as well as indicated by the application and accompanying
inspections or tests when the permit was issued;
(d) If it operates or functions not in compliance with this subchapter, or for like good cause.
(2) The issuance of a permit, regardless of its duration, in no way relieves the property owner of his continuing
responsibility to insure effective and safe operation of his private sewage facility; and each property owner shall be and
remain responsible to insure that the property's private sewage facility functions properly and to take all necessary
measures to correct any deficiencies that might develop.
(C) Non-containment private sewage facilities. Except as may be otherwise expressly provided elsewhere in this subchapter, noncontainment
private systems, other than septic tank systems, will not be authorized:
(1) If they do not at least meet the minimum criteria for septic tank systems established by this subchapter;
(2) If they are less effective than a proper septic tank system would be in respect to controlling pollution, minimizing
danger to public health, or preventing escape of sewage odor therefrom to neighboring property;
(3) If they fail to meet other applicable standards provided in this subchapter, including but not limited to those
specified in this subchapter; or
(4) If their permit is forbidden by another section or sections of this subchapter.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.020 NEW PRIVATE FACILITY PERMIT PROCEDURE.
The following procedures shall govern the issuance of permits for new private sewage facilities (those constructed after the date of
passage of this subchapter) under this subchapter:
(A) In order to initiate an application for a permit, a written application in such form as may be prescribed by the city
must be filed with the City Secretary.
(B) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, inspections, tests, and reports shall be made as the city may determine to
be appropriate, which may include percolation tests as provided in Regulations for Individual Septic Tank Systems and
Subdivisions Review of Septic Tank System Developments, dated September, 1972, published by the Austin-Travis
County Health Department, or any subsequent edition of said regulation, site inspection and other such tests, inspections,
and reports as the city may consider appropriate. Such inspections, tests, and reports shall be made by authorized
representatives of the above permit authority. If the application is approved, the applicant may then proceed with the
construction of the private sewage facility in accordance with the plans submitted with the application. If the application
is disapproved as submitted, but a qualified engineer is of the opinion that a private sewage facility of a different design
may be constructed on the property, it shall advise the applicant in writing of the changes necessary to obtain a permit.
The required information shall be filed with the city. All private sewage facilities shall be constructed in accordance with
Austin-Travis County Health Department Regulations for Individual Septic Systems and Subdivision Review of Systems
Development and deviation from the plans must be approved by the city before construction is commenced. The
construction of the system shall be subject to inspection by the authorized representative at all reasonable times; and upon
completion of the construction but before the system is buried, a final inspection shall be made to insure compliance with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/422
this subchapter after all requirements have been met, including the final inspection, certification of the system will be
provided the City Building Inspector which will be made a part of the certificate of occupancy.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.021 OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE.
(A) All authorized sewage facilities shall be operated and maintained in accordance with criteria established by the Texas State
Department of Health. All private sewage facilities shall be subject to inspection by the city and its agents at all reasonable times for
the purposes of determining compliance with the terms of the permit and this subchapter.
(B) All wastes removed from private sewage facilities shall be hauled and disposed in an organized disposal system for final
disposition. Any person or entity removing waste from a private sewage facility, or hauling waste so removed shall take it to an
organized disposal system and deposit there for final disposition (or to see to such taking and deposit) all such waste removed by him
or it and all such waste hauled by him or it; and the owner of a sewage facility shall not allow waste to be removed from such facility
by another unless the party removing it first agrees to promptly take same to an organized disposal system and deposit it there for
final disposition and the owner reasonably and in good faith believes that such removing party will do so, or unless the owner has in
effect other arrangements which he reasonably and in good faith believes will result in the waste being so taken and deposited
promptly upon removal. The owner of each organized disposal system shall establish a reasonable policy for the acceptance of all
sludge, sewage or other waste.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.022 PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING APPROVAL FOR PLANNED SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) Any person or entity desiring to create a subdivision in which the lots therein require sewage disposal must receive approval
from the city before the subdivision shall be approved by the city. This approval must be obtained before the subdivision plat shall be
approved and before same may be recorded. Percolation tests shall be required on each lot in each such new subdivision, which is
proposed to be served by septic tank or other non-containment facility and which may not be feasibly connected to an organized
disposal system.
(B) If the city or its representatives find that one or more portions of a subdivision is suitable for septic tank development, and the
remainder is not suitable, it may specify those lots which are found suitable and those which are not found suitable. The city may
make similar specifications regarding any proper other non-containment private sewage facility. The city's approval of a subdivision
or one or more lots thereof, for septic tank system development, or for development with proper other non-containment private
sewage facility, shall not constitute a permit for septic tank system (other non-containment private sewage facility) for any one or
more lots in the subdivision, and notwithstanding any such approval, each private sewage facility installed within the subdivision
must in all events be individually inspected in the manner provided for in the other sections of this subchapter. If application
respecting a subdivision is not first made under this § 53.022, then no permit will be granted respecting any lot in the subdivision
except that a proper non-containment sewage facility other than septic tank is not rendered ineligible for permit by reason of there
being no applicable approval for septic tank system development in the subdivision under this § 53.022, if the city in its action
respecting the subdivision expressly and affirmatively gives applicable approval to such proper other non-containment private
sewage facility, and provided, further however, that if in the city's action under this § 53.022 expressly disapproves a subdivision (or
any lot or lots in same) for a particular type of other non-containment private sewage facility, then, no permit (or application for
same) will be granted for such type of other non-containment private sewage facility with respect to any lot or lots as to which such
disapproval thereof has been made.
(C) On all subdivision plats approved for recording by the city after the effective date of this subchapter, there shall be
conspicuously written on the face thereof for recording a legend stating appropriate limitation with respect to the use of sewage
facilities thereon where an organized disposal system is not available to all or some of the lots thereof.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
Cross-reference–Subdivisions, see Chapter 156.
§ 53.023 EXISTING FACILITIES.
(A) All persons owning or using any private sewage facility located either in the city limits or in it extraterritorial jurisdiction,
which is in existence on the effective date of this subchapter are subject to inspections of such systems to determine the efficiency of
operation. If it is found after inspection that such system does not function properly, or that it will pose a danger of possible pollution
or possible injury to public health, or that it will cause or allow sewage or odor therefrom to go onto neighboring property, or that it
will otherwise not meet the standards set forth in this subchapter for a properly operating private sewage facility, the property owner
or occupant will be so notified. This notification will constitute legal condemnation proceedings and will place the burden of repair,
reconstruction, or closing of such facility directly upon the property owner. Once the system is condemned, the property owner will
have three days in which to file an application, and have 15 days from the date of application to complete the repairs, reconstruction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/422
or closing and filling of the facility as may be necessary to meet the health standards of this chapter. If weather, or a suitable
construction company is not available during this time period, the city shall be notified and a maximum extension of ten days may be
granted. After that time the property owner is subject to the penalties specified in this subchapter. Further, when a definite health
hazard has been established and condemnation notification issued, the city reserves the right to refuse the sale of water to the
property owner until such time as corrective action as specified by this subchapter has been taken.
(B) In the case of common outdoor privies, same will be prima facie deemed not to meet the standards required of this subchapter,
and may be condemned without further testing or inspection, in which case the owner of the property shall be charged with the
responsibility of closing and filling such privy, unless he can establish by competent evidence that same does meet the standards set
forth in this subchapter.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.024 DESIGN CRITERIA.
(A) Private sewage facilities. In order for a new private sewage facility to be constructed under this subchapter the design of such
private sewage facility shall, in addition to any other or further requirements that may be appropriate in the particular case, be in
accordance with the guidelines of the Regulations for Individual Septic Tank Systems, Travis County Health Department, September,
1972, and amendments thereto. Should any applicant desire to install a private sewage facility of a design other than that already
approved by the Texas State Department of Health, the applicant must receive approval of its design from the State Department of
Health before it will be permitted under this chapter.
(B) Organized disposal systems. Prior to the construction of an organized disposal system the necessary approval and permits must
be obtained from the city.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.025 VIOLATIONS.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this subchapter for any person to construct, install, place, maintain, hold available for use, use,
operate, or discharge sewage into any private sewage facility or organized disposal system, or to perform maintenance or service on
any private sewage facility or to remove (or as owner allow removal of) waste from a private sewage facility, or haul waste so
removed, contrary to the terms of, or in circumstances, conditions, or situations or at times or places where or in which such is
prohibited by, this subchapter, or to do any act or thing or engage in any conduct prohibited by this subchapter, or to do any act or
thing or engage in any conduct prohibited by the terms of this subchapter, or with respect to any private sewage facility or organized
disposal system owned or controlled by such person or entity to suffer or allow any conditions, a situation, or use prohibited by this
subchapter or to fail to do any act required by the terms of this subchapter, or for any subdivider with respect to his (or its)
subdivision or the plat thereof to comply with or act contrary to the provisions of § 53.022 hereof applicable to subdividers, or for
any person or entity to file with the city any materially false written report or statement in connection with any permit or certification
of repair under this subchapter or any other matter in connection with the administration of this subchapter, or to cause same to be so
filed, or to make same (or cause same to be made) believing that it will or may be so filed which report the maker, or the filer, or the
one causing same to be so made or filed, respectively, does not in good faith believe to be true, or to otherwise violate any of the
terms or provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
§ 53.026 REMEDIES.
(A) Any person violating, at any time more than 30 days after the day this subchapter is adopted, any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall become liable to the city for any expenses, loss or damages occasioned by the city by reason of such violation.
(B) The purpose of this subchapter being to promote the health, sanitation, safety and welfare of the public, any violation of this
chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and the city or any individual adversely affected by such violation may obtain an
injunction restraining such violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75)
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
§ 53.040 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Mayor or his duly authorized representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/422
B.O.D. (Biochemical Oxygen Demand). The quantity of oxygen by weight, expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation
of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions for five days at a temperature of 20° C.
BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal (also called house lateral
and house connection).
CITY. The City of Pflugerville, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
C.O.D. (Chemical Oxygen Demand). Measure of the oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and organic matter present in the water
or wastewater expressed in mg/l as the amount of oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test, but not differentiating
between stable and unstable organic matter and thus not necessarily correlating with biochemical oxygen demand.
CONTROL MANHOLE. A manhole giving access to a building sewer at some point before the building sewer discharge mixes with
other discharges in the public sewer.
CONTROL POINT. A point of access to a course of discharge before the discharge mixes with other discharges in the public sewer.
GARBAGE. Animal and vegetable wastes and residue from preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food; and from the handling,
processing, storage and sale of food products and produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any
natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE CHARGE. The charge made on those persons who discharge industrial wastes into the city's sewerage system.
MILLIGRAMS PER LITER (mg/l). Means the same as parts per million and is a weight-to-volume ratio; the milligram-per-liter value
multiplied by the factor 8.34 shall be equivalent to pounds per million gallons of water.
NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater.
NORMAL DOMESTIC WASTEWATER. Wastewater excluding industrial wastewater discharged by a person into sanitary sewers and
in which the average concentration of total suspended solids is not more than 250 mg/l and BOD is not more than 250 mg/l.
OVERLOAD. The imposition of organic or hydraulic loading on a treatment facility in excess of its engineered design capacity.
PERSON. Includes corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership association, and any other legal entity.
pH. The logarithm (Base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration.
PUBLIC SEWER. Pipe or conduit carrying wastewater or unpolluted drainage in which owners of abutting properties shall have the
use, subject to control by the city.
SANITARY SEWER. A public sewer that conveys domestic wastewater or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and into which
storm water, surface water, groundwater, and other unpolluted wastes are not intentionally passed.
SLUG. Any discharge of water, wastewater, or industrial waste which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow,
exceeds for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-hour concentration or flows during
normal operation.
STANDARD METHODS. The examination and analytical procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
STORM SEWER. A public sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage and into which domestic wastewater or
industrial wastes are not intentionally passed.
STORM WATER. Rainfall or any other forms of precipitation.
SUPERINTENDENT. The Water and Wastewater Superintendent of the city or any duly authorized deputy, agent, or representative
appointed by the City Council.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS. Solids measured in mg/l that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, water, wastewater, or
other liquids, and which are largely removable by a laboratory filtration device.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/422
TO DISCHARGE. Includes to deposit, conduct, drain, emit, throw, run, allow to seep, or otherwise release or dispose of, or to allow,
permit, or suffer any of these acts or omissions.
TRAP. A device designed to skim, settle, or otherwise remove grease, oil, sand, flammable wastes or other harmful substances.
UNPOLLUTED WASTEWATER. Water containing:
(1) No free or emulsified grease or oil;
(2) No acids or alkalis;
(3) No phenols or other substances producing taste or odor in receiving water;
(4) No toxic or poisonous substances in suspension, colloidal state, or solution;
(5) No noxious or otherwise obnoxious or odorous gases;
(6) Not more than an insignificant amount in mg/l each of suspended solids and BOD, as determined by the Texas
Water Quality Board; and
(7) Color not exceeding 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt method of determination as specified in Standard
Methods.
WASTE. Rejected, unutilized or superfluous substances in liquid, gaseous, or solid form resulting from domestic, agricultural, or
industrial activities.
WASTEWATER. A combination of the water-carried waste from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial
establishments, together with any ground, surface, and storm water that may be present.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES. Includes all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of wastewater and industrial
wastes.
WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT. Any city-owned facilities, devices, and structures used for receiving, processing and treating
wastewater, industrial waste, and sludges from the sanitary sewers.
WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge on all users of the public sewer system whose wastes do not exceed in strength the
concentration values established as representative of normal wastewater.
WATERCOURSE. A natural or man-made channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.041 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
(A) No person may discharge to public sewers any waste which by itself or by interaction with other wastes may:
(1) Injure or interfere with wastewater treatment processes or facilities;
(2) Constitute a hazard to humans or animals; or
(3) Create a hazard in receiving waters of the wastewater treatment plant effluent.
(B) All discharges shall conform to requirements of this subchapter.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.042 CHEMICAL DISCHARGES.
(A) No discharge to public sewers may contain:
(1) Cyanide greater than 1.0 mg/l;
(2) Fluoride other than that contained in the public water supply;
(3) Chlorides in concentrations greater than 300 mg/l;
(4) Gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/422
(5) Substances causing an excessive chemical oxygen demand (C.O.D.) .
(B) No waste or wastewater discharged to public waters may contain:
(1) Strong acid, iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
(2) Fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of (100) mg/l or containing substances which may
solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
(3) Objectionable or toxic substances, exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite wastewater at the wastewater treatment works exceeds the limits established by the approving
authority for such materials; or
(4) Obnoxious, toxic, or poisonous solids, liquids, or gases in quantities sufficient to violate the provisions of §
53.041(A).
(C) No waste, wastewater, or other substance may be discharged into public sewers which has a pH lower than 5.5 or higher than
9.5, or any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel at the
wastewater facilities.
(D) All waste, wastewater, or other substance containing phenols, hydrogen sulfide, or other taste-and-odor producing substances,
shall conform to concentration limits established by the approving authority. After treatment of the composite wastewater,
concentration limits may not exceed the requirements established by state, federal, or other agencies with jurisdiction over discharges
to receiving waters.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.043 HEAVY METALS AND TOXIC MATERIALS.
(A) No discharges may contain concentrations of heavy metals greater than amounts specified in division (B) of this section.
(B) The maximum allowable concentrations of heavy metals stated in terms of milligrams per liter (mg/l), determined on the basis
of individual sampling in accordance with “Standard Methods” are:
(1) Arsenic 0.05 mg/l;
(2) Barium 5.0 mg/l;
(3) Boron 1.0 mg/l;
(4) Cadmium 0.02 mg/l;
(5) Chromium (Total) 5.0 mg/l;
(6) Copper 1.0 mg/l;
(7) Lead 0.1 mg/l;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/422
(8) Manganese 1.0 mg/l;
(9) Mercury 0.005 mg/l;
(10) Nickel 1.0 mg/l;
(11) Selenium 0.02 mg/l;
(12) Silver 0. 1 mg/l;
(13) Zinc 5.0 mg/l;
(C) No other heavy metals or toxic materials may be discharged into public sewers without a permit from the approving authority
specifying conditions of pretreatment, concentrations, volumes, and other applicable provisions.
(D) Prohibited heavy metals and toxic materials include but are not limited to:
(1) Antimony,
(2) Beryllium,
(3) Bismuth,
(4) Cobalt,
(5) Molybdenum,
(6) Uranyl ion,
(7) Rhenium,
(8) Strontium,
(9) Tellurium,
(10) Herbicides,
(11) Fungicides, and
(12) Pesticides.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.044 GARBAGE.
(A) No person may discharge garbage into public sewers unless it is shredded to a degree that all particles can be carried freely
under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers. Particles greater than one-half inch in any dimension are prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/422
(B) The approving authority is entitled to review and approve the installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with
a motor of three-fourths horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.045 STORM WATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
(A) No person may discharge to public sanitary sewers:
(1) Unpolluted storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage;
(2) Unpolluted cooling water;
(3) Unpolluted industrial process waters; or
(4) Other unpolluted drainage.
(B) In compliance with the Texas Water Quality Act, Tex. Water Code, §§ 26.001 et seq., and other statutes, the approving
authority may designate storm sewers and other watercourses into which unpolluted drainage described in division (A) of this section
may be discharged.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.046 TEMPERATURE.
No person may discharge liquid or vapor having a temperature higher am 150° F. (65° C.) or any substance which causes the
temperature of the total wastewater treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of 10° F. or more per hour, or a combined total
increase of plant influent temperature to 110° F.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.047 RADIOACTIVE WASTES.
(A) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into public sewers without the permission of the approving authority.
(B) The approving authority may establish, in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations, regulations for discharge
of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.048 IMPAIRMENT OF FACILITIES.
(A) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance capable of causing:
(1) Obstruction to the flow in sewers;
(2) Interference with the operation of treatment processes of facilities; or
(3) Excessive loading of treatment facilities.
(B) Discharges prohibited by division (A) above include, but are not limited to materials which exert or cause concentrations of:
(1) Inert suspended solids greater than 250 mg/l including but not limited to:
(a) Fuller's earth
(b) Lime slurries; and
(c) Lime residues;
(2) Dissolved solids greater than 1,600 mg/l including but not limited to:
(a) Sodium chloride; and
(b) Sodium sulfate;
(3) Excessive discoloration including but not limited to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/422
(a) Dye wastes; and
(b) Vegetable tanning solutions; or
(4) BOD, COD, or chlorine demand in excess of normal plant capacity.
(C) No person may discharge into public sewers any substance that may:
(1) Deposit grease or oil in the sewer lines in such a manner as to clog the sewers;
(2) Overload skimming and grease handling equipment;
(3) Pass to the receiving waters without being effectively treated by normal wastewater treatment processes due to the
nonamenability of the substance to bacterial action; or
(4) Deleteriously affect the treatment process due to excessive quantities.
(D) No person may discharge any substance into public sewers which:
(1) Is not amenable to treatment or reduction by the processes and facilities employed; or
(2) Is amenable to treatment only to such a degree that the treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of
other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(E) The approving authority shall regulate the flow and concentration of slugs when they may:
(1) Impair the treatment process;
(2) Cause damage to collection facilities;
(3) Incur treatment costs exceeding those for normal wastewater; or
(4) Render the waste unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(F) No person may discharge into public sewers solid or viscous substances which may violate division (A) of this section if
present in sufficient quantity or size including but not limited to:
(1) Ashes;
(2) Cinders;
(3) Sand;
(4) Mud;
(5) Straw;
(6) Shavings;
(7) Metal;
(8) Glass;
(9) Rags;
(10) Feathers;
(11) Tar;
(12) Plastics;
(13) Wood;
(14) Unground garbage;
(15) Whole blood;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/422
(16) Paunch manure;
(17) Hair and fleshings;
(18) Entrails;
(19) Paper products, either whole or ground by garbage grinders;
(20) Slops;
(21) Chemical residues;
(22) Paint residues; or
(23) Bulk solids.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.049 COMPLIANCE WITH EXISTING AUTHORITY.
(A) Unless exception is granted by the approving authority, the public sanitary sewer system shall be used by all persons
discharging:
(1) Wastewater;
(2) Industrial waste;
(3) Polluted liquids;
(B) Unless authorized by the Texas Water Quality Board, no person may deposit or discharge any waste included in division (A) of
this section on public or private property into or adjacent to any:
(1) Natural outlet;
(2) Watercourse;
(3) Storm sewer;
(4) Other area within the jurisdiction of the city.
(C) The approving authority shall verify prior to discharge that wastes authorized to be discharged will receive suitable treatment
within the provisions of laws, regulations, ordinances, rules and orders of federal, state and local governments.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.050 APPROVING AUTHORITY REQUIREMENTS.
(A) If discharges or proposed discharges to public sewers may deleteriously affect wastewater facilities, processes, equipment, or
receiving waters, create a hazard to life or health, or create a public nuisance, the approving authority shall require:
(1) Pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(2) Control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and
(3) Payment to cover the cost of handling and treating the wastes.
(B) The approving authority is entitled to determine whether a discharge is included under division (A) of this section.
(C) The approving authority shall reject wastes when:
(1) It determines that a discharge or proposed discharge is included under division (A) of this section; and
(2) The discharger does not meet the requirements of division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.051 APPROVING AUTHORITY REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/422
(A) If pretreatment or control is required, the approving authority shall review and approve design and installation of equipment
and processes.
(B) The design and installation of equipment and processes must conform to all applicable statutes, codes, ordinances and other
laws.
(C) Any person responsible for discharges requiring pretreatment, flow-equalizing, or other facilities shall provide and maintain
the facilities in effective operating condition at his own expense.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.052 REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAPS.
(A) Discharges requiring a trap include:
(1) Grease or waste containing grease in excessive amounts;
(2) Oil;
(3) Sand;
(4) Flammable wastes; and
(5) Other harmful ingredients.
(B) Any person responsible for discharges requiring a trap shall at his own expense and as required by the approving authority:
(1) Provide equipment and facilities of a type and capacity approved by the approving authority;
(2) Locate the trap in a manner that provides ready and easy accessibility for cleaning and inspection; and
(3) Maintain the trap in effective operating condition.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80) Penalty, see § 53.999
§ 53.053 REQUIREMENTS FOR BUILDING SEWERS.
Any person responsible for discharges through a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall, at his own expense and as required
by the approving authority:
(A) Install an accessible and safely located control manhole;
(B) Install meters and other appurtenances to facilitate observation sampling and measurement of the waste; and
(C) Maintain the equipment and facilities.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.054 SAMPLING AND TESTING.
(A) Sampling shall be conducted according to customarily accepted methods, reflecting the effect of constituents upon the sewage
works and determining the existence of hazards to health, life, limb, and property. (NOTE: The particular analyses involved will
determine whether a 24-hour composite sample from all outfalls of a premise is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls.
Where applicable, 16-hour, 8-hour or some other period may be required. Periodic grab samples are used to determine pH.)
(B) Examination and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes required by this subchapter shall be:
(1) Conducted in accordance with the latest edition of “Standard Methods”; and
(2) Determined from suitable samples taken at the control manhole provided or other control point authorized by the
approving authority.
(C) BOD and suspended solids shall be determined from composite sampling, except to detect unauthorized discharges.
(D) The city may select an independent firm or laboratory to determine flow, BOD, and suspended solids.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/422
(E) The city is entitled to select the time of sampling at its sole discretion so long as at least annual samples are taken.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.055 PAYMENT AND AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
(A) Persons making discharges of industrial waste shall pay a charge to cover the cost of collection and treatment.
(B) When discharges of industrial waste are approved by the approving authority, the city or its authorized representative shall
enter into an agreement or arrangement providing:
(1) Terms of acceptance by the city; and
(2) Payment by the person making the discharge.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.056 INDUSTRIAL COST RECOVERY SYSTEM.
Industrial cost recovery shall be as outlined in the current wastewater user charge ordinance. (See §§ 53.095 through 53.104).
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.057 EXISTING DISCHARGERS.
(A) A person discharging industrial wastes into public sewers prior to the effective date of Ord. 113-2-1-21-80 may continue
without penalty so long as he:
(1) Does not increase the quantity or quality of discharge, without permission of the approving authority;
(2) Has discharged the industrial waste at least 12 months prior to the effective date of Ord. 113-2-1-21-80; and
(3) Applies for and is granted a permit no later than 120 days after the effective date of Ord. 113-2-1-21-80.
(B) The city may grant a permit to discharge to persons meeting all requirements of division (A) above, provided that the person:
(1) Submits an application within 90 days after the effective date of Ord. 113-2-1-21-80 on forms supplied by the
approving authority;
(2) Secures approval by the approving authority of plans and specifications for pretreatment facilities when required;
and
(3) Has complied with all requirements for agreements or arrangements including, but not limited to, provisions for
(a) Payment of charges;
(b) Installation and operation of pretreatment facilities; and
(c) Sampling and analysis to determine quantity and strength; and
(4) Provides a sampling point subject to the provisions of this subchapter and approval of the approving authority.
(C) A person applying for a new discharge shall:
(1) Meet all conditions of division (A) of this section; and
(2) Secure a permit prior to discharging any waste.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.058 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
(A) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled
to enter any public or private property at any reasonable time for the purpose of enforcing this subchapter.
(B) Anyone acting under this authority shall observe the establishment's rules and regulations concerning safety, internal security,
and fire protection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/422
(C) Except when caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions, the city shall indemnify the company
against loss or damage to its property by city employees and against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the company and growing out of the sampling operation.
(D) The Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification are entitled
to enter all private properties through which the city holds a negotiated easement for the purposes of:
(1) Inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, or repair;
(2) Maintenance of any portion of the sewerage system lying within the easements; and
(3) Conducting any other authorized activity. All activities shall be conducted in full accordance with the terms of the
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved.
(E) No person acting under authority of this provision may inquire into any processes including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the
public sewers.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.059 AUTHORITY TO DISCONNECT SERVICE.
(A) The city may terminate water and wastewater disposal service and disconnect an industrial customer from the system when:
(1) Acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment process are released to the sewer causing rapid
deterioration of these structures or interfering with proper conveyance and treatment of wastewater;
(2) A governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the wastewater treatment plant is no longer of a
quality permitted for discharge to a watercourse, and it is found that the customer is delivering wastewater to the city's
system that cannot be sufficiently treated or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic
treatment; or
(3) The industrial customer:
(a) Discharges industrial waste or wastewater that is in violation of the permit issued by the approving authority;
(b) Discharges wastewater at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity to cause an imbalance in the
wastewater treatment system;
(c) Fails to pay monthly bills for water and sanitary sewer services when due; or
(d) Repeats a discharge of prohibited wastes to public sewers.
(B) If service is discontinued pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section, the city shall:
(1) Disconnect the customer;
(2) Supply the customer with the governmental agency's report and provide the customer with all pertinent information;
and
(3) Continue disconnection until such time as the industrial customer provides additional pretreatment or other facilities
designed to remove the objectionable characteristics from his industrial wastes.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.060 NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
(A) The city shall serve persons discharging in violation of this subchapter with written notice stating the nature of the violation
and providing a reasonable time limit for satisfactory compliance.
(B) No person may continue discharging in violation of this subchapter beyond the time limit provided in the notice.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
§ 53.061 FURTHER SANCTIONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/422
In addition to sanctions provided for by this subchapter, the city is entitled to exercise sanctions provided for by the other ordinances
of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and sanitary sewer service when due.
(Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80)
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 53.095 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
BILLING CYCLE. The interval of approximately 30 days between successive meter reading dates.
CUSTOMER. Any individual, partnership, association, firm, public or private corporation, builder or developer, or governmental
agency receiving any one or more of the following services from the city at any specified premises: water; wastewater; or solid waste
disposal.
CUSTOMER'S ACCOUNT. Include charges for water and wastewater utility and solid waste disposal services provided by the city.
LIVING UNIT EQUIVALENT. A unit of measure representing the quantity of water consumed and wastewater generated on an
average daily basis from a single-family, detached residence of average size and occupancy.
PRESENTMENT. The mailing of notice of a charge, if such notice is mailed, or the personal delivery of such notice.
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85)
§ 53.096 WATER AND WASTEWATER RATES, FEES AND CHARGES.
The city's waters and wastewater rates, fees and charges will be as set forth in a separate ordinance. (See Table IX of the Table of
Special Ordinances).
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 226-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 261-87-9-22, passed 9-22-87; Am. Ord. 325-
90-09-11, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 505-98-09-22, passed 9-22-98)
§ 53.097 [DELETED]
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 261-87-9-22, passed 9-22-87; Am. Ord. 325-90-09-11, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 340-
91-10-08, passed 10-8-91; Am. Ord. 505-98-09-22, passed 9-22-98)
§ 53.098 TAP FEE.
The tap fee established by Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85, is rescinded effective June 27, 1990, except to the extent that an impact
fee as it existed on June 20, 1987, is assessed, and provision for collection thereof is made, pursuant to § 3.1 of Ord. 319-90-06-26 as
subsequently replaced by 388-93-10-26.
§ 53.099 CAPITAL RECOVERY FEES.
The capital recovery fees established by Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85, are rescinded effective June 27, 1990, except to the
extent that an impact fee as it existed on June 20, 1987, is assessed, and provision for collection thereof is made, pursuant to § 3.1 of
Ord. 319-90-06-26 as subsequently replaced by 388-93-10-26.
§ 53.100 [DELETED]
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 261-87-9-22, passed 9-22-87; Am. Ord. 325-90-09-1 1, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 505-
98-09-22, passed 9-22-98)
§ 53.101 [DELETED]
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 505-98-09-22, passed 9-22-98)
§ 53.102 BILLING; DELINQUENCY.
(A) Billing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/422
(1) A customer's bill for utility services shall be presented to such customer monthly and shall be due and payable to
the city on or before the fifteenth day following its presentment.
(2) Any balance not paid by the due date set out in division (1), above, together with any penalty charge as required in
division (B)(2) below, shall be carried forward to the next billing cycle and shall be added to the current charges. The
entire balance shall be due and payable on or before the fifteenth day following its presentment.
(B) Delinquency.
(1) Any bill for utility services not paid in full by the deadline established in division (A)(1) above, shall be considered
delinquent and a penalty charge shall be added to the customer's billing account.
(2) Payment of a penalty charge as determined in § 53.100(B) shall be required for all customers with delinquent
accounts.
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Am. Ord. 772-05-01-25, passed 1-25-05)
§ 53.103 TERMINATION OF SERVICE.
(A) General. If full payment of a customer's account is not made in accordance with the requirements of § 53.102(A)(2), such
customer is subject to termination of his water utility service.
(B) Notice.
(1) It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after
notice and a meaningful opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for utility service and all
bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address, room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing,
clearly visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
(a) That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth on the bill; and
(b) That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if
the bill is not paid within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for nonpayment;
and
(c) That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall have a right to a hearing at which time he may be
represented in person and by counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in writing his
complaint and contentions to the city official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to order
that the customer's service not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination of the
customer's complaint.
(2) Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only questions of proper and correct billing will
be considered. In the absence of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided herein, service
will be discontinued at the time specified, but in no event until the charges have been due and unpaid for at least 30 days.
(C) Disconnection.
(1) The water utility service of any customer with a delinquent account which is not paid in full by the deadline date set
out in division (B)(2)(b) above, shall be disconnected.
(2) Water utility service disconnected for nonpayment will be restored after payment by the customer of the balance
owed on his account as determined in § 53.102(A)(2), plus the disconnection and reinstatement charges and the deposit,
as set out in §§ 53.100(A) and 53.101(C), respectively.
(D) Waiver. The failure of the city to comply with any time provision contained herein shall not be a waiver of the city's right to
seek termination of water utility service for the reasons specified in this subchapter.
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85)
§ 53.104 VIOLATION.
It shall be deemed a violation of this subchapter to:
(A) Use the water or wastewater service of the city without the knowledge and consent of the City Council;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/422
(B) Interfere or tamper with, deface, or in any way cause injury to the water or wastewater system or its appurtenances;
or
(C) Do any act which otherwise is proscribed by this subchapter.
(Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85)
§ 53.105 NON-MUNICIPALITY OWNED WATER AND SEWER UTILITIES.
(A) The utility ratemaking information ordinance and any and all attachments, including Attachment A - Rate Filing Package
Requirements for Water Utility and Sewer Utility (as these terms are defined herein) is hereby adopted and read with all attachments
as if incorporated into this section for all intents and purpose.
(B) All non-municipally owned water utilities and/or non-municipally owned sewer utilities providing service to customers within
the city's jurisdictional limits must present a full and complete rate filing package (without omissions) that fully conforms with and
complies with this section to the city and such package must be on file with the city for at least 90 days prior to any request for a rate
increase may be considered complete and presented for consideration by the city council pursuant to state law. Municipally owned
water utilities and sewer utilities are exempt from this section.
(Ord. 1135-13-02-22, passed 1-22-13)
DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
§ 53.200 SCOPE.
The requirements of this subchapter are established as the city's drought contingency plan (the “plan”). Copies of this plan will be
available for inspection or reproduction in the office of the city secretary and on the city's website www.pflugervilletx.gov.
§ 53.201 DECLARATION OF POLICY, PURPOSE, AND INTENT.
(A) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with particular regard for
domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public health, welfare, and safety and minimize the
adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the regulations and
restrictions on the delivery and consumption of potable water set forth in this subchapter.
(B) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this plan are considered to be nonessential and continuation of such uses during times
of water shortage or other emergency water supply conditions are deemed to constitute a waste of water which subjects the
offender(s) to penalties as defined in §53.211 of this plan.
(C) The city operates a reuse irrigation system that utilizes wastewater effluent to provide water for irrigation. The use of effluent
irrigation water will not be affected by this plan.
§ 53.202 PUBLIC INVOLVEMENT.
The public was able to provide input into the preparation of this plan during the public hearing that was held prior to city council
consideration of the ordinance adopting this plan.
§ 53.203 PUBLIC EDUCATION.
The city will educate the public about conservation and drought conditions by information distributed from the Water Conservation
Information Center located at the Public Works Department, 15500 Sun Light Near Way #B or call (512) 990-6400. As trigger
conditions approach, the public will be notified through articles on the current conditions and water conservation methods on the
city's internet website.
§ 53.204 COORDINATION WITH REGIONAL WATER PLANNING GROUPS AND COMPLIANCE WITH THE
LCRA WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
The service area of the city is located within the Lower Colorado Regional Water Planning Area and the city will provide a copy of
this plan to the regional water planning group. The city will comply with firm water drought response requirements as required in the
Lower Colorado River Authority Water Management Plan.
§ 53.205 AUTHORIZATION.
The city manager is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions of this plan upon determination that such
implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare. The city manager may initiate or terminate drought or other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/422
water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan.
§ 53.206 APPLICATION.
The provisions of this plan apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the city. The terms “person” and
“customer” as used in this plan includes individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, and all other legal entities.
§ 53.207 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions apply:
AESTHETIC WATER USE. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and water gardens.
COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL WATER USE. Water use that is integral to the operations of commercial and nonprofit
establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants, and office buildings.
CONSERVATION. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the loss or waste of
water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so that a supply is conserved and made
available for future or alternative uses.
CUSTOMER. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
DOMESTIC WATER USE. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking, bathing, heating,
cooking, sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
DRIP IRRIGATION SYSTEM. Small diameter pressurized lines directly buried in the soil to a nominal depth of six inches and
containing pressure reducing emitters to restrict water flow to a very low rate.
HOUSEHOLD. The residential premises served by the customer's meter.
INDUSTRIAL WATER USE. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms having greater
usability and value.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION USE. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly or privately
owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, athletic fields, parks, and rights-of-way and medians.
NONESSENTIAL WATER USE: Water uses that are neither essential nor required for the protection of public health, safety, and
welfare, including:
(1) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(2) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or other hard-surfaced
areas;
(3) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;
(4) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(5) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or Jacuzzi-type pools;
(6) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to support aquatic life;
(7) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice directing the repair
of such leak(s); and
(8) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than firefighting.
OUTDOOR WATER USE DAY FOR STAGE 1 AND STAGE 2. The day that a customer may use water outdoors for purposes
permitted by this subchapter. Addresses, box numbers or rural postal route numbers ending in the following number are assigned the
following days for outdoor water use:
(1) Wednesday and Saturday: Residential homes with a street address ending in an odd number.
(2) Thursday and Sunday: Residential homes with a street address ending in an even number.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/422
(3) Tuesday and Friday: Watering days for commercial facilities including apartments, condominiums, civic,
commercial, industrial and institutional properties.
(4) Monday: No watering.
PERSONS PER HOUSEHOLD. Includes only those persons currently physically residing at the premises and expected to reside
there for the entire billing period.
§ 53.208 TRIGGERING CRITERIA FOR INITIATION AND TERMINATION OF DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.
The city will monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and will advise the mayor and the city council when
conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan. The city manager may order that the appropriate stage of water
conservation be implemented or terminated in accordance with the applicable provisions of this subchapter by public notification.
Public notification of the initiation or termination of drought response stages will be by means of posting notices on the city website
and social media sites. The triggering criteria described below are based on the statistical analysis of the vulnerability of the city's
water source under drought of record conditions.
The triggering criteria described below are based on the statistical analysis of the vulnerability of the city's water source under
drought of record conditions.
(A) Stage 1 - mild water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers will be requested to voluntarily conserve water and adhere to the
prescribed restrictions on nonessential water uses, defined in §53.209(A) of this plan year round.
(B) Stage 2 - moderate water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers must comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain
nonessential water uses, defined in §53.207 of this plan, from March 1st through October 31st or when the average
daily water consumption reaches 80% of production distribution capacity for a period of three consecutive days, or
the combined storage of the Highland Lakes falls to 900,000 acre-feet. At 900,000 acre-feet the city manager must
implement our stage 2 water restrictions as mandated under the city's wholesale water purchase contract with the
Lower Colorado River Authority.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 2 of this plan may be rescinded by the city manager when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days or by the city council if
any of the conditions listed as triggering events, other than requirements imposed by the city's wholesale water
contract with the Lower Colorado River Authority, have ceased to exist and the city council finds that termination of
the drought response stage 2 will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. Upon termination of stage
2, stage 1 becomes operative.
(C) Stage 3 - severe water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers must comply with the requirements and restrictions on certain
nonessential water uses for stage 3 of this plan when the average daily water consumption reaches 90% of
production/distribution capacity for a period of 3 consecutive days; or the combined storage of the Highland Lakes
falls to 700,000 acre-feet or the city manager determines that stage 3 implementation is necessary to protect the
city's water supply for essential usages. No variances will be granted during stage 3 severe water shortage
conditions.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 3 of this plan may be rescinded by the city manager when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days or by the city council if
any of the conditions listed as triggering events, other than requirements imposed by the city's wholesale water
contract with the Lower Colorado River Authority, have ceased to exist and the city council finds that termination of
the drought response stage 3 will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. Upon termination of stage
3, the city will determine what stage will become operative, based on current lake levels.
(D) Stage 4 - emergency water shortage conditions.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers must comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 4 of this
plan when the city manager determines that a water supply emergency exists based on:
(a) The combined storage of the Highland Lakes reaches 600,000 acre-feet or Lake Pflugerville is down to
its 625 elevation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/422
(b) Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, and cause unexpected loss of capability to
provide water service;
(c) System demand exceeds available high service pump capacity;
(d) There is detection of accidental or intentional contamination of the water system;
(e) There is detection of water systems failure from acts of God (e.g., tornados, hurricanes, etc.) or man;
(f) A mechanical failure of pumping equipment occurs during a moderate drought and will require more
than 12 hours to repair; or
(g) Implementation is necessary under the city's wholesale water contract with the Lower Colorado River
Authority.
(2) Requirements for termination. Stage 4 of this plan may be rescinded by the city manager when all of the
conditions listed as triggering events have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days or the emergency
condition no longer exists or by the city council if any of the conditions listed as triggering events, other than
requirements imposed by the city's wholesale water contract with the Lower Colorado River Authority, have ceased
to exist and the city council finds that termination of the drought response stage 2 will not adversely affect the
public health, safety or welfare.
(E) Water rationing.
(1) Requirements for initiation. Customers must comply with the water allocation plan prescribed in §53.210 of
this plan and comply with the requirements and restrictions for stage 4 of this plan when the city manager
determines that water rationing is necessary.
(2) Requirements for termination. Water rationing may be rescinded when all of the conditions listed warranting
water rationing have ceased to exist for a period of 3 consecutive days.
§ 53.209 DROUGHT RESPONSE STAGES.
The public works department will monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily basis and, in accordance with the
triggering criteria set forth in §53.208 of this plan, will recommend to the city manager the extent of the conservation required
through the implementation or termination of particular conservation stages in order for the city to prudently plan for and supply
water to its customers. The city manager may order the appropriate stage of water conservation implemented or terminated in
accordance with the applicable provisions of this subchapter by public notification. The conservation stage will take effect
immediately upon public notification:
(A) Stage 1 - mild water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a voluntary 5% reduction in average daily water use (e.g., total water use, daily water demand,
etc.).
(2) Supply management measures. The city must comply with the voluntary water use restrictions year round.
(3) Required water use restrictions. Outdoor irrigation by a permanently installed automatic irrigation system is
prohibited between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. This prohibition does not apply to irrigation:
(a) Using treated wastewater effluent or raw water; or
(b) During repair or testing of a new or existing irrigation system; or
(c) At a commercial plant nursery; or
(d) Watering with a handheld hose with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
(4) Voluntary water use restrictions.
(a) Customers whose use is not restricted by stage 1, as referenced in subsection (A)(3) are requested to
voluntarily comply with the restrictions in subsection (B) stage 2.
(b) All city operations will comply with the water use restrictions prescribed for stage 1 of this plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/422
(c) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or discontinue water use
for nonessential purposes.
(5) Prohibited waste of water. The following uses constitute a waste of water and are prohibited:
(a) Failing to repair a controllable leak, including a broken sprinkler head, a leaking valve, or a leaking
faucet;
(b) Operating a permanently installed irrigation system with a broken head, with a head that is out of
adjustment and spraying more than 10 percent of the spray on a street or parking lot, or that is misting;
(c) During irrigation:
(i) Allowing a substantial amount of water to run off a property; or
(ii) Allowing water to pond in the street or parking lot to a depth greater than 1/4 of an inch.
(B) Stage 2 - moderate water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a 10 percent reduction in average daily water use (e.g., total water use, daily water demand,
etc.).
(2) Supply management measures. The city will reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains; reduce or
discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas; use an alternative water supply source, where possible; and use
reclaimed water for non-potable purposes, where possible. The city will comply with the water use restrictions for
stage 2 when stage 2 is implemented.
(3) Water use restrictions. The water use and waste restrictions in stage 1, as referenced in subsection (A) and the
following water use restrictions will apply to all customers during stage 2:
(a) Outdoor irrigation is permitted at any time if it is by means of a handheld hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less.
(b) Outdoor irrigation is permitted by a hose end sprinkler, a soaker hose, or drip irrigation, from 12:00
midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on an outdoor water use day as designated by the city.
(c) Outdoor irrigation is permitted by a permanently installed automatic irrigation system from 12:00
midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight on an outdoor water use day as designated by the city.
(d) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle is prohibited
except on designated watering days from 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. Such
washing, when allowed, must be done with a handheld bucket or a handheld hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle. This restriction does not apply to a commercial carwash or a commercial service station or if
washing is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. Charity carwashes are prohibited
without a permit approved by the city.
(e) Watering the ground around a foundation to prevent foundation cracking is prohibited except on a
designated outdoor water use day from 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. or 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(f) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzitype
pools is permitted.
(g) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is prohibited, except
where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are equipped with a recirculation
system.
(h) Use of water from hydrants will be limited to firefighting and related activities, or other activities
necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare, except that use of water from designated fire hydrants
for construction purposes may be allowed under a permit for construction water from the city.
(i) Use of water for the irrigation of golf course greens, tees, and fairways is prohibited except on designated
watering days between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight. However,
if the golf course utilizes an irrigation water source other than potable water obtained from the utility
provider's water distribution system, the facility will not be subject to these regulations.
(j) All restaurants are prohibited from serving water to their customers except upon the customer's request.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/422
(4) The following uses of water are nonessential and prohibited except to alleviate an immediate health or safety
hazard:
(a) Wash down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, patios or other hardsurfaced
areas;
(b) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire protection;
(c) Use of water for dust control;
(d) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street; and
(e) Failure to repair a controllable leak within a reasonable period after being given notice to repair such
leak.
(5) Notwithstanding the prohibitions in this section, irrigation of new landscape installation is permitted. In that
event, irrigation may only occur during the hours permitted under subsection (A)(3) and in accordance with the
following 30-day irrigation schedule:
(a) For the first ten days after installation, once a day;
(b) For day 11 through 20 after installation, once every other day; and
(c) For day 21 through 30 after installation, once every third day.
(6) The stage 2 restrictions do not apply to the following:
(a) The necessary use of water other than for landscape irrigation, by a governmental entity in pursuit of a
governmental function for the benefit of the public, including for a capital improvement construction project;
(b) the necessary use of water, other than for landscape irrigation, for land development including roadway
base preparation, flushing utility lines, dust control, concrete or asphalt work and building construction;
(c) The necessary use of water for repair of a water distribution facility, residential and commercial
plumbing, or a permanently installed landscape irrigation system;
(d) The use of water under a variance granted by the review board in accordance with §53.212.; and
(e) Drip irrigation systems as long as any leaks are repaired in a timely manner, and there's no ponding or
runoff do to over watering.
(C) Stage 3 - severe water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a 25 percent reduction in average daily water usage (e.g., total water use, daily water demand,
etc.).
(2) Supply management measures. The city will reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains; reduce or
discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas; use an alternative water supply source, where possible; and use
reclaimed water for non-potable purposes, where possible. The city must comply with the water use restrictions for
stage 3 when stage 3 is implemented.
(3) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 will remain in effect during stage 3 except:
(a) Irrigation of landscaped areas by any means is limited to a once a week watering schedule on the
designated watering day, during designated watering times 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to
12:00 midnight The last digit of your street address will determine your watering day.
0 or 1 Monday
2 or 3 Tuesday
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/422
4 or 5 Wednesday
6 or 7 Thursday
8 or 9 Friday
(b) Outdoor irrigation is permitted on all days, only during the designated watering times 12:00 midnight to
10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight, if it is by means of a handheld hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less.
(c) The watering of golf course fairways is prohibited unless golf course utilizes an irrigation water source
other than potable water obtained from the utility provider's distribution system.
(d) The washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes, and other types of mobile equipment not
occurring on the immediate premises of a commercial carwash or a commercial service station and not
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare is prohibited.
(e) Commercial plant nurseries may use only handheld hoses, handheld watering cans, or drip irrigation.
(f) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzitype
pools is permitted.
(D) Stage 4 - emergency water shortage conditions.
(1) Goal. Achieve a 30 percent reduction in average daily water use (e.g., total water use, daily water demand,
etc.) from a rolling 12-month period.
(2) Supply management measures. The city must reduce or discontinue flushing of water mains; reduce or
discontinue irrigation of public landscaped areas; use an alternative water supply source, where possible; and use
reclaimed water for non-potable purposes, where possible. The city must comply with the water use restrictions for
stage 4 when the restrictions are implemented.
(3) Water use restrictions. All requirements of stage 2 and 3 will remain in effect during stage 4 except:
(a) Outdoor irrigation is permitted on all days, only during the designated watering times 12:00 midnight to
10:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight, if it is by means of a handheld hose equipped with a positive
shutoff nozzle, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five gallons or less.
(b) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading pools, or Jacuzzitype
pools is permitted on all days, only during the designated watering times 12:00 midnight to 10:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m. to 12:00 midnight.
(c) Irrigation other than drip irrigation of new landscape installation under subsection (B)(5) is prohibited.
(4) No applications for building permits for new pools or irrigation facilities other than drip irrigation systems
will be allowed or approved.
§ 53.210 WATER RATIONING.
If water shortage conditions threaten public health, safety, and welfare, the city manager may ration water according to the following
water allocation plan:
(A) Single-family residential customers.
(1) The allocation to residential water customers residing in a single-family dwelling will be as follows:
Persons per Household Gallons per Month
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/422
1 or 2 6,000
3 or 4 7,000
5 or 6 8,000
7 or 8 9,000
9 or 10 10,000
11 or more 12,000
(2) It will be assumed that a particular customer's household is comprised of two persons unless the customer
notifies the city of a greater number of persons per household on a form prescribed by the city manager. The city
manager will use best efforts to see that the forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or made available to every
residential customer. If, however, a customer does not receive such a form, it will be the customer's responsibility to
go to the city utility billing offices to complete and sign the form claiming more than two persons per household.
New customers may claim more persons per household at the time of applying for water service on the form
prescribed by the city manager. When the number of persons per household increases so as to place the customer in
a different allocation category, the customer may notify the city on such form and the change will be implemented in
the next practicable billing period. If the number of persons in a household is reduced, the customer must notify the
city in writing within two days.
(3) Any person who falsely reports the number of persons in a household or fails to timely notify the city of a
reduction in the number of person in a household commits a class C misdemeanor offense and may be fined not less
than $50.00 and more than $500.00. No culpable mental state is required to prove this offense. However, if it is
shown on the trial of the offense that the offense was committed intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with
criminal negligence then the person may be fined not more than $2,000.00.
(4) Residential water customers who exceed their monthly allocation of water will pay the following surcharges:
(a) $2.50 per 100 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(b) $5.00 per 100 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(c) $7.50 per 100 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(d) $10.00 per 100 gallons for any additional amount over allocation.
(5) Surcharges shall be cumulative, added to the monthly utility bill, and subject to late payment penalties
including suspension of services.
(B) Master-metered multifamily residential customers.
(1) A customer billed from a master meter that jointly measures water to multiple permanent residential dwelling
units (e.g., apartments, mobile homes) will be allocated 6,000 gallons per month for each dwelling unit. All master
meter customers shall notify the city of the number of dwelling units served from the master meter on a form
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/422
prescribed by the city manager. The city will use best efforts to see that the forms are mailed, otherwise provided, or
made available to every customer. If, however, a customer does not receive a form, it will be the customer's
responsibility to go to the city utility billing offices to complete and sign the form claiming the number of dwelling
units. A dwelling unit may be claimed under this provision whether it is occupied or not. New customers may claim
more dwelling units at the time of applying for water service on the form prescribed by the city manager. If the
number of dwelling units served by a master meter is reduced, the customer must notify the city in writing within
two days. In prescribing the method for claiming more than two dwelling units, the city manager will adopt methods
to insure the accuracy of the claim.
(2) Any person who falsely reports the number of dwelling units served by a master meter or fails to timely notify
the city of a reduction in the number of persons in a household commits a class C misdemeanor offense and may be
fined not less than $500.00. No culpable mental state is required to prove this offense. However, if it is shown on the
trial of the offense that the offense was committed intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence
then the person may be fined not more than $2,000.00.
(3) Customers billed from a master meter under this provision who exceed their monthly allocations must pay the
following monthly surcharges:
(a) $2.50 per 100 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation up through 1,000 gallons for each
dwelling unit.
(b) $5.00 per 100 gallons, thereafter, for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation up through a second
1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit.
(c) $7.50 per 100 gallons, thereafter, for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation up through a third
1,000 gallons for each dwelling unit.
(d) $10.00 per 100 gallons, thereafter for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(4) Surcharges shall be cumulative, added to the monthly utility bill, and subject to late payment penalties
including suspension of services.
(C) Commercial customers.
(1) A monthly water usage allocation will be established by the city for each nonresidential commercial customer
other than an industrial customer who uses water for processing purposes. The nonresidential customer's allocation
will be 75% of the customer's usage for corresponding month's billing period for the immediately preceding 12
months. If the customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which
there is a record will be used for any monthly period for which no history exists. Provided, however, a customer,
75% of whose monthly usage is less than 6,000 gallons, will be allocated 6,000 gallons. The city will use best
efforts to see that notice of each nonresidential customer's allocation is mailed to each customer. If, however, a
customer does not receive the notice, it will be the customer's responsibility to contact the city utility billing offices
to determine the allocation. Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city, the allocation may be
reduced or increased if: (a) the designated period does not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage; (b)
one nonresidential customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to another nonresidential customer in a binding
agreement satisfactory to the city; or (c) other objective evidence demonstrates that the designated allocation is
inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal the request for allocation decision to the city manager.
(2) Nonresidential commercial customers who exceed monthly allocation must pay the following surcharges:
(a) Customers whose allocation is 0 gallons through 10,000 gallons per month:
(i) $2.50 per 100 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(ii) $5.00 per 100 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iii) $7.50 per 100 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iv) $10.00 per 100 gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(b) Customers whose allocation is 10,001 gallons per month or more:
(i) $5.00 per 100 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through 5 percent
above allocation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/422
(ii) $10.00 per 100 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons from 5 percent through 10 percent above
allocation.
(iii) $15.00 per 100 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons from 10 percent through 15 percent above
allocation.
(iv) $20.00 per 100 gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation.
(3) Surcharges shall be cumulative, added to the monthly utility bill, and subject to late payment penalties
including suspension of services.
(D) Industrial customers.
(1) A monthly water usage allocation will be established by the city for each industrial customer. The industrial
customer's allocation will be approximately 90% of the customer's water usage baseline as defined below. Ninety
days after the initial imposition of the allocation for industrial customers, the industrial customer's allocation will be
further reduced to 80% of the customer's water usage baseline. The industrial customer's water usage baseline will
be computed on the average water usage for the immediately preceding 12-month period. If the industrial water
customer's billing history is shorter than 12 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record
will be used for any monthly period for which no billing history exists. The city will use best efforts to see that
notice of each industrial customer's allocation is mailed to each customer. If, however, a customer does not receive
the notice, it will be the customer's responsibility to contact the city utility billing offices to determine the allocation,
and the allocation will be fully effective notwithstanding the lack of receipt of written notice. Upon request of the
customer or at the initiative of the city, the allocation may be reduced or increased if: (a) the designated period does
not accurately reflect the customer's normal water usage because the customer had shutdown a major processing
unit for repair or overhaul during the period; (b) the customer has added or is in the process of adding significant
additional processing capacity; (c) the customer has shutdown or significantly reduced the production of a major
processing unit; (d) the customer has previously implemented significant permanent water conservation measures
such that the ability to further reduce usage is limited; (e) the customer agrees to transfer part of its allocation to
another industrial customer in a binding document satisfactory to the city; or (f) if other objective evidence
demonstrates that the designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an
allocation established hereunder to the city manager.
(2) Industrial customers who exceed monthly allocation must pay the following surcharges:
(a) Customers whose allocation is 0 gallons through 20,000 gallons per month:
(i) $2.50 per 100 gallons for the first 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(ii) $5.00 per 100 gallons for the second 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iii) $7.50 per 100 gallons for the third 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(iv) $10.00 per 100 gallons for each additional 1,000 gallons over allocation.
(b) Customers whose allocation is 20,001 gallons per month or more:
(i) $5.00 per 100 for the first 1,000 gallons in excess of the allocation up through 5 percent above
allocation.
(ii) $10.00 per 100 for the second 1,000 gallons from 5 percent through 10 percent above allocation.
(iii) $15.00 per 100 for the third 1,000 gallons from 10 percent through 15 percent above allocation.
(iv) $20.00 per 100 for each additional 1,000 gallons more than 15 percent above allocation.
(3) Surcharges shall be cumulative, added to the monthly utility bill, and subject to late payment penalties
including suspension of services.
§ 53.211 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) No person may allow the use of water from the city for residential, commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any
other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response
stage in effect at the time.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/422
(B) Proof of a culpable mental state is not required for a conviction of an offense established under §53.210 or levy of an
administrative fee under this section. Any person, including a person classified as a water customer of the city, in apparent control of
the property where a violation occurs or originates, is presumed to be the violator. Each day that one or more of the provisions in this
plan is violated is a separate offense. A person who violates any provision of this plan may be subject to the civil actions and
administrative fees detailed below.
(C) The city may take the following civil actions for water use violations in affect for stages 2, 3 and 4.
(1) First notice. The customer will be given a YELLOW notice of the violation outlining the city's watering schedule
and drought stage.
(2) Second notice. The customer will be given a RED notice of the violation along with a letter from the city outlining
the watering violation. A visit will be made by the city to inform the homeowner about our water restrictions that are in
place and ideas to conserve water.
(3) Third notice. The customer will receive a letter from the city informing them of the $100.00 administrative fee
being added to their water bill.
(4) Fourth notice. The customer will receive a certified letter or phone call informing them their water is being
disconnected due to continuing violations of the current water restrictions set forth in this plan.
(D) Any employee of the city designated by the city manager may issue an administrative notice and/or fee described above to a
person reasonably believed to be in violation of this plan. The notice of administrative fee will be prepared in duplicate and will
contain the name and address of the alleged violator, if known and will inform the person that the fee will be added to their water
bill.
§ 53.212 VARIANCES.
(A) A review board consisting of the city staff members appointed by the city manager will be established on May 1 of each year.
The review board will review hardship and special cases that cannot strictly comply with this subchapter to determine whether the
cases warrant a variance, permit, or compliance agreement (collectively, “variance”).
(B) All applications for a variance must be submitted to the review board on an “application for variance/permit/compliance
agreement” form and must include a non-refundable fee of $200.00 and the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s);
(2) Purpose of water use;
(3) Specific provision(s) of this plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief;
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of this plan adversely affects the petitioner or what damage or
harm will occur to the petitioner or others if petitioner complies with this subchapter;
(5) Description of the relief requested;
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought;
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take to meet the intent of
this plan and the compliance date; and
(8) Other pertinent information.
(C) The review board will make a determination no later than the 5th working day after receipt of a properly completed
“application for variance/permit/compliance agreement” form and the non-refundable administrative fee of $200.00 is received by
the review board.
(D) Until the review board has acted on an application, the applicant must comply with all provisions of this subchapter. The
review board may not approve a variance if the terms and conditions do not meet or exceed the purpose and intent of this subchapter.
(E) A variance may be granted only for reasons of economic hardship or health conditions substantiated by a licensed physician. In
this section, “economic hardship” means an imminent threat to a person's or entities primary source of income. If the review board
determines there is an economic hardship, it may authorize the implementation of alternative water use restrictions that further the
purposes of this plan. The alternative water use restrictions must be set forth on the face of the variance and the customer must keep
a copy of the variance in a location that is accessible by and visible to the public. Inconvenience or the potential for damage to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/422
landscaping does not constitute an economic hardship under this section. NO VARIANCES MAY BE GRANTED WHILE THE
CITY IS IN STAGE 3 OF THIS PLAN OR HIGHER.
(F) The review board may, in writing, grant a temporary variance for existing water uses otherwise prohibited under this plan if it
determines that failure to grant such variance would cause an emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire
protection for the public or the person requesting such variance and if either of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water supply shortage or
other condition for which this plan is in effect; or
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented that will achieve the same level of reduction in water use.
(G) Variances granted by the city are subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the review board;
(1) Variances must include a timetable for compliance; and
(2) Variances expire when this plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has failed to meet specified
requirements.
(H) A variance may not be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring before the variance is issued.
§ 53.213 WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS IMPLEMENTATION OF PLAN.
Each wholesale customer of the city must develop and implement a water conservation plan or water conservation measures using
the applicable elements in this plan. If the wholesale customer intends to resell the water, then the contract between the city and the
wholesale customer must provide that the contract for the resale of the water must have water conservation requirements so that each
successive customer in the resale of the water will be required to implement water conservation measures in accordance with
applicable provision of this plan.
§ 53.214 PRO RATA WATER ALLOCATION (WHOLESALE CUSTOMERS).
(A) In the event that the triggering criteria specified in §53.208 of this subchapter have been met, the city manager is hereby
authorized initiate allocation of water supplies on a pro rata basis in accordance with Texas Water Code §11.039 and according to the
following water allocation policies and procedures:
(1) A wholesale customer's monthly allocation shall be a percentage of the customer's water usage baseline. The
percentage will be set by resolution of the city council based on the city manager's assessment of the severity of the water
shortage condition and the need to curtail water diversions and/or deliveries and may be adjusted periodically by
resolution of the city council as conditions warrant. Once pro rata allocation is in effect, water diversions by or deliveries
to each wholesale customer shall be limited to the allocation established for each month.
(2) A monthly water usage allocation shall be established by the city manager, or his/her designee, for each wholesale
customer. The wholesale customer's water usage baseline will be computed on the average water usage by month for the
36-month period immediately prior to the implementation of the computation. If the wholesale water customer's billing
history is less than 36 months, the monthly average for the period for which there is a record shall be used for any
monthly period for which no billing history exists.
(3) The city shall provide notice, by certified mail, to each wholesale customer informing them of their monthly water
usage allocations and shall notify the news media and the executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality upon initiation of pro rata water allocation.
(4) Upon request of the customer or at the initiative of the city, the allocation may be reduced or increased if: (a) the
designated period does not accurately reflect the wholesale customer's normal water usage; (b) the customer agrees to
transfer part of its allocation to another wholesale customer; or (c) other objective evidence demonstrates that the
designated allocation is inaccurate under present conditions. A customer may appeal an allocation established hereunder
to the city council.
(B) The requirements of this section must be included in any contract that is entered into, renewed or amended after the effective
date of this section.
§ 53.215 SEVERABILITY.
If any provision of this plan is illegal, invalid, or unenforceable under present or future laws, the remainder of this plan will not be
affected and, in lieu of each illegal, invalid, or unenforceable provision, a provision as similar in terms to the illegal, invalid, or
unenforceable provision as is possible and is legal, valid, and enforceable will be added to this plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/422
(Ord. 558-99-09-14, passed 09-14-99; Ord. 579-00-03-14, passed 3-14-00; Ord. 588-00-06-27, passed 6-27-00; Ord. 603-00-10-10,
passed 10-10-00; Ord. 664-02-03-12, passed 3-12-02; Ord. 677-02-09-10, passed 9-10-02; Ord. 681-02-10-22, passed 10-22-02; Ord.
909-07-09-25, passed 9-25-07; Ord. 1074-11-04-26, passed 4-26-11; Ord. 1147-13-06-25, passed 6-25-13; Ord. 1162-13-10-22,
passed 10-22-13; Ord. 1393-19-04-23, passed 4-23-19)
§ 53.999 PENALTY.
(A) Any person, firm, or corporation who violates any provision of §§ 53.001 or 53.104 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty
shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(B) Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§ 53.015 through 53.026 is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding $2,000 for each offense. Each day of violation constitutes a separate offense. It shall be a
valid affirmative defense to any prosecution hereunder if either of the following matters are shown to exist:
(1) That the facts constituting a violation are not known to the defendant and could not have been known by him by the
exercise of reasonable diligence, or
(2) That despite good faith, reasonable and diligent effort on the part of the defendant to avoid and not commit or suffer
the acts, conduct or conditions charged as constituting the violation, it was not reasonably possible for one in the
defendant's position to in any way avoid committing or suffering the violation, and such impossibility did not arise from
any wrongful or negligent conduct or inaction on the defendant's part. Provided further, that the mere inconvenience,
effort or expense to defendant to avoid a violation will not constitute a defense.
(C) A person who continues prohibited discharges in violation of §§ 53.040 through 53.061 is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction is punishable by a fine of not more than $500 for each act of violation and for each day of violation. In addition to
proceeding under authority of this division (B), the city is entitled to pursue all other criminal and civil remedies to which it is
entitled under authority of statutes or other ordinances against a person continuing prohibited discharges.
(Ord. 54-7-15-74, passed 7-15-74; Am. Ord. 68-75-5-19, passed 5-19-75; Ord. 113-2-1-21-80, passed 1-21-80; Ord. 172-83-11-7,
passed 11-7-83; Ord. 206-85-7-30, passed 7-30-85; Ord. 219-85-12-3, passed 12-3-85; Ord. 260-87-08-11, passed 8-11-87; Ord. 325-
90-09-11, passed 9-11-90; Ord. 772-05-01-25, passed 1-25-05; Ord. 1074-11-04-26, passed 4-26-11)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
CHAPTER 70: TRAFFIC RULES
GENERAL RULES
§ 70.01 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
(A) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, as the term AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE is defined by state law,
TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE, § 541.201, when responding to an emergency call or when in the pursuit of an actual or
suspected violator of the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may exercise the privileges set forth in
this section, but subject to the conditions herein stated.
(B) The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
(1) Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this [chapter] or any ordinance;
(2) Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after slowing down as may be necessary for safe operation;
(3) Exceed the prima facie speed limits so long as he does not endanger life or property;
(4) Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in specified directions.
(C) The exemptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall apply only when such vehicle is making use of
audible or visual signals meeting the requirements of Tex. Transportation Code, §§ 546.003 et seq., (Uniform Act Regulating Traffic
on Highways), except that any authorized emergency vehicle operated as a police vehicle need not be equipped with or display a red
light visible from the front of the vehicle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/422
(Ord. 590-00-06-27, passed 6-27-00)
(D) The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons, nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences of his reckless disregard for
the safety of others.
(E) Provisions of this traffic code applicable to drivers upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicle owned or
operated by the United States, the State of Texas, or any county, city, town, district or any other political subdivision of the state,
subject to such specific exceptions as are set forth in this traffic code with reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80) Penalty, see § 70.99
§ 70.02 SPEED LIMITS.
Except as otherwise provided, the prima facie maximum speed within the city on all streets and highways is 30 miles per hour.
(Ord. 75-75-11-17, passed 11-17-75; Am. Ord. 316-90-04-10, passed 4-10-90) Penalty, see § 70.99
TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
§ 70.15 OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
All traffic-control devices including signs, signals, and markings (pavement and/or curb) installed or used for the purpose of
directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform to the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways, Volumes I and II (hereafter called the Manual). Pursuant to TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE, § 544.002, all signs,
signals, and markings erected or used by the city shall be uniform and be located so far as practicable according to the directions
shown in the Manual throughout the city/county. All existing traffic-control devices and those erected in the future by the city being
consistent with the Manual, state law and this chapter shall be official traffic-control devices.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80)
§ 70.16 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES REQUIRED.
The driver of any vehicle, motor vehicle or animal shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device, sign, signal or
marking applicable thereto placed in accordance with this chapter, the Manual and any ordinance directing that such traffic-control
device, sign or signal shall be installed or erected unless otherwise directed by a law enforcement officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle permitted by § 70.01.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80)
Statutory reference–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004.
§ 70.17 RESERVED.
Editor's note–Former section 70.17 pertaining to the authority of the chief of police to install traffic-control devices was repealed by Ordinance 905-07-09-11
adopted September 11, 2007.
§ 70.18 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS OR DEVICES.
(A) No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any highway, street or alley any unauthorized sign, signal,
marking or device which purports to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic-control device or railroad sign or signal,
or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or which hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any official
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal.
(B) No person shall place or maintain nor shall any public authority permit upon any highway, street or alley any traffic sign or
signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
(C) A person may not place or maintain a flashing light or flashing electric sign within 1,000 feet of an intersection except under a
permit issued by the state Transportation Commission.
(D) This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private property adjacent to highways, streets or alleys of signs
giving useful directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
(E) Every such prohibited sign, signal or marking is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the Chief of Police or other
authority is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be moved without notice.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/422
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80)
Penalty--See § 70.99.
Statutory reference–Display of unauthorized signs, signals or markings, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.006.
§ 70.19 ALTERING, DEFACING OR INJURING DEVICES.
No person shall without lawful authority attempt to or in any fact alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official trafficcontrol
device, sign or signal or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia thereon, or any part thereof.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80)
Penalty--See § 70.99.
Statutory reference–Interference with traffic-control devices or railroad signs or signals, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.005.
§ 70.20 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE.
It being unlawful for any person other than the Chief of Police, acting pursuant to an ordinance of the city, to install or cause to be
installed any signal, sign or device purporting to direct the use of the streets or the activities on those streets of pedestrians, vehicles,
motor vehicles, or animals, proof, in any prosecution for a violation of this subchapter or any traffic ordinance of the city that any
traffic-control device, sign, signal or marking was actually in place on any street shall constitute prima facie evidence that the same
was installed by the Chief of Police pursuant to the authority of this subchapter and of the ordinance directing the installation of such
device, sign, signal or marking.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80)
§ 70.30 DESIGNATION OF LOAD LIMITS.
The City Engineer and Director of the Street Department may determine and designate appropriate load limits for city streets to
prohibit traffic that is found to be incompatible with the normal and safe movement of traffic or with the quality of the street
condition and, under the direction of the Chief of Police as provided in § 70.17, must erect appropriate official traffic-control devices
to notify the public of the load limits.
(Ord. 530-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99)
§ 70.31 LOAD LIMITS ON STATE STREETS.
No person may transport loads over State maintained streets within the City that exceed the legal limits for weight, length, height or
width as established by the TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE § 621.101 unless they possess a permit issued by the State. The City
Engineer and Director of the Street Department may, with the State's prior agreement, reduce the load limits as needed to avoid
damage to Streets or ensure traffic safety. With the State's prior agreement, the Chief of Police will erect traffic-control devices to
notify the public of any load limits.
(Ord. 530-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99)
§ 70.32 ENFORCEMENT OF LOAD LIMITS.
The Police Department will enforce all load limits within the City in accordance with Chapter 621, Subchapter F of the TEXAS
TRANSPORTATION CODE. Load limits may not be enforced until appropriate traffic-control devices have been erected.
(Ord. 530-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99)
§ 70.33 THROUGH-TRUCK TRAFFIC.
(A) Definitions.
(1) AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY TRUCKS. Fire department trucks, police trucks, public or private ambulances for
which permits have been issued by the State Board of Health, emergency trucks of municipal departments or public
service corporations as are designated or authorized by the governing body of an incorporated city, private trucks operated
by volunteer firemen or certified Emergency Medical Services volunteers while answering a fire alarm or responding to a
medical emergency, and trucks owned by the state or by a political subdivision engaged in emergency utility repair or
electric, water, or wastewater services.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/422
(2) LIGHT TRUCK. Any truck with a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity of two thousand (2,000) pounds or less,
including trucks commonly known as pickup trucks, panel delivery trucks, and carryall trucks.
(3) PROOF OF ROUTE. A written verification of pick-ups, deliveries, or destinations, which may include a log book,
delivery slip, shipping order, bill, or any other document which identifies and specifies the date, address, and name of the
person requesting or directing the pick-up or delivery and the destination of the pick up or delivery.
(4) THROUGH TRUCK. Trucks having no destination, pick-up, or delivery point within the corporate limits of the city.
(5) TRUCK. A motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, including
“truck tractors,” “road tractors,” “trailers,” “semitrailers,” “pole trailers,” and “special mobile equipment,” as those terms
are defined in Tex. Transp. Code Ann. §541.201 (Vernon 1999).
Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
(B) Through Truck Traffic.
(1) Regulations.
(a) All public streets except North Railroad Avenue; Pflugerville Parkway; Wilke Lane; 10th Street; Heatherwilde
Boulevard; Dessau Road; Immanuel Road; Pecan Street (FM 1825); FM 685; Weiss Lane; Wells Branch Parkway;
Grand Avenue Parkway/AW Grimes; Kelly Lane; Rowe Lane; Cele Road; SH 45 and SH 130 within the corporate
limits of the city are closed to through-truck traffic.
(b) The prohibition in this section does not apply to authorized emergency trucks, light trucks, or trucks with
drivers that are able to produce proof of route within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 611-00-12-12, passed 12-12-00; Ord. 1192-14-10-14, passed 10-14-14)
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of §§ 70.01, or 70.15 through 70.20, or 70.30 through 70.33 shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 123-80-6-16, passed 6-16-80; Am. Ord. 260-87-08-11, passed 8-11-87; Am. Ord. 530-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99; Am. Ord.
611-00-12-12, passed 12-12-00)
(B) The driving or operating of any motor vehicle on or along any portion of a public street of the city at a rate of speed that is
greater than the maximum rate of speed fixed by this traffic code shall be a violation of this traffic code. Any person convicted of
violating any of the provisions of § 70.02 or Schedules I and II of Chapter 72 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor known as the offense
of speeding and shall, upon conviction, be fined in an amount not to exceed $200.
(Ord. 292-88-10-25, passed 10-25-88; Am. Ord. 316-90-04-10, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord. 330-91-01-08, passed 1-8-91; Am. Ord.
662-02-02-12, passed 2-12-02)
(C) Any person convicted of an offense under Chapter 70 and Chapter 72 of this code, or an offense under Section 545.066, Texas
Transportation Code, while driving or operating a motor vehicle within a school zone as described in Schedules I and II of Chapter
72 of this code, shall, upon conviction, pay as court costs $25 in addition to other taxable court costs.
(1) The money collected under this subsection shall be collected in the same manner that other fines and taxable court
costs in the case are collected; and
(2) The money collected under this subsection in a municipal court case shall be used for a school crossing guard
program or shall be deposited in an interest-bearing account or expended for programs designed to enhance child safety,
health, or nutrition, including child abuse prevention and intervention and drug and alcohol abuse prevention.
(Ord. 657-02-01-08, passed 1-08-02)
(D) Above notwithstanding, it shall not be a defense in a prosecution under this traffic code that there was no sign, or that such
sign was not sufficiently legible or in a proper position to be seen by the defendant or by an ordinarily observant person.
(Ord. 611-00-12-12, passed 12-12-00)
CHAPTER 71: PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 71.01 DESIGNATED PARKING SPACES FOR DISABLED PERSONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/422
(A) The Chief of Police is authorized and directed to designate within the city one or more parking spaces for the exclusive use of
vehicles transporting temporarily or permanently disabled persons. The parking space or spaces shall conform to the rules
promulgated under TEX. REV. CIV. STAT., Art. 9102, § 5(c), relating to the identification and dimensions of parking spaces for the
disabled.
(B) Pursuant to TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE, §§ 681.011, it is hereby provided that TEX. TRANSPORTATION CODE, §§
681.011, as that section now exists, or as it may be amended, is made applicable to any parking space or area for the disabled on
public or private property designated in compliance with the identification requirements referred to in TEX. TRANSPORTATION
CODE, § 681.009.
(C) Any parking space within the city which appears to be properly marked in compliance with the identification requirements
conforming to the rules promulgated by the State Purchasing and General Services Commission under Tex. Rev. Civ. Stat., Art.
9102, § 5(c) shall be deemed prima facie to have been properly so marked and authorized to have been so marked.
(Ord. 273-88-02-09, passed 2-9-88)
§ 71.02 ON-STREET PARKING OF CERTAIN VEHICLES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.
(A) Except as provided in division (B) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or permit to park, or caused to be placed,
stored, or parked on any street, alley or sidewalk within the city:
(1) Any vehicle with a gross vehicle weight in excess of 9,500 pounds, as determined by the motor vehicle registration
records of the State of Texas;
(2) Any vehicle exceeding 24 linear feet in length;
(3) Any trailer, semi-trailer, boat trailer, trailer house, or other nonmotorized device or equipment designed or intended
to be towed upon the public streets by means of attachment to a motor vehicle or other self propelled vehicle or
equipment; or
(4) Any self-propelled motor home or other motor vehicle containing permanently installed sleeping facilities or human
sanitary treatment or disposal facilities or both.
(B) Division (A) above shall not apply to:
(1) Vehicles actively engaged in service or delivery functions for the period of time actually engaged in service or
delivery activity;
(2) Publicly owned or franchised emergency vehicles required by municipal, state or publicly franchised utility
departments to be taken home by its on-call employees charged with making emergency utility repairs;
(3) Major recreational equipment, as defined in the zoning ordinances of the city, which is:
(4) Any trailer as defined in (A)(3) being loaded, unloaded, or otherwise prepared for use or storage during a period of
time which does not exceed 24 hours; or
(5) Any motor vehicle or trailer being used for human occupancy for a period of time which does not exceed 24 hours;
provided, however, that the Chief of Police or his designee, shall be authorized to grant extensions to such 24-hour
limitation, not to exceed five days in any 30-day period, upon a finding of good cause shown;
(6) Trailers or other similar vehicles which are being held or used for the purpose of participating in any city-sponsored
parade, festival or related activity during the period of time commencing 48 hours prior to such activity, and ending 24
hours after such activity; or
(7) A trailer having load weight carrying capacity of 3,000 pounds or less during the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(C) (1) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any motor vehicle or trailer described in §
71.02(A), regardless of size or gross vehicle weight, to park or allow same to be parked at any time in the side yard or
front yard, or in any area between the property line of the lot and the curbline or the edge of the adjacent street (nuisance
strip) within any of the residential districts; provided, however, that motor vehicles and trailers may be parked only on the
front yard or side yard with all wheels on permanently maintained parking areas constructed of:
(a) Concrete;
(b) Brick; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/422
(c) Asphalt.
extending from the curb, street, or alley in a contiguous course. This subsection shall not apply to those lots or
parcels used solely for single-family residential purposes and located in the old town neighborhood and further
described in exhibit A to Ordinance 974-08-10-28.
(2) For the purposes of this subsection it shall be unlawful to park any motor vehicle or trailer without having valid and
current state registration attached in a manner prescribed by law.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle or trailer to block a sidewalk or public right-of-way.
(b) It shall be unlawful to park any trailer or recreational vehicle without securing the same by use of a parking
brake or by chocking the tires with a device manufactured for that purpose.
(c) It shall be unlawful to collect trash, rubbish, tree limbs, building materials, or other debris material of any kind
including but not limited to, appliances, upholstered and indoor furniture, automotive parts, metal, glass, paper,
plastic, wood, brick, sand or rock on or in any parked trailer or motor vehicle, for more than twenty-four (24) hours,
if such items are visible from the public right-of-way or adjacent property.
(d) The authority to enforce the provisions of this section shall be vested in the police department and with the
code compliance department.
(e) For purposes of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the vehicle was, at the time of the
offense alleged, owned by the person charged with the offense and that shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
vehicle was parked or left standing at the place charged, by the owner.
(f) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed
guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00.
This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by chapter 6.02
of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation
occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 382-93-06-22, passed 6-22-93; Ord. 894-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 974-08-10-28, passed 10-28-08; Ord. 1273-16-07-26,
passed 7-26-16) Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.03 PARKING OF VEHICLES USED IN BUSINESS FOR CERTAIN LENGTH OF TIME.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or employee of any trade or business, including but not limited to any service station,
garage, repair shop, manufacturer, or store, to permit, or cause to be placed, stored or parked on any street, alley or sidewalk in any
residential area of the city more than one automobile, truck, trailer, or other vehicle held for use in connection with such trade or
business while the same is awaiting being used, or after it has been used, or for the purpose of exhibiting the same for sale, for any
period in excess of one hour. The foregoing shall not apply to vehicles actively engaged in service or delivery functions for the
period of time actually engaged in the service or delivery activity and shall not apply to any personal automobile or other personal
vehicle temporarily parked at the curb while awaiting the personal use of the owner or user.
(Ord. 382-93-06-22, passed 6-22-93) Penalty, see § 71.99
§ 71.04 PARKING OF CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership or corporation to park or allow to be parked any construction equipment or
motor vehicles associated with a construction project within 30 feet of an open lane of vehicular traffic along roadways with speed
limits in excess of 30 miles per hour during nonwork hours.
(B) It shall be a defense to prosecution that the construction equipment was at least 10 feet from an open lane of vehicular traffic
and separated from that lane by barricades in compliance with the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices for Streets and
Highways as may be amended from time to time.
(C) Any person partnership or corporation who shall recklessly violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply
therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than
$500.00. Each day that the violation occurs may constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 1055-10-10-26, passed 10-26-10)
§ 71.05 PARKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN DESIGNATED LOCATIONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/422
(A) When signs are erected in the following locations reading substantially, “no parking, tow-away zone,” it shall hereafter be
unlawful for any person to park or stand any vehicle or trailer on the following parts of streets at any time, including but not limited
to Sundays and holidays:
(1) E. Oxford Dr. On the south side of Oxford Dr. from 230 ft. east of the centerline from its intersection with Dessau
Rd. to a point 390 ft. east of the centerline of Dessau Rd.
(2) Portchester Castle Path.
(a) On south side of Portchester Castle Path from a point 200 ft. west of its intersection with the centerline with
Mammoth Cave Blvd. to a point 365 ft. east of its intersection with the centerline of Bandelier Dr.
(b) On the east side of Portchester Castle Path from a point 300 ft. south of its intersection with the centerline of
Obed River Dr. to a point 40 ft. south of its intersection with the centerline of Obed River Dr.
(3) Pfluger Farm Lane.
(a) On the east side of Pfluger Farm Lane from its intersection with West Town Center Drive to a point 970 ft.
south of its intersection with West Town Center Drive.
(b) On the west side of Pfluger Farm Lane from its intersection with West Town Center Drive to a point 970 ft.
south of its intersection with West Town Center Drive.
(4) Terrell Lane.
(a) On the east side of Terrell Lane from its intersection with Town Center Drive to a point 800' south of Town
Center Drive.
(b) On the west side of Terrell Lane from its intersection with Town Center Drive to a point 800' south of Town
Center Drive.
(5) Justice Center Drive. On the south side of Justice Center Drive from its intersection with FM 685 to 700' west of
FM 685.
(6) Pfennig Lane. On the north side of Pfennig Lane from its intersection with Swenson Farms Drive to its intersection
with Black Locust Drive.
(7) Heatherwilde and Windermere Subdivision Streets. Including:
(a) On the northern and southern sides and eastern and western sides of Blackthorn Drive from its intersection
with Black Locust Drive to its intersection of Gravesend Road.
(b) On the northern and southern sides of Thackery Lane from its intersection with Blackthorn Drive to its
intersection of Gower Street.
(c) On the eastern and western sides of Gravesend Road from its intersection with Black Locust Drive to its
intersection of Isle of Man Road.
(d) On the eastern and western sides of Isle of Man Road from its intersection with Thackery Lane to its
intersection of Gower Street.
(e) On the northern and southern sides of Isle of Man Circle from its intersection of Isle of Man Road to the
circle's termini.
(f) On the eastern and western sides of Langland Road from its intersection with Thackery Lane to its intersection
of Isle of Man Road.
(g) On the eastern and western sides of Gower Street from its intersection with Black Locust Drive to the
Windermere Clubhouse Parking lot.
(h) On the northern and southern sides and eastern and western sides of Cactus Blossom Drive from its
intersection with Black Locust Drive to its intersection of Heatherwilde Boulevard.
(i) On the eastern and western sides of Columbine Street from its north and south intersections with Cactus
Blossom Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/422
(j) On the eastern and western sides of Ardisia Drive from its intersection with Black Locust Drive to its
intersection of Cactus Blossom Drive.
(k) On the eastern and western sides of Simsbrook Drive from its intersection with Black Locust Drive to its
intersection of Cactus Blossom Drive.
(l) On the eastern and western sides of Dashwood Creek Drive from its intersection with Black Locust Drive to its
intersection of Cactus Blossom Drive.
(8) Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
(a) On the south side of Kingston Lacy Boulevard starting at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard and
continuing to its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
(b) On the north side of Kingston Lacy Boulevard where not marked as a parallel parking space starting at its
intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard and continuing to its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
(9) Heatherwilde Boulevard.
(a) On both sides of Heatherwilde Boulevard from the Pflugerville City Limits (approximately 310 feet north of
Cheyenne Valley Drive) to the Cheyenne Valley Drive intersection.
(10) Calply Drive.
(a) On both sides of Calply Drive from its intersection with Picadilly Drive to approximately 100 feet north.
(b) At each commercial access drive along Calply Drive, for approximately 15 feet either side of each driveway.
(B) The city manager or his designee is directed to cause to be towed away any vehicle found parked or standing in violation of
this section; and the owner of such vehicle shall be civilly liable to the person doing such towing for the reasonable cost thereof.
(Ord. 1226-15-07-28,passed 7/28/15; Am. Ord. 1249-16-03-22, § 2, passed 3-22-16; Am. Ord. 1257-16-05-10, passed 5-10-16; Am.
Ord. 1260-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Am. Ord. 1261-16-05-24, passed 5-10-16; Am. Ord. 1278-16-08-09, passed 8-9-16; Am. Ord.
1341-18-02-13, passed 2-13-18; Am. Ord. 1347-18-03-27, passed 3-27-18; Am. Ord. 1372-18-11-27, passed 11-27-18; Am. Ord.
1384-19-02-26, passed 2-26-19)
§ 71.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day of violation shall be cumulative and the foregoing
penalty shall not be exclusive of any other rights and remedies which the city may have.
(B) It is a rebuttable presumption that the registered owner of the motor vehicle is the person who parked or stopped the vehicle at
the time and place of the offense charged; and, a computer-generated record of the Texas Department of Transportation's files
showing the current registered vehicle owner is prima facie evidence of the contents of the record.
(Ord. 273-88-02-09, passed 2-9-88; Ord. 382-93-06-22, passed 6-22-93; Ord. 1226-15-07-28, passed 7-28-15)
CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS ON STATE HIGHWAYS.
The prima facie maximum speed limits on those portions of the following highways routed in the city are as follows. The reference
points designated are those established by the Texas Highways and Public Transportation Department.
Street Direction of
Traffic
Location Speed Limit (m.p.h.)
F.M. Highway 685 Northbound Beginning at F.M. Highway 1825 at
milepoint 4.867 to mile point 4.605
45
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/422
F.M. Highway 685 Northbound From milepoint 4.605 to milepoint
3.550
50
F.M. Highway 685 Northbound From milepoint 3.550 to the north city
limit at milepoint 1.120
55
F.M. Highway 685 Southbound Beginning at the north city limit at
milepoint 1.120 to milepoint 3.550
55
F.M. Highway 685 Southbound From milepoint 3.550 to milepoint
4.605
50
F.M. Highway 685 Southbound From milepoint 4.605 to F.M.
Highway 1825 at milepoint 4.867
45
F.M. Highway 1825
(Pecan Street)
Eastbound Beginning at the west city limit at
milepoint 2.494 to milepoint 2.676
50; 35 in school speed zone
when traffic-control device
is flashing
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Eastbound From milepoint 2.676 to milepoint
3.258
45 except as provided below
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Eastbound From milepoint 2.992 to milepoint
3.258
30 in school speed zone
when traffic-control devise
is flashing
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Eastbound From milepoint 3.258 to milepoint
3.593
30
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Eastbound From milepoint 3.593 to milepoint
3.891
45
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Westbound Beginning at milepoint 3.891 to
milepoint 3.593
45
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Westbound From milepoint 3.593 to milepoint
3.258
30
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Westbound From milepoint 3.258 to milepoint
2.676
45 except as provided below
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan
Street)
Westbound Beginning at milepoint 3.258 to
milepoint 2.992
30 in school speed zone
when traffic-control device
is flashing
F.M. Highway 1825 (Pecan Westbound From milepoint 2.676 to the west city 50; 35 in school speed zone
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/422
Street) limit at milepoint 2.494 when traffic-control device
is flashing
(Ord. 316-90-04-10, passed 4-10-90; Am. Ord. 330-91-01-08, passed 1-8-91; Ord. 662-02-02-12, passed 2-12-02) Penalty, see §
70.99
SCHEDULE II. SPEED LIMITS ON CITY STREETS.
The prima facie maximum speed limits for the section of the streets described below are as follows:
Street Direction of
Traffic
Location Speed Limit
(m.p.h.)
Ordinance #
1 Acanthus Street
25 731-03-12-16
2 Alison Ann Court
25 731-03-12-16
3 Amarylis Drive
25 731-03-12-16
4 Amber Day Drive
25 731-03-12-16
5 Amen Corner Road
25 731-03-12-16
6 American Robin Path
25 731-03-12-16
7 Anna Kate Court
25 731-03-12-16
8 Apache Cove
25 731-03-12-16
9 Ardisia Drive
25 931-08-02-12
10 Arusha Street
25 931-08-02-12
11 Avena Valley Drive
25 931-08-02-12
12 A.W. Grimes Boulevard Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at the intersection of
Schultz Ln and ending at the
north city limits
45 1230-15-09-18
13
14
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/422
15 Bassington Court 25 731-03-12-16
16 Becker Farm Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at E Pflugerville
Parkway intersection and
ending at Silent Harbor Loop
intersection
35 1185-14-09-09
17 Bellaire Oaks Drive
25 731-03-12-16
18 Benning Drive
25 731-03-12-16
19 Bergamont Drive
25 731-03-12-16
20 Berol Drive
25 731-03-12-16
21 Bethesda Court
25 731-03-12-16
22 Black Isle Drive
25 931-08-02-12
23 Black Locust Drive Eastbound Beginning 1,715 feet east of
the intersection with
Heatherwilde Boulevard and
ending at 68 feet west of
Golden Eagle Street
40 731-03-12-16
24 Black Locust Drive Westbound Beginning at 56 feet west of
Golden Eagle Street and
ending 1,720 feet east of the
intersection with Heatherwilde
Boulevard
40 731-03-12-16
25 Black Willow Street
25 731-03-12-16
26 Blue Willow Court
25 731-03-12-16
27 Boca Rio Court
25 731-03-12-16
28 Botany Bay Circle
25 731-03-12-16
29 Boysenberry Lane
25 731-03-12-16
30 Brandon Keller Court
25 731-03-12-16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/422
31 Brewer Blackbird Drive 25 869-07-09-27
32 Broken Feather Trail
25 731-03-12-16
33 Brookhollow Drive
25 316-90-04-10
34 Butler National Drive
25 731-03-12-16
35 Cajuiles Court
25 731-03-12-16
36 Cajuiles Drive
25 731-03-12-16
37 Camille Court
25 731-03-12-16
38 Campanula Court
25 731-03-12-16
39 Canna Lily Lane
25 731-03-12-16
40 Canterwood Lane
25 731-03-12-16
41 Cardinal Meadow Way
25 731-03-12-16
42 Caribou Ridge Trail
25 731-03-12-16
43 Champions Point Drive
25 731-03-12-16
44 Cherokee Run
25 731-03-12-16
45 Chincho Drive
25 731-03-12-16
46 Cistern Cove
25 731-03-12-16
47 City Park Road
25 316-90-04-10
48 Clarence Bohls Lane
25 731-03-12-16
49 Club Chase Drive
25 731-03-12-16
50 Colorado Sand Drive
35 1172-14-03-25
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/422
51 Cooper's Hawk Path
25 731-03-12-16
52 Cora Marie Cove
25 731-03-12-16
53 Cora Marie Drive
25 731-03-12-16
54 Cosmos Way
25 731-03-12-16
55 Creekbend Cove
25 316-90-04-10
56 Creekbend Drive
25 316-90-04-10
57 Crossvine Way
25 731-03-12-16
58 Dahlia Court
25 731-03-12-16
59 Dashwood Creek
25 931-08-02-12
60 Daylily Cove
25 731-03-12-16
61 Dessau Road
Beginning at the city limits and
ending 1,562 feet south of the
intersection of E Pecan Street
50 731-03-12-16
62 Dessau Road
Beginning 1,562 feet south of
the intersection with E Pecan
Street and ending at the
intersection of E Pecan Street
45 731-03-12-16
63 Diablo Court
25 731-03-12-16
64 Diablo Road
25 731-03-12-16
65 Dove Haven Drive
Beginning 150 feet east of the
intersection with Dessau Road
and ending 139 feet east of the
intersection with Greenway
Drive
20 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
292-88-10-25
66 Drake Elm Drive
25 731-03-12-16
67 Dunes Drive
25 731-03-12-16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/422
68 Dusty Leather Court
25 731-03-12-16
69 Emblem Court
25 731-03-12-16
70 Emblem Drive
25 731-03-12-16
71 Evening Grosbeak
Drive
25 731-03-12-16
72 Fast Filly Avenue
25 931-08-02-12
73 Faber Drive
25 731-03-12-16
74 Falcon Pointe
Boulevard
Beginning 438 feet south of the
intersection of Kelly Lane and
ending at the intersection of
Grand Mission Way
25 in school
zone when
traffic-control
device is
flashing
869-07-03-27
75 Falsterbo Drive
25 731-03-12-16
76 Firebush Drive
25 731-03-12-16
77 Fitchburg Circle
20 731-03-12-16
78 Fitzgerald
25 931-08-02-12
79 Fitzgerald Lane
25 869-07-03-07
80 Fitzgerald Lane
Beginning at the intersection
with Picadilly Drive and
ending 876 feet north of
Picadilly Drive
20 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
931-08-02-12
81 Four Hills Court
25 731-03-12-16
82 Gale Meadow Drive
25 731-03-12-16
83 Ganton Court
25 731-03-12-16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/422
84 Gardena Canyon Drive 25 731-03-12-16
85 Gazania Drive
25 731-03-12-16
86 Glen Rose Chase
25 731-03-12-16
87 Glorious Lane
25 931-08-02-12
88 Golden Eagle Street
25 869-07-03-27
89 Goodspeed Parkway
25 731-03-12-16
90 Grand Avenue Parkway
45 931-08-02-12
90.1 Grand Avenue Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 1,190 feet south of
the Picadilly Drive intersection
with and ending 500 feet north
of the Picadilly Drive
intersection.
30 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
1233-15-10-13
91 Greenfield Cove
25 316-90-04-10
92 Green Valley Cove
25 316-90-04-10
93 Greenbrook Parkway
25 316-90-04-10
94 Greenhill Drive
25 316-90-04-10
95 Greenslope Circle
25 316-90-04-10
96 Gypsum Court
25 731-03-12-16
97 Haley Gray Drive
25 731-03-12-16
98 Hanging Rock Drive
25 731-03-12-16
99 Hayfield Square
25 731-03-12-16
100 Helios Way
35 1172-14-03-25
101 Heatherwilde Northbound Beginning at W Pecan Street 40 1185-14-09-09
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/422
Boulevard and southbound intersection and ending at W
Pflugerville Parkway
intersection
102 Heatherwilde
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at W Pflugerville
Parkway intersection and
ending 460 feet south of New
Meister Lane intersection
45 1185-14-09-09
103 Heatherwilde
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 460 feet south of
New Meister Lane intersection
and ending at Pflugerville
north city limits
40 1185-14-09-09
104 South Heatherwilde
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at Wells Branch
Parkway intersection and
ending 170 feet south of
Olympic Drive intersection
45 1181-14-08-12
105 South Heatherwilde
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 170 feet south of
Olympic Drive intersection and
ending at W Pecan Street
intersection
40 1181-14-08-12
106 South Heatherwilde
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 625 feet south of
Settlers Valley Drive
intersection and ending 738
feet north of the Settlers Valley
Drive intersection
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1181-14-08-12
107 Heritage Well Lane
25 731-03-12-16
108 Hollyhock Court
25 731-03-12-16
109 Honeysuckle Lane
25 731-03-12-16
110 Hughmont Drive
25 731-03-12-16
111 Old Austin Hutto Road
Beginning at the intersection of
E Pecan Street (FM 1825) and
ending at the intersection of
FM 685
35 869-07-03-27
112 Ibex Trail
25
113 Immanuel Road Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at south city limits
and ending at the intersection
of E Pecan Street
40 1181-14-08-12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/422
114 Immanuel Road Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 574 feet north of the
intersection with Oxford Drive
and ending 1,050 feet south of
the intersection with Oxford
Drive
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1181-14-08-12
115 Indian Run Drive
25 731-03-12-16
116 Katie Lynch Drive
25 731-03-12-16
117 Kelly Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at SH 130 Frontage
Rd and intersection and ending
at Falcon Pointe
Boulevard/Vilamoura Street
intersection
40 1225-15-07-28
118 Kelly Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at Falcon Pointe
Boulevard/Vilamoura Street
intersection and ending at
Weiss Lane
45 1225-15-07-28
119 Kelly Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at 159 feet west of
Benning Drive intersection and
ending 219 feet east of
Kennemer Drive intersection
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1225-15-07-28
120 Kennemer Drive
25 731-03-12-16
121 Kennemer Drive
Beginning 101 feet north of the
intersection of Kelly Lane and
ends at the intersection of
Kelly Lane and Kennemer
Drive
25 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
731-03-12-16
122 Kingston Lacy
Boulevard
Beginning 231 feet east of the
intersection with Heatherwilde
Boulevard and ending 127 feet
west of the intersection of
Alnwick Castle Drive
25 in school
zone when
traffic-control
device is
flashing
869-07-03-27
123 Laurelleaf Drive
25 731-03-12-16
124 Lavender Cove
25 731-03-12-16
125 Lone Star Ranch
Boulevard
35 1172-14-03-25
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/422
126 Luedtke Lane 25 731-03-12-16
127 Mallard Pond Trail
25 731-03-12-16
128 Manjack Cay Drive
25 869-07-03-27
129 Marigold Way
25 731-03-12-16
130 Marsh Harbour Drive
25 869-07-03-27
131 Mason Bend Drive
25 731-03-12-16
132 Mayapple Street
25 731-03-12-16
133 Meadow Lane
Beginning 125 feet south of the
intersection with Rolling
Meadow Drive and ending at
the intersection of Rolling
Meadow Drive
25 316-90-04-10
134 Meister Lane Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at the New Meister
Ln intersection and ending at
the north city limits
40 263-15-08-25
135 Mexican Heather Court
25 731-03-12-16
136 Murchison Ridge Trail
35 869-07-03-27
137 Mustang Grape Court
25 731-03-12-16
138 Natural Bridge Lane
25 931-08-02-12
139 New Meister Lane Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at Schultz Lane
intersection and ending at
Heatherwilde Boulevard
intersection
40 1185-14-09-09
140 Oakdale Circle
25 731-03-12-16
141 Oakdale Lane
25 731-03-12-16
142 Ocotillo Drive
25 731-03-12-16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/422
143 Old Pflugerville Austin
Road
Beginning 861 feet west of the
intersection with Heatherwilde
Boulevard and ending at the
intersection of Heatherwilde
Boulevard
20 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
731-03-12-16
144 Oxford Drive
Beginning at the intersection of
Immanuel Road and ending
114 feet west of the
intersection of Immanuel Road
20 in school
zone when
traffic-control
device is
flashing
869-07-03-27
145 Pacers Gait Ln
25 931-08-02-12
146 Parkcrest Court
25 731-03-12-16
147 Parkview Cove
25 316-90-04-10
148 Parkview Drive
25 316-90-04-10
149 Parkway Street
25 316-90-04-10
150 Passion Vine Cove
25 731-03-12-16
151 Pasternak Drive
25 869-07-03-27
152 Pawtucket Court
25 731-03-12-16
153 Pecan Street, East Eastbound and
westbound
From the intersection of East
Pecan St SH 130 to the eastern
city limits
50 1320-17-10-10
154 Pecan Street, East
Beginning at the intersection of
Immanuel Road and ending at
the east city limits
50
155 Petunia Lane
25 731-03-12-16
156 Pfennig Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning 980 feet east of the
intersection of Rocky Creek
Drive and ending at the
intersection of FM 685
40 1233-15-10-13
157 Pfennig Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning 226 feet east of the
intersection with N Railroad
Avenue and ending 927 feet
20 in school
speed zone
when traffic-
1233-15-10-13
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/422
west of the intersection with N
Railroad Avenue
control device
is flashing
158 Pfennig Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at 175 feet west of
the intersection of Black
Locust Drive and ending at
Heatherwilde Boulevard
intersection
40 1233-15-10-13
159 Pfennig Lane Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning 175 feet west of the
intersection of Black Locust
Drive and ending 980 feet east
of Rocky Creek Drive
intersection
35 1233-15-10-13
160
1233-15-10-13
161
1233-15-10-13
Pfluger Farm Lane Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at its intersection
with E. Pflugerville Parkway
and at its intersection with
Town Center Drive
40 1342-18-02-13
162 Pflugerville Parkway
Beginning at SH 130 and
ending at the intersection of
Weiss Lane
45 869-07-03-27
163 Pflugerville Parkway Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at Pflugerville city
limits and ending at SH 130
intersection
45 1185-14-09-09
164 Picadilly Drive
Beginning at the intersection of
Central Commerce Drive and
ending at west city limit
40 931-08-02-12
165 Picadilly Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at the intersection of
Pflugerville Parkway and
ending at the intersection with
Central Commerce Drive
35 1233-15-10-13
166 Picadilly Drive
Beginning 186 feet east of the
intersection with Cranston
Drive and ending 546 feet west
of the intersection with
Fitzgerald Lane
20 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
931-08-02-12
166.1 Picadilly Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning 228 feet east of the
intersection with Bishopsgate
20 in school
speed zone
1233-15-10-13
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/422
Drive and ending at the Grand
Avenue intersection
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
167 Pigeon Forge Road
Beginning at the intersection of
Olympic Drive and ending at
the intersection of Immanuel
Drive
25 731-03-12-16
168 Pinon Pine Drive
25 731-03-12-16
169 Pleasant Valley Drive
25 316-90-04-10
170 Plumbago Drive
25 731-03-12-16
171 Point Run Cove
25 731-03-12-16
172 Point Run Drive
25 731-03-12-16
173 Poppy Pass
25 731-03-12-16
174 Purple Iris Cove
25 731-03-12-16
175 Purple Martin Court
25 731-03-12-16
176 Purple Martin Drive
25 731-03-12-16
177 Quail Run Road
Beginning 6 feet north of the
intersection with Old Tract
Road and ending 190 feet
south of the intersection with
Dove Haven Drive
20 in school
speed zone
when trafficcontrol
device
is flashing
292-88-10-25
178 Quantico Court
25 731-03-12-16
179 Quincy Drive
25 931-08-02-12
180 Racers Ford
25 931-08-02-12
181 Railroad Avenue, North Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at E Pecan Street
intersection and ending 1,370
feet north of the intersection of
E Pecan Street
35 1181-14-08-12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/422
182 Railroad Avenue,North Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at 1,370 feet north
of the E Pecan Street
intersection and ending at E
Pflugerville Parkway
intersection
40 1181-14-08-12
183 Railroad Avenue, North Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 3,960 feet north of
the E Pecan Street intersection
and ending 572 feet south of E
Pfennig Lane intersection
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1181-14-08-12
184 Railroad Avenue, North Northbound Beginning 572 feet south of E
Pfennig Lane and ending 660
feet north of E Pfennig Lane
intersection
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1181-14-08-12
185 Railroad Avenue, North Southbound Beginning 572 feet south of E
Pfennig Lane and ending 660
feet north of E Pfennig Lane
intersection
25 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1181-14-08-12
186 Ramsgate Court
25 731-03-12-16
187 Red Tailed Hawk Road
25 731-03-12-16
188 Rolling Meadow Drive
25 316-90-04-10
189 Royston Lane
35 931-08-02-12
190 Runners Ridge Trail
25 731-03-12-16
191 Runners Ridge Cove
25 731-03-12-16
192 Santolina Drive
25 731-03-12-16
193 Schultz Lane
Beginning at the intersection of
A.W. Grimes Boulevard and
ending at the north city limits
45 731-03-12-16
194 Sea Island Drive
25 731-03-12-16
195 Secluded Willow Cove
25 731-03-12-16
196 Setting Sun Court
25 316-90-04-10
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/422
197 Settlers Valley Drive Beginning at the intersection
with Heatherwilde Boulevard
and ending 1,425 feet east of
the intersection with
Heatherwilde Boulevard
20 in school
speed zone
traffic-control
device is
flashing
731-03-12-16
198 Shotgun Court
25 731-03-12-16
199 Silene Court
25 731-03-12-16
200 Sims Brook Drive
25 931-08-02-12
201 Skylark Hill Lane
25 731-03-12-16
202 Smoke Signal Pass
25 731-03-12-16
203 Snowberry Street
25 731-03-12-16
204 Sophie Court
25 731-03-12-16
205 Sophie Drive
25 731-03-12-16
206 Sotogrande Drive
25 731-03-12-16
207 Spanish Ridge Cove
25 731-03-12-16
208 Spoonemore Drive
25 731-03-12-16
209 Spotted Owl Circle
25 731-03-12-16
210 Spotted Owl Lane
25 731-03-12-16
211 Spring Peony Court
25 731-03-12-16
212 Stage Line Trail
25 731-03-12-16
213 Stansted Manor Drive
25 731-03-12-16
214 Statler Bend Drive
25 731-03-12-16
215 Stoneham Circle
20 731-03-12-16
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/422
216 Sun Light Near Way Northbound
and southbound
Beginning at E Pecan St and
ending at the south city limits
40 263-15-05-25
217 Sunflower Drive
25 731-03-12-16
218 Sunken Creek Pass
25 731-03-12-16
219 Sunny Oaks Court
25 316-90-04-10
220 Suzi Lane
25 931-08-02-12
221 Swallow Ridge Cove
25 731-03-12-16
222 Sweet William Lane
25 731-03-12-16
223 Sweetwood Song Drive
25 731-03-12-16
224 Swenson Farm
Boulevard
Beginning at the intersection of
W Pecan Street (FM 1825) and
ending at W Pfennig Lane
40 869-07-03-27
225 Swenson Farm
Boulevard
Northbound
and southbound
Beginning 575 feet north of
East Pecan Street (FM 1825)
and ending at 200 feet north of
the Timmerman Elementary
School property
25 mph when
school speed
device flashing
1311-17-08-08
226 Sykes Court
25 731-03-12-16
227 Talamore Road
25 731-03-12-16
228 Tanner Trail
25 731-03-12-16
229 Tarahill Drive
25 731-03-12-16
230 Terradyne Drive
25 731-03-12-16
231 Tortoise Street
25 931-08-02-12
232 Trotters Lane
25 931-08-02-12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/422
233 Valley Meadow Drive
25 316-90-04-10
234 Ventana Court
25 731-03-12-16
235 Victoria Ridge Drive
25 731-03-12-16
236 Viki Lynn Place
25 931-08-02-12
237 Vilamoura Street
25 731-03-12-16
238 Wells Branch Parkway
Beginning at the east city
limits and ending at the west
city limits
50 931-08-02-12
239 Wells Point Pass
25 731-03-12-16
240 Wild Orchard Drive
25 731-03-12-16
241 Wild Petunia Way
25 731-03-12-16
242 Wilke Ridge Lane
Beginning at the intersection of
Pflugerville Parkway and
ending at the intersection of
Heatherwilde Boulevard
40 731-03-12-16
243 Willow Bluff Drive
25 731-03-12-16
244 Willowwick Circle
25 316-90-04-10
245 Windsor Hill Drive
25 731-03-12-16
246 Windermere Drive
Beginning at the intersection of
FM 1825 (W Pecan Street) and
ending 130 feet south of the
intersection of Fitchburg Circle
and Stoneham Circle
35 731-03-12-16
247 Wiseman Drive
25 931-08-02-12
248 Wolf Pack Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning at Weiss Lane and
ending at the eastern most
limits of existing roadway,
approximately 2,800 linear-feet
35 1314-17-08-22
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/422
249 Wolf Pack Drive Eastbound and
westbound
Beginning approximately 600
feet east Weiss Lane and
ending at the eastern most
limits of existing roadway,
approximately 2,200 linear-feet
20 mph when
school speed
zone device
flashing
1314-17-08-22
250 Yorkshire Street
25 316-90-04-10
251 Zola Lane
25 869-07-03-27
252 SH 130 Frontage Roads Northbound
and southbound
On SH 130 frontage roads (FM
85) from route marker
427+23.014 (Rowe Lane) to
route marker 431+66.214
(Pecan Street) a distance of
4.432 miles
55 941-08-04-22
253 SH 45 Frontage
Roads/Wilke Ln
Eastbound and
westbound
On SH 45 frontage roads from
route marker 580+0.784
(Heatherwilde Blvd) to route
marker 582+0.357 (SH 130) a
distance of 1.483 miles
55 941-08-04-22
(Ord. 292-88-10-25, passed 10-25-88; Am. Ord. 316-90-04-10, passed 4-10-90; Ord. 731-03-12-16, passed 12-16-03; Ord. 869-07-
03-27, passed 3-27-07; Ord. 931-08-02-12, passed 2-12-08; Ord. 941-08-04-22, passed 4-22-08; Ord. 1172-14-03-25, passed 3-25-
14; Ord. 1181-14-08-12, passed 8-12-14; Ord. 1185-14-09-09, passed 9-9-14; Ord. 1211-15-04-28, passed 4-28-15; Ord. 1225-15-
07-28, passed 7-28-15; Ord. 1228-15-08-25, passed 8-25-15; Ord. 1230-15-09-08, passed 9-8-15; Ord. 1233-15-10-13, passed 10-13-
15; Ord. 1311-17-08-08, passed 8-8-17; Ord. 1314-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17; Ord. 1320-17-10-10, passed 10-10-17; Ord. 1342-18-
02-13, passed 2/13/18) Penalty, see §70.99
SCHEDULE III. STOP SIGNS ON PUBLIC STREETS.
The following stop signs are approved in addition to those previously approved by plat:
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Olympic Drive facing east at its intersection with 10th Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Olympic Drive facing west at its intersection with 10th Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Applewood Drive facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Applewood Drive facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of East Oxford Drive facing east at its intersection with the 700 Block of Stansted Manor Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of East Oxford Drive facing west at its intersection with the 700 Block of Stansted Manor Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of East Oxford Drive facing east at its intersection with Dessau Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rex Kerwin Court facing north at its intersection with West Pecan Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Impact Way facing south at its intersection with East Pecan Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dalshank Street facing east at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Algreg Street facing north at its intersection with Dalshank Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Algreg Street facing south at its intersection with Sullivan Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Algreg Street facing north at its intersection with Sullivan Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Algreg Street facing south at its intersection with Rowe Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sullivan Street facing east at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sullivan Street facing west at its intersection with Mashburn Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mashburn Street facing north at its intersection with Dalshank.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Option Avenue facing east at its intersection with Mashburn Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Yellow Sage facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of El Malino Drive facing west at its intersection with Yellow Sage.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Green Meadows facing west at its intersection with Yellow Sage.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Green Meadows facing west at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Yellow Sage facing west at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Old Austin Pflugerville Road facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Old Austin Pflugerville Road facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing west at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard South.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Heatherwilde Boulevard South facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Heatherwilde Boulevard South facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Olympic Drive West facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Kelly Lane facing west at its intersection with Weiss Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing west at its intersection with Weiss Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Becker Farm Road facing east at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Becker Farm Road facing west at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing east at its intersection with State Highway 130 North Service
Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of State Highway 130 North Service Road facing south at its intersection with Pflugerville
Parkway East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing west at its intersection with State Highway 130 North
Service Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing east at its intersection with State Highway 130 South Service
Road.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of State Highway 130 South Service Road facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville
Parkway East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing west at its intersection with State Highway 130 South
Service Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing east at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pflugerville Parkway East facing west at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pecan Street East facing east at its intersection with State Highway 130 North Service Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of State Highway 130 North Service Road facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pecan Street East facing west at its intersection with State Highway 130 North Service Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pecan Street East facing east at its intersection with State Highway 130 South Service Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of State Highway 130 South Service Road facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville
Parkway East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pecan Street East facing west at its intersection with State Highway 130 South Service Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Bellemeade Boulevard facing west at its intersection with Yellow Sage Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mill Creek Road facing south at its intersection with Bellemeade Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Green Meadows Street facing east at its intersection with Mill Creek Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Green Meadows Street facing east at its intersection with Yellow Sage Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bellemeade Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Parkway Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Poe Circle facing east at its intersection with Parkway Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Frost Circle facing east at its intersection with Parkway Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Parkway Driveway facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Pflugerville Loop facing north at its intersection with Central Commerce Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pflugerville Loop facing south at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Immanuel Road facing south at its intersection with Wells Branch Parkway.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Immanuel Road facing north at its intersection with Wells Branch Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Wells Branch Parkway facing west at the intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Wells Branch Parkway facing east at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pleasant Bay Drive facing south at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pleasanton Parkway facing east at its intersection with Weiss Lane.
Arbor Creek Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of House Wren Loop facing west at its intersection with Brewer Blackbird Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of House Wren Loop facing east at its intersection with Brewer Blackbird Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brewer Blackbird Drive facing south at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Brookhollow Drive facing east at its intersection with Brewer Blackbird Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Black Locust Drive East facing north at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/422
Blackhawk Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Kelly Lane facing west at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Kelly Lane facing east at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kennemer Drive facing north at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dunes Drive facing east at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Canton Street facing south at its intersection with Dunes Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Luedtke Lane facing south at its south entrance to Dunes Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ventana Court facing south at its south entrance to Dunes Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sotogrande Drive facing west at its intersection with Dunes Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Amen Corner Road facing east at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Butler National Drive facing east at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ocotillo Drive facing north at its intersection with Butler National Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Butler National Drive facing west at its intersection with Diablo Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Vilamoura Street facing east at its intersection with Diablo Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cajuiles Drive at its west end facing north at its intersection with Vilamoura Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cajuiles Drive at its east end facing north at its intersection with Vilamoura Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cajuiles Court facing north at its intersection with Cajuiles Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Falsterbo Drive facing east at its intersection with Vilamoura Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Diablo Court facing west at its intersection with Diablo Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Amen Corner Road facing west at its intersection with Diablo Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sea Island facing south at its intersection with Amen Corner Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Diablo Road facing west at its intersection with Vilamoura Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Vilamoura Street facing north at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
Bohls Crossing
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Plumbago Drive facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Petunia Lane facing east at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Mexican Heather Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Spring Peony Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Petunia Lane facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cosmos Way facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the wortheast corner of Cosmos Way facing east at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Campanula Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hollyhock Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Firebush Drive facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Firebush Drive facing north at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Firebush Drive facing south at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Santolina Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Dahlia Court facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Boysenberry Lane facing west at its intersection with Plumbago Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Lavender Cove facing north at its intersection with Boysenberry Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Daylily Cove facing north at its intersection with Boysenberry Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Boysenberry Lane facing east at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Firebush Drive facing east at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Firebush Drive facing south at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
Bohls Place Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sunflower Drive facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Marigold Way facing east at its intersection with Honeysuckle Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Petunia Lane facing east at its intersection with Honeysuckle Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Honeysuckle Lane facing south at its intersection with Poppy Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Honeysuckle Lane facing north at its intersection with Poppy Pass.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Canna Lily Lane facing east at its intersection with Honeysuckle Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Crossvine Way facing east at its intersection with Honeysuckle Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Drake Elm Drive facing east at its intersection with Honeysuckle Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Poppy Pass facing east at its intersection with Old Austin-Hutto Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Firebush Drive facing east at its intersection with Old Austin-Hutto Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Honeysuckle Lane facing south at its intersection with Firebush Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Honeysuckle Lane facing north at its intersection with Firebush Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Honeysuckle Lane facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Marigold Way facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Petunia Lane facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Poppy Pass facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Canna Lily facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Crossvine facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Firebush Drive facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sunflower Drive facing north at its intersection with Firebush Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Drake Elm Drive facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Wild Petunia Way facing west at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Wild Petunia Way facing north at its intersection with Drake Elm Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Mustang Grape Court facing west at its intersection with Wild Petunia Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sweet William Lane facing south at its intersection with Sunflower Drive.
Brookhollow Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Brookhollow Drive facing east at its intersection with Greenbrook Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brookhollow Drive facing west at its intersection with Greenbrook Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Creekbend Drive facing east at its intersection with Greenbrook Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sunny Oaks Court facing south at its intersection with Parkview Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Setting Sun Court facing south at its intersection with Parkview Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Parkview Court facing south at its intersection with Parkview Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Greenhill Drive facing north at its intersection with Parkview Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Parkway Street facing north at its intersection with Parkview Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Parkview Drive facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Creekbend Drive facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brookhollow Drive facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Parkway Street facing south at its intersection with Creekbend Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Greenhill Drive facing south at its intersection with Creekbend Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Yorkshire Street facing south at its intersection with Brookhollow Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Greenhill Drive facing south at its intersection with Brookhollow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Creekbend Cove facing north at its intersection with Creekbend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Yorkshire Street facing north at its intersection with Creekbend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Greenhill Drive facing north at its intersection with Creekbend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Greenhill Drive facing north at its intersection with Brookhollow Drive.
Cambridge Estates
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing east at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stevenage Drive facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ramsgate Cove facing north at its intersection with Stansted Manor Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing south at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing north at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pigeon Forge Road facing west at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing north at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Victoria Ridge Drive facing north at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stevenage Drive facing west at its intersection with Victoria Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stevenage Drive facing west at its intersection with Victoria Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Windsor Hill Drive facing west at its intersection with Victoria Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bassington Court facing north at its intersection with Windsor Hill Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Windsor Hill Drive facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stansted Manor Drive facing north at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Victoria Ridge Drive facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bellaire Oaks Drive facing north at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Botany Bay Circle at its south end facing west at its intersection with Bellaire Oaks Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Botany Bay Circle at its north end facing west at its intersection with Bellaire Oaks Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sykes Court facing south at its intersection with Bellaire Oaks Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Briole Drive facing east at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
Cambridge Heights Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Marfa Lights Trail facing north at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Van Horn Drive facing east at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Van Horn Court facing north at its intersection with Van Horn Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Fort Leaton Drive facing east at its intersection with Balmorhea Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fort Leaton Drive facing west at its intersection with Balmorhea Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Quitman Mountain Way facing north at its intersection with Balmorhea Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Lobo Mountain Lane facing west at its intersection with Quitman Mountain Way.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pecos River Trail facing east at its intersection with Quitman Mountain Way.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pecos River Trail facing west at its intersection with A. W. Grimes.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Lobo Mountain Lane facing east at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Lobo Mountain Lane facing west at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dell City Drive facing south at its intersection with Mentone Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Mentone Drive facing west at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Balmorhea Lane facing east at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Balmorhea Lane facing west at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Balmorhea Lane facing east at its intersection with Limpia Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Lobo Mountain Lane facing east at its intersection with Limpia Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Marfa Lights Trail facing south at its intersection with Candelaria Mesa Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Salt Flat Lane facing north at its intersection with Hueco Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Chinati Mountain Lane facing west at its intersection with Salt Flat Lane.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Salt Flat Lane facing south at its intersection with Mentone Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Mentone Drive facing east at its intersection with Limpia Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Toyahville Trail facing south at its intersection with Chinati Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Barilla Mountain Trail facing south at its intersection with Chinati Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Casa Piedra Place facing south at its intersection with Chinati Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Toyahville Trail facing north at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hueco Mountain Trail facing east at its intersection with Toyahville Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hueco Mountain Trail facing west at its intersection with Toyahville Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hueco Mountain Trail facing east at its intersection with Barilla Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Casa Piedra Place facing north at its intersection with Barilla Mountain Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sauceda Ranch Road facing west at its intersection with Valentine Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sauceda Ranch Road facing east at its intersection with Orwell Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Huxley Lane facing west at its intersection with Orwell Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Zola Lane facing south at its intersection with Huxley Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Huxley Lane facing east at its intersection with Warner Ranch Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Huxley Lane facing west at its intersection with Warner Ranch Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pasternak Drive facing east at its intersection with Zola Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Zola Lane facing north at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Marfa Lights Trail facing south at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Marsh Harbour Drive facing east at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Marsh Harbour Cove facing east at its intersection with Abaco Harbour Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Manjack Cay Drive facing west at its intersection with Abaco Harbour Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Abaco Harbour Cove facing east at its intersection with Abaco Harbour Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cambridge Heights Drive facing east at its intersection with Abaco Harbour Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cambridge Heights Drive facing west at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Abaco Harbour Lane facing north at its intersection with Coral Cay Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Guana Cay Drive facing north at its intersection with Coral Cay Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Guana Cay Drive facing south at its intersection with Coral Cay Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Manjack Cay Drive facing east at its intersection with Marfa Lights Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Zola Lane facing south at its intersection with Victoria Station Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Tolstoy Circle facing east at its intersection with Zola Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Tolstoy Circle facing east at its intersection with Fitzgerald Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Kafka Circle facing east at its intersection with Fitzgerald Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Silone Circle facing east at its intersection with Fitzgerald Lane.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Tolstoy Circle facing west at its intersection with Fitzgerald Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Radholme Court facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive. (No street sign)
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Fitzgerald Lane facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Fitzgerald Lane facing south at its intersection with Tolstoy Circle.
Carmel West Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Benica Street facing south at its intersection with Pleasanton Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Benica Street facing north at its intersection with Anaheim Avenue.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Anaheim Avenue facing west at its intersection with Benica Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Anaheim avenue facing east at its intersection with El Sinore lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of El Sinore Lane facing south at its intersection with Pleasanton Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Folsom Avenue facing west at its intersection with Athrop Avenue.
A stop sign at the Northeast corner of Folsom Avenue facing east at intersection with Athrop Avenue.
A stop at the southwest corner of Folsom Avenue facing west at its intersection with Borromeo Ave.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Folsom Avenue facing east at its intersection with Borromeo Ave.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Athrop Avenue facing south at its intersection with Wolf Pack Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Casanova Avenue facing south at its intersection with Wolf Pack Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Casanova Avenue facing north at its intersection with Wolf Pack Drive.
Club at Wells Point Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Champions Point Drive facing north at its intersection with Olympic Drive West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Point Run Drive at its south end facing west at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Point Run Drive at its north end facing west at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Indian Run Drive at its south end facing east at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cherokee Run facing east at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Club Chase Drive facing east at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Indian Run Drive at its north end, facing east at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Champions Point Drive facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Glen Rose Chase facing west at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Glen Rose Chase facing east at its intersection with Point Run Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Point Run Cove facing south at its intersection with Point Run Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Point Run Drive at its south end, facing west at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Club Chase Drive facing east at its intersection with Indian Run Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Club Chase Drive facing west at its intersection with Champions Point Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Club Chase Drive facing west at its intersection with Broken Feather Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Apache Cove facing west at its intersection with Indian Run Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cherokee Run facing south at its intersection with Club Chase Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Wells Point Pass facing east at its intersection with Broken Feather Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Smoke Signal Pass facing east at its intersection with Broken Feather Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Olympic Drive West facing east at its intersection with Broken Feather Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Olympic Drive West facing west at its intersection with Broken Feather Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Broken Feather Trail facing north at its intersection with Olympic Drive West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Broken Feather Trail facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Broken Feather Trail facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Runners Ridge facing north at its intersection with Wells Point Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Caribou Ridge Trail facing north at its intersection with Wells Point Pass.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Runners Ridge facing south at its intersection with Wells Point Pass.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Caribou Ridge Trail facing south at its intersection with Wells Point Pass.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Wells Point Pass facing west at its intersection with Smoke Signal Pass.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Caribou Ridge Trail facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Caribou Ridge Trail facing north at its intersection with Olympic Drive West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Runners Ridge facing west at its intersection with Caribou Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Broken Feather Trail facing west at its intersection with Caribou Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Smoke Signal Pass facing east at its intersection with Caribou Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Smoke Signal Pass facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
Colorado Sand Drive
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Colorado Sand Drive facing south at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Autumn Slate Drive facing east at its intersection with Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Autumn Slate Drive facing west at its intersection with Benning Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Copper Mine Drive facing east at its intersection Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Copper Mine Drive facing west at its intersection Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Colorado Sand Drive facing north at its intersection with Copper Mine Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Colorado Sand Drive facing north at its intersection with East Pflugerville Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dillon Pond Lane facing east at its intersection with Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Crimson Apple Way facing north at its intersection with Dillon Pond Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Crimson Apple Way facing south at its intersection with Dillon Pond Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dillon Pond Lane facing south at its intersection with Turning Stream Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Turning Stream Lane facing north at its intersection with Crimson Apple Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Lone Star Ranch Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Lone Star Ranch Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Turning Stream Lane facing west at its intersection Lone Star Ranch Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Creeping Vine Court facing north at its intersection with Turning Stream Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rough Berry Road facing north at its intersection with Turning Stream Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Turning Stream Lane facing east at its intersection with Auburn Chestnut Lane.
Creekside Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Avenue West facing east at its intersection with 6th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Avenue West facing east at its intersection with 5th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Avenue West facing east at its intersection with 4th Street South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 3rd Street South facing north at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 2nd Street South facing north at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 1st Street South facing north at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of 6th Street South facing west at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of 5th Street South facing west at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of 4th Street South facing west at its intersection with Walter Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Noton Street East facing west at its intersection with Geyser Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Geyser Avenue facing north at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Geyser Avenue facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Custers Creek Bend East facing west at its intersection with Geyser Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Vogue Court facing east at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Custers Creek Bend East facing south at its intersection with Oxford Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Custers Creek Bend West facing north at its intersection with Oxford Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Dundalk Bay Cove facing north at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Galway Bay Cove facing north at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 4th Street South facing north at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 5th Street South facing north at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 6th Street South facing north at its intersection with Custers Creek Bend West.
Eighteen Twenty-Five Place
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Foothill Farms Loop facing east at its intersection with Central Commerce Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Foothill Farms Loop facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
Enclave at Springbrook Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Faber Drive facing east at its intersection with Berol Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Berol Drive facing north at its intersection with Faber Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Faber Drive facing east at its intersection with Berol Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Faber Drive facing west at its intersection with Berol Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Berol Drive facing south at its intersection with Faber Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tara Hill Drive facing north at its intersection with Statler Bend Drive.
Falcon Pointe Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cardinal Meadow Way facing west at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cardinal Meadow Way facing east at its intersection with Mallard Pond Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Mallard Pond Trail facing west at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Spotted Owl Lane facing west at its intersection with Mallard Pond Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Spotted Owl Circle facing east at its intersection with Spotted Owl Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Murchison Ridge Trail facing north at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Heritage Well Lane facing east at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of the median at Heritage Well Lane facing east at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of the median at Heritage Well Lane facing west at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Benning Drive facing north at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Benning Drive facing south at its intersection with Heritage Well Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Secluded Willow Cove facing west at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stage Line Trail facing north at its intersection with Secluded Willow Cove.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stage Line Trail facing east at its intersection with Sunken Creek Pass.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Quantico Court facing east at its intersection with Gale Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cistern Court facing east at its intersection with Gale Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Gale Meadow Drive facing north at its intersection with Secluded Willow Cove.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gale Meadow Drive facing south at its intersection with Stage Line Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sunken Creek Pass facing north at its intersection with Secluded Willow Cove.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sunken Creek Pass facing south at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brandon Keller Court facing west at its intersection with Sunken Creek Pass.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Alison Ann Court facing west at its intersection with Sunken Creek Pass.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gypsum Court facing west at its intersection with Sunken Creek Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Drifting Meadows Drive facing north at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Murchison Ridge Trail facing east at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hanging Rock Drive facing east at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hanging Rock Drive facing west at its intersection with Hanging Rock Drive and Hayfield
Square.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Anna Kate Court facing north at its intersection with Hanging Rock Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hayfield Square facing north at its intersection with Hanging Rock Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hanging Rock Drive facing west at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Falcon Pointe Boulevard at its west end, facing south at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Boulder Crest facing north at its intersection with Richfield Landing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Misty Heights Cove facing north at its intersection with Boulder Crest.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kerbey Heights facing north at its intersection with Boulder Crest.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Summit Heights facing north at its intersection with Boulder Crest.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Boulder Crest facing east at its intersection with Marble Glen.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Marigold Heights facing west at its intersection with Marble Glen.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Marble Glen facing north at its intersection with Richfield Landing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hilltop Canyon Cove facing north at its intersection with Richfield Landing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Richfield Landing facing north at its intersection with Barley Field Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Wandering Vine Cove facing north at its intersection with Barley Field Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Canyon Sage Lane facing north at its intersection with Barley Field Pass.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Colonial Manor Lane facing north at its intersection with Barley Field Pass.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Barley Field Pass facing east at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Beauty Berry Cove facing west at its intersection with Colonial Manor Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Village View Loop facing west at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Village View Loop facing north at its intersection with Village View Loop.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Falcon Pointe Boulevard at its east end facing south at its intersection with Kelly Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Quiet Water Pass facing east at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Colonial Manor Lane facing south at its intersection with Quiet Water Pass.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Canyon Sage Lane facing south at its intersection with Quiet Water Pass.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Quiet Water Pass facing west at its intersection with Wandering Vine Cove.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Grand Mission Way facing east at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Lone Star Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Grand Mission Way facing north at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Derby Hill Lane facing west at its intersection with Grand Mission Way.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gold Dust Pass facing west at its intersection with Grand Mission Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Derby Hill Lane facing south at its intersection with Grand Mission Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Gold Dust Pass facing south at its intersection with Grand Mission Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Wind Valley Way facing south at its intersection with Barley Field Pass.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Canyon Valley Run facing east at its intersection with Wind Valley Way.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stonewall Bend facing east at its intersection with Wind Valley Way.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Honey Peach Way facing west at its intersection with Pinyon Pine Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Burning Ember Pass facing south at its intersection with Honey Peach Way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Burning Ember Pass facing north at its intersection with Cotton Blossom Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Honey Peach Way facing south at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hidden Lake Crossing facing south at its intersection with Falcon Pointe Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Rough Berry Road facing south at its intersection with Turning Stream Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rough Berry Road facing north at its intersection with Blush Rose Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Blush Rose Road facing north at its intersection with Lone Star Ranch Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Falcon Village Lane facing east at its intersection with Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Falcon Village Lane facing west at its intersection with Colorado Sand Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Falcon Village Lane facing east at its intersection with the northbound State Highway 130
access road.
Gatlinburg Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pigeon Forge Road facing east at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sylvia Lane facing north at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Honey Cove facing south at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Alexis Cove facing south at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Clancy Way facing south at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Lynn Cove facing south at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sylvia Lane facing south at its intersection with Quail Run Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Quail Run Road facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Old Tract Road facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Old Tract Road facing east at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Middleway Road facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Dove Haven Drive facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dove Haven Drive facing east at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sage Boot Drive facing west at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dove Haven Drive facing east at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Suzzane Road facing north at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Oat Meadow Drive facing north at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Greenway Drive facing north at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Gatlinburg Drive facing north at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Quail Run Road facing south at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Middleway Road facing south at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Candleberry Circle facing south at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Jill Sue Circle facing south at its intersection with Dove Haven Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Old Tract Road facing east at its intersection with Quail Run Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gatlinburg Drive facing east at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Suzzane Road facing south at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Oat Meadow Drive facing south at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Greenway Drive facing south at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Sage Boot Drive facing south at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Water Brook Drive facing east at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Water Brook Drive facing east at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sage Boot Drive facing east at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sage Boot Drive facing west at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gregory Cove facing west at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Maize Cove facing west at its intersection with Gatlinburg Drive.
Greenridge Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cheyenne Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with Red Bud.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cheyenne Valley Drive facing west at its intersection with San Chisolm Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cheyenne Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with San Chisolm Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Lime Cove facing north at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Boone Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Boone Valley Drive facing south at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sap Cove facing north at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of San Chisolm Drive facing north at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of San Chisolm Drive facing south at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brown Juniper Way facing east at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dinge Bay Drive facing east at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Castebar Drive facing east at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Paladin Place facing east at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Dark Tree Cove facing north at its intersection with Dark Tree Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Seed Cove facing west at its intersection with Dark Tree Cove.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brown Juniper Way facing west at its intersection with Needle Point Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mid Bark Pass facing south at its intersection with Brown Juniper Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Bark Way facing south at its intersection with Brown Juniper Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bark Way facing north at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Bark Way facing south at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Boone Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Mid Bark Pass.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mid Bark Pass facing north at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of San Chisolm Drive facing north at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Paladin Place facing west at its intersection with Tree Sap Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tree Sap Way facing south at its intersection with Dark Tree Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Castebar Drive facing south at its intersection with Tree Sap Way.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Dinge Bay Drive facing west at its intersection with Tree Sap Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tree Sap Way facing north at its intersection with Brown Juniper Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tree Sap Way facing south at its intersection with Brown Juniper Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tree Sap Way facing north at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Needle Pine Drive facing north at its intersection with Boone Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cisco Valley Drive facing east at the intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cisco Valley Drive facing west at the intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cheyenne Valley Cove facing east at the intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tiny Seed Cove facing north at the intersection with Cisco Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cisco Valley Cove facing south at the intersection with Cisco Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cisco Valley Drive facing west at the intersection with San Chisolm Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Winding Way facing west at its intersection with Cisco Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Winding Way facing east at its intersection with Cisco Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Winding Way facing west at its intersection with San Chisolm Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Winding Way facing east at its intersection with San Chisolm Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Winding Way facing west at the intersection of Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of San Chisolm Drive facing west at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of San Chisolm Drive facing east at its intersection with Cheyenne Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cheyenne Valley Drive facing south at its intersection with Gattis School Road.
Heatherwilde Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Heatherwilde Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pfenning Lane West facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Acanthus Street facing north at its intersection with Pfenning Lane West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Acanthus Street facing south at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Acanthus Street facing north at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Laurelleaf Drive facing north at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Laurelleaf Drive facing south at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Laurelleaf Drive facing north at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Laurelleaf Drive facing south at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner Black Willow Street facing east at its intersection with Acanthus Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Black Willow Street facing west at its intersection with Laurelleaf Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner Wild Orchard Drive facing east at its intersection with Acanthus Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Wild Orchard Drive facing west at its intersection with Laurelleaf Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Acanthus Street facing west at its intersection with Laurelleaf Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hughmont Drive facing north at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hughmont Drive facing south at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hughmont Drive facing north at its intersection with Sweetwood Song Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hughmont Drive facing south at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Mayapple Street facing east at its intersection with Hughmont Drive.
A stop sign at northeast corner of Mayapple Street facing east at its intersection Gazania Drive.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Mayapple Street facing west at its intersection Gazania Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Silene Court facing east at its intersection with Hughmont Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Blue Willow Court facing east at its intersection with Hughmont Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Gazania Drive facing north at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Gazania Drive facing south at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sweetwood Song Drive facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sweetwood Song Drive facing west at its intersection with Gazania Drive.
Highland Park Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Black Canyon Street facing west at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Black Canyon Street facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bryce Canyon Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Canyonlands Lane facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Crater Lake Drive facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Craters of the Moon Boulevard facing west at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Craters of the Moon Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Craters of the Moon Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Craters of the Moon Boulevard facing west at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Craters of the Moon Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Fire Island Drive facing east at its intersection with Glacier Bay Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gates of the Artic Avenue facing east at its intersection with Wilke Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gila Cliff Drive facing east at its intersection with Glacier Bay Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gila Cliff Drive facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Glacier Bay Street facing north at its intersection with Gates of the Artic Avenue.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Glacier Bay Street facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Great Basin Avenue facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Great Basin Avenue facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Great Sand Dunes facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Grand Sand Dunes Avenue facing north at its intersection with Black Canyon Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Halekala Trail facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ice Age Trails Street facing south at its intersection with Yucca House Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ice Age Trails Street facing south at its intersection with Crater Lake Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ice Age Trails Street facing north at its intersection with Crater Lake Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ice Age Trails Street facing north at its intersection with North Cascades Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Joshua Tree Circle facing north at its intersection with Glacier Bay Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing south at its intersection with Gila Cliff Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing north at its intersection with Lava Bed Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing north at its intersection with North Cascades Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing south at its intersection with Lava Bed Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing north at its intersection with Yucca House Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kenai Fjords Drive facing south at its intersection with Yucca House Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Lassen Volcanic Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing north at its intersection with North Cascades Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing west at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing south at its intersection with North Cascades Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Lassen Volcanic Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Lava Bed Drive facing east at its intersection with Glacier Bay Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Lava Bed Drive facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Black Canyon Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Walnut Canyon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Niobrara River Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Niobrara River Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Walnut Canyon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Black Canyon Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mammoth Cave Boulevard facing south at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Niobrara River Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Niobrara River Drive facing west at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Niobrara River Drive facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Noatak Trail facing west at its intersection with Salt River Bay Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Noatak Trail facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of North Cascades Avenue at its median facing west at its intersection with Kingston Lacy
Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of North Cascades Avenue facing west at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of North Cascades Avenue facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of North Cascades Avenue at its median facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy
Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Obed River Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Obed River Drive facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Petroglyph Trail facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Salt River Bay Drive facing north at its intersection with Niobrara River Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Salt River Bay Drive facing south at its intersection with Obed River Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sleeping Bear Dune Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive facing north at its intersection with Great Sand Dunes Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive facing south at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive at its median, facing south at its intersection with Craters of the Moon
Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive at its median, facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon
Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive facing south at its intersection with Walnut Canyon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive facing north at its intersection with Walnut Canyon Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tallgrass Prairie Drive facing north at its intersection with Great Sand Dunes Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walnut Canyon Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walnut Canyon Boulevard at its northeast end, facing east at its intersection with Mammoth
Cave Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walnut Canyon Boulevard at its median, facing east at its intersection with Mammoth Cave
Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Wilke Ridge Lane facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Wilke Ridge Lane facing south at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Yucca House Drive facing east at its intersection with Glacier Bay Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Yucca House Drive facing west at its intersection with Great Basin Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Bryce Canyon Drive facing east at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bryce Canyon Drive facing west at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Portchester Castle Path facing east at its intersection with Horseshoe Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Portchester Castle Path facing west at its intersection with Horseshoe Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bryce Canyon Drive facing east at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Friendship Hill Drive facing south at its intersection with Bryce Canyon Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Sleeping Bear Dunes Drive facing west at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Lassen Volcanic Drive facing west at its intersection with Tallgrass Prairie Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Atoctin Drive facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Blvd.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cumberland Gap facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Blvd.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Conagree Street facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Blvd.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Conagree Street facing south at its intersection with Cane River Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cuyahoga Drive facing north at its intersection with Craters of the Moon Blvd.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cuyahoga Drive facing south at its intersection with Cane Rover Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Craters of the Moon Blvd facing east at its intersection with N Heatherwilde.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cane River Drive facing east at its intersection with N Heatherwilde.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cumberland Gap Street facing south at its intersection with Cane River Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Craters of the Moon facing west at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Blvd.
Highland Park North Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Abbeyglen Castle Drive facing east at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Abbeyglen Castle Drive facing west at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Alnwick Castle Drive facing north at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Alnwick Castle Drive facing north at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Alnwick Castle Drive facing south at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Balmoral Castle Court facing west at its intersection with Raglan Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Blair Castle Court facing north at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Busleigh Castle Way facing east at its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Busleigh Castle Way facing east at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Busleigh Castle Way facing west at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Busleigh Castle Way facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Caisteal Castle Path facing north at its intersection with Windsor Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Carlisle Castle Court facing north at its intersection with Gladstone Castle Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Crighton Castle Bend facing south at its intersection with Kensington Castle Trail.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dover Castle Lane facing east at its intersection with Caisteal Castle Path.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Dover Castle Lane facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Edinburgh Castle Road facing north at its intersection with Crighton Castle Bend.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Edinburgh Castle Road facing south at its intersection with Kensington Castle Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Fyvie Castle Court facing east at its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gladstone Castle Trail facing east at its intersection with Crighton Castle Bend.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gladstone Castle Trail facing east at its intersection with Edinburgh Castle Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gladstone Castle Trail facing west at its intersection with Edinburgh Castle Road.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Huntingtower Castle Boulevard facing north at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Kensington Castle Trail facing east at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Kingston Lacy Boulevard facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Old Wick Castle Way facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Old Wick Castle Way facing east at its intersection with Caisteal Castle Path.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pendragon Castle Drive facing west at its intersection with Edinburgh Castle Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pendragon Castle Drive facing east at its intersection with Crighton Castle Bend.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Portchester Castle Path facing east at its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Portchester Castle Path facing north at its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Portchester Castle Path facing east at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Portchester Castle Path facing north at its intersection with Obed River Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Portchester Castle Path facing south at its intersection with Obed River Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Portchester Castle Path facing west at its intersection with Huntingtower Castle Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Raglan Castle Path facing north at its intersection with Kensington Castle Trail.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Raglan Castle Path facing south at its intersection with Abbeyglen Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Ripley Castle Cove facing east at its intersection with Crighton Castle Bend.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Rochester Castle Way facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stirling Castle Court facing north at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stokesay Castle Path facing north at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stokesay Castle Path facing east at its intersection with Alnwick Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Windsor Castle Drive facing west at its intersection with Portchester Castle Path.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Windsor Castle Drive facing west at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Windsor Castle Drive facing east at its intersection with Kingston Lacy Boulevard.
Katymead Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Julies Walk facing south at its intersection with Pfennig Lane East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Savin Rise Court facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fenway Park facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Timber Bend Drive facing south at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Felsmere Drive facing south at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mattapan Drive facing south at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brophy Drive facing south at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Milton Cove facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Woodlawn Drive facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bell Rock Circle at its north end, facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bell Rock Circle at its south end facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fenway Park facing west at its intersection with Timber Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Palmwood Trail facing east at its intersection with Timber Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Teakwood Trail facing north at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Split Oak Drive facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hickory Ridge Trail facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hickory Ridge Trail facing north at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Split Oak Cove facing north at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Kay Lane facing west at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
Meadow Park South Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Oakdale Circle facing west at its intersection with Meadow Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Oakdale Lane facing east at its intersection with Meadow Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Meadow Lane facing south at its intersection with Rolling Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Meadow Lane facing north at its intersection with Valley Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Park Access Road facing north at its intersection with Rolling Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Green Field Cove facing north at its intersection with Rolling Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Green Valley Cove facing south at its intersection with Rolling Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Valley Meadow Drive facing west at its intersection with City Park Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Rolling Meadow Drive facing west at its intersection with City Park Road.
Meadow Park West Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of American Robin Path facing east at its intersection with Evening Grosbeak Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pleasant Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with Red Tailed Hawk Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Rolling Meadow Drive facing east at its intersection with Red Tailed Hawk Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Pleasant Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Rolling Meadow Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of American Robin Path facing east at its intersection with Evening Grosbeak Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/422
Meadow Ridge Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Golden Eagle Street facing east at its intersection with Black Locust East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ruffed Grouse Cove facing north at its intersection with Golden Eagle Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fox Sparrow Cove facing west at its intersection with Golden Eagle Street.
Mountain Creek Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Olympic Drive facing north at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Olympic Drive facing south at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Ambrose Cove facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Ambrose Cove facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 10th Street South facing north at its intersection with Wells Branch Parkway East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Clemson Cove facing east at its intersection with Ambrose Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Clemson Cove facing west at its intersection with Ambrose Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of La Fayette Lane facing east at its intersection with Ambrose Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Seton Hill Lane facing east at its intersection with Ambrose Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of La Fayette Lane facing west at its intersection with Brown Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of St. John Court facing east at its intersection with Brown Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Brown Drive facing north at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brown Drive facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Olympic Drive facing east at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Olympic Drive facing west at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Rutgers Drive facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Vanderbilt Circle facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Duke Cove facing south at its intersection with Olympic Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Brown Drive facing north at its intersection with Seton Hall Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Seton Hill Lane facing west at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Loyola Drive facing east at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Loyola Drive facing west at its intersection with Vanderbilt Circle.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rutgers Drive facing north at its intersection with Loyola Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Ambrose Drive facing east at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Ambrose Drive facing west at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Wells Branch Parkway Drive East.
Mountain Creek East
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Purple Martin Drive facing west at its intersection with Immanuel Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Purple Martin Drive facing east at its intersection with Olympic Drive East.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Purple Martin Drive facing west at its intersection with Olympic Drive East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Skylark Hill Lane facing north at its intersection with Purple Martin Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Skylark Hill Lane facing east at its intersection with Olympic Drive East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pigeon Forge Road facing east at its intersection with Olympic Drive East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Swallow Ridge Cove facing north at its intersection with Pigeon Forge Road.
Mountains of Blackhawk
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Terradyne Drive facing west at its intersection with Kennemer Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Canterwood Lane facing north at its intersection with Terradyne Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner Canterwood Lane facing south at its intersection with Speidel Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Bethesda Court facing west at its intersection with Canterwood Lane.
A stop sign at the northest corner of Pawtucket Court facing east at its intersection with Canterwood Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Talamore Road facing west at its intersection with Canterwood Lane.
A stop sign the southwest corner of Boca Rio Court facing west at its intersection with Canterwood Lane.
A stop sign the southeast corner of Four Hills Court facing south at its intersection with Canterwood Lane.
Old Town Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Court facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pfluger Street West facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 9th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 8th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 7th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 6th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 5th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 4th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pfluger Street East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pfluger Street East facing east at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hoopes Avenue East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hoopes Avenue East facing east at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hoopes Avenue East facing east at its intersection with 1st Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hoopes Avenue West facing east at its intersection with 2nd Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hoopes Avenue West facing east at its intersection with 3rd Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hoopes Avenue West facing west at its intersection with 2nd Street South.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hoopes Avenue West facing west at its intersection with 1st Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Noton Street East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Noton Street East facing east at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Walter Avenue East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Avenue East facing east at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 9th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 8th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 7th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 6th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 5th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 4th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 7th Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 6th Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 5th Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the Southeast corner of 4th Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street South facing south at its intersection with Noton Street East.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hall Street West facing east at its intersection with 5th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hall Street West facing east at its intersection with 4th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hall Street West facing east at its intersection with 3rd Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hall Street West facing east at its intersection with 2rd Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Hall Street East facing east at its intersection with 1st Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with 5th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with 4th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with 3rd Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with 2nd Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with 1st Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Hall Street West facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue South.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 5th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 4th Street South facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street South facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street South facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street South facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Paul Street facing east at its intersection with Wren Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Paul Street facing east at its intersection with Willow Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pfluger Street East facing west at its intersection with Willow Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pfluger Street East facing east at its intersection with Willow Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Bohl's Street facing south at its intersection with Paul Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Wren Avenue facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Smith Avenue facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Robbins Street facing south at its intersection with Pecan Street East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Main Street West facing west at its intersection with 4th Street North.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Main Street West facing east at its intersection with 4th Street North.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 3rd Street North facing north at its intersection with Main Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 2nd Street North facing north at its intersection with Main Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 1st Street North facing north at its intersection with Main Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street North facing south at its intersection with Main Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street North facing south at its intersection with Main Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street North facing south at its intersection with Main Street East.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 5th Street North facing north at its intersection with Wilbarger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 4th Street North facing south at its intersection with Wilbarger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street North facing south at its intersection with Wilbarger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street North facing south at its intersection with Wilbarger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street North facing south at its intersection with Wilbarger Street East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 1st Street North facing south at its intersection with Walnut Street East.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 3rd Street North facing south at its intersection with Walnut Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 2nd Street North facing south at its intersection with Walnut Street West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Walnut Street East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Wilbarger Street East facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 4th Street North facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 3th Street North facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 2nd Street North facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 1st Street North facing north at its intersection with Pecan Street West.
Parkcrest Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Spoonemore Drive facing north at its intersection with Clarence Bohls Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Shotgun Court facing north at its intersection with Goodspeed Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Clarence Bohls Lane facing east at its intersection with Parkcrest Court.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Goodspeed Parkway facing west at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Clarence Bohls Lane facing west at its intersection with Shotgun Court.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Spoonemore Drive facing south at its intersection with Pfennig Lane West.
Park Place at Heatherwilde Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Willow Bluff Drive facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Amber Day Drive facing north at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Amber Day Drive facing south at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pinon Pine Drive facing east at its intersection with Amber Day Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pinon Pine Drive facing west at its intersection with Emblem Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Snowberry Street facing south at its intersection with Cora Marie Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Emblem Drive facing south at its intersection with Cora Marie Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cora Marie Cove facing south at its intersection with Cora Marie Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Bergamont Drive facing west at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bergamont Drive facing east at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Willow Bluff Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Locust Drive East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Amarylis Drive facing west at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Amarylis Drive facing east at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Amarylis Drive facing west at its intersection with Haley Gray Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Amarylis Drive facing east at its intersection with Haley Gray Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Emblem Court facing east at its intersection with Emblem Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Emblem Drive facing east at its intersection with Katie Lynch Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Emblem Drive facing east at its intersection with Katie Lynch Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Laurelleaf Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Locust Drive East.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Passion Vine Cove facing west at its intersection with Laurelleaf Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Purple Iris Cove facing west at its intersection with Laurelleaf Drive.
Park View Estates
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sophie Drive facing east at its intersection with City Park Road.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Sophie Drive facing west at its intersection with Sophie Court.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Camille Court facing east at its intersection with Sophie Court.
Penley Park Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Links Lane facing east at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Red Bank Lane facing south at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Peach Vista Drive facing east at its intersection with Links Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hidden Gully Lane facing south at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gunning Cove facing west at its intersection with Hidden Gully Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Carillion Drive facing west at its intersection with Navarre Terrace.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Speckled Alder Drive facing east at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Coconut Grove Street facing east at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Speckled Alder Drive facing west at its intersection with Navarre Terrace.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Coconut Grove Street facing west at its intersection with Navarre Terrace.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Tinton Falls Lane facing west at its intersection with Navarre Terrace.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Penley Reserve Pass facing south at its intersection with Coconut Grove Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Valhalla Lane facing west at its intersection with Vista Verde Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brazos Lane facing west at its intersection with Vista Verde Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Valhalla Lane facing west at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Brazos Lane facing west at its intersection with Peach Vista Drive.
Pflugerville Heights Subdivision
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Faber Drive facing west at its intersection with Schultz Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Stevie Ray Drive facing north at its intersection with Faber Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Muddy Water Drive facing west at its intersection with Stevie Ray Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Howlin Wolf Trail facing west at its intersection with Stevie Ray Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Violet Blue Drive facing west at its intersection with Ingrids Iris Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Faber Drive facing east at its intersection with Ingrids Iris Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Muddy Water Drive facing east at its intersection with Ingrids Iris Drive.
Royal Pointe Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Valjean Drive facing east at its intersection with William Anderson Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Royal Pointe Drive facing north at its intersection with Valjean Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Jana Patrice Drive facing north at its intersection with Valjean Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Jana Patrice Drive facing south at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Candace Loop facing south at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of William Anderson Drive facing south at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Royal Pointe Drive facing south at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Royal Pointe Drive facing north at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Timothy John Drive facing east at its intersection with Royal Pointe Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Timothy John Drive facing west at its intersection with Royal Pointe Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Royal Pointe Drive facing south at its intersection with Meister Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Candace Loop facing west at its intersection with William Anderson Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Aquitaine Drive facing south at its intersection with Meister Lane.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Aquitaine Drive facing north at its intersection with Timothy John Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Meister Lane facing west at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard North.
Saxony Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Twin Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pecan Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Split Oak Drive facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pine Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Maplewood Drive facing south at its intersection with Split Oak Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sage Court facing east at its intersection with Hackberry Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Jasmine Court facing east at its intersection with Hackberry Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Holly Court facing east at its intersection with Hackberry Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Maplewood Circle facing east at its intersection with Maplewood Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Maplewood Drive facing north at its intersection with Cedar Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cedar Cove facing north at its intersection with Cedar Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cottonwood Lane facing west at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Redwood Lane facing west at its intersection with Twin Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Elm Drive facing north at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Applewood Drive facing east at its intersection with Railroad Avenue North.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Applewood Drive facing east at its intersection with Rocky Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Valley View Drive facing north at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Applewood Drive facing west at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
Settlers Ridge Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cactus Bend Drive facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Camp Fire Trail facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Wagon Wheel Trail facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Settlers Valley Cove facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dartmouth Cove facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Princeton Drive facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cornell Drive facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brown Drive facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Prairie Ridge Trail facing east at its intersection with Cactus Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Camp Fire Trail facing north at its intersection with Prairie Ridge Trail.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Mountain View Cove facing south at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Canyon Bend Drive facing south at its intersection with Pioneer Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Prairie Ridge Trail facing west at its intersection with Canyon Bend Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Canyon Bend Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pioneer Bend Drive facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Mountain View Drive facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Mountain View Drive facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Princeton Cove facing west at its intersection with Princeton Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Princeton Drive facing west at its intersection with Cornell Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Harvard Drive facing west at its intersection with Cornell Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cornell Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Brown Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Yale Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ivy Drive facing north at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Brown Drive facing south at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Settlers Valley Drive facing south at its intersection with Mountain View Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Yale Drive facing east at its intersection with Brown Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Oxford Drive facing east at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of 12th Street South facing east at its intersection with Noton Court.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 11th Street South facing north at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Noton Street West facing north at its intersection with Noton Court.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of 12th Street facing north at its intersection with Pfluger Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 12th Street facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 12th South facing south at its intersection with Farm-to-Market 685.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of 11th South facing south at its intersection with Pfluger Street West.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Walter Court facing south at its intersection with Noton Street West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Walter Court facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Walter Court facing east at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pfluger Street West facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Noton Street West facing west at its intersection with 10th Street South.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of South 10th street facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of South 10th street facing south at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
Shops at 685 Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Terrell Lane facing south at its intersection with Town Center Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of the private drive facing east at its intersection with Terrell Lane.
Sorento Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Aventura Avenue facing south at its intersection with Weiss Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Via Sorento Way facing east at is intersection with Weiss Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Via Sorento Way facing west at its intersection with Bassano Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bassano Avenue facing north at its intersection with Via Sorento Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Bassano Avenue facing south at its intersection with Via Sorento Way.
Springbrook Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Regis Drive facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Betterman Drive facing west at its intersection with Worley Drive.
A stop sign at the Northeast corner of Betterman Drive facing east at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Betterman Drive facing west at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Betterman Drive facing east at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Deren Lane facing north at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Deren Lane facing west at its intersection with Worley Drive.
A stop sign the southeast corner of Deren Cove facing south at its intersection with Deren Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Deren Cove facing north at its intersection of Deren Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Worley Drive facing south at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Worley Drive facing north at its intersection with Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Worley Drive facing south at its intersection with Catumet Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dansworth Drive facing east at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dansworth Drive facing south at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner Dansworth Cove facing north at its intersection with Dansworth Drive on its west end.
A stop sign at the northwest corner Dansworth Cove facing north at its intersection with Dansworth Drive on its east end.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Palitine Drive facing north at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Palitine Drive facing south at its west intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Palitine Drive facing north at its intersection with Dansworth Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kessler Drive facing north at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kessler Drive facing south at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kessler Drive facing north at its intersection with Palitine Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kessler Cove facing north at its intersection with Kessler Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Betterman Cove facing north at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Grener Cove facing west at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Richelle Cove facing west at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Narsitin Lane facing east at its intersection with Betterman Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Narsitin Lane facing south at its intersection Justeford Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner Justeford Drive facing east at its intersection with Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner Justeford Drive facing west at its intersection Regis Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Justeford Drive facing west at its intersection with Dansworth Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Holderness Lane facing east at its intersection with Dansworth Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Holderness Lane facing west at its intersection with Worley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hayworth Cove facing north at its intersection with Holderness Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Catumet Cove facing north at its intersection with Catumet Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Lynde Cove facing south at its intersection with Catumet Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner Catumet Drive facing south at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Regis Drive facing south at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
Springbrook Centre Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Edgemere Drive facing south at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Royston Lane facing west at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Edgemere Drive facing south at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Idaho Falls Lane facing north at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Idaho Falls Cove facing west at its intersection with Idaho Falls Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Glorious Lane facing north at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Viki Lynn Place facing north at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ascent Cove facing south at its intersection with Suzi Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Glorious Lane facing south at its intersection with Suzi Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Suzi Cove facing south at its intersection with Suzi Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Viki Lynn Court facing west at its intersection with Viki Lynn Place.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Suzi Lane facing east at its intersection with Viki Lynn Place.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Natural Bridge Lane facing east at its intersection with Viki Lynn Place.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Viki Lynn Place facing south at its intersection with Royston Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Freestone Drive facing east at its intersection with Natural Bridge Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Natural Bridge Lane facing west at its intersection with Suzi Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Freestone Drive facing west at its intersection with Suzi Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Suzi Lane facing south at its intersection with Royston Lane.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Royston Lane facing east at its intersection with Central Commerce Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Royston Lane facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Central Commerce Court facing east at its intersection with Royston Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Picadilly Court facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Jerusalem Drive facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive on its west end.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Jerusalem Drive facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive on its east end.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cranston Drive facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of War Horse Lane facing west at its intersection with Jerusalem Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pon Court facing south at its intersection with Jerusalem Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cranston Drive facing west at its intersection with Jerusalem Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Constantinople Lane facing north at its intersection with Cranston Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Constantinople Lane facing south at its intersection with War Horse Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Copperhead Drive facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tortoise Street facing south at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Bedolin Court facing west at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Emporer Court facing west at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Byzantium Lane facing west at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Byzantium Lane facing east at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Byzantium Lane facing west at its intersection with Tortoise Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Joffa Court facing west at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Copperhead Drive facing north at its intersection with Tortoise Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cranston Drive facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Jigsaw Pathway facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Jigsaw Pathway Cove facing east at its intersection with Jigsaw Pathway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Campus Lane facing west at its intersection with Jigsaw Pathway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cranston Cove facing east at its intersection with Cranston Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cheetan Cove facing east at its intersection with Cranston Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Campus Lane facing east at its intersection with Cranston Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gnu Gap facing east at its intersection with Cranston Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cranston Drive facing south at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ibex Trail facing south at its intersection with Victoria Station Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ibex Trail facing south at its intersection with Bengal Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ibex Trail facing north at its intersection with Bengal Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Copperhead Drive facing south at its intersection with Bengal Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/422
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Copperhead Cove facing east at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Arusha Street facing east at its intersection with Copperhead Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ibex Trail facing north at its intersection with Arusha Street.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Tortoise Street facing south at its intersection with Arusha Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Copperhead Drive facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tortoise Street facing north at its intersection with Picadilly Drive.
Springbrook Glen Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kilkenny Drive facing north at its intersection with Pflugerville Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast of Kilkenny Drive facing south at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest of Kilkenny Drive facing north at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Springbrook Drive facing east at intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Springbrook Drive facing west at intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Glendalough Drive facing south at its intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cormac Court facing south at its intersection with Liffey Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Cahir Glen Cove facing south at its intersection with Liffey Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Liffey Cove facing south at its intersection with Liffey Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Liffey Drive facing west at its intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Liffey Drive facing east at its intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Bunratty Circle facing east at its intersection with Bunratty Circle.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Bunratty Circle facing north at its intersection with Liffey Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Madden Drive facing east at its intersection with Kilkenny Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Madden Drive facing south at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Claire Morris Lane facing north at its intersection with Madden Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Claire Morris Lane facing south at its intersection with Madden Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Claire Morris Lane facing south at its intersection with Howeth Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Howeth Drive facing west at its intersection with Madden Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Howeth Drive facing east at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Howeth Cove facing north at its intersection with Howeth Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Gantry Drive at its west end, facing north at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Gantry Drive at its east end facing north at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Glendalough Drive facing east at its intersection with Grafton Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Grafton Glen Cove facing north at its intersection with Grafton Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Grafton Lane facing west at its intersection with Newgrange Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Newgrange Drive facing south at its intersection with Connemara Lane.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Newgrange Drive facing north at its intersection with Glendalough Drive.
Spring Trails Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Autumn Sage Way facing north at its intersection with Willow Walk Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Autumn Sage Way facing east at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Autumn Sage Way facing west at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Dogwood Blooms Lane facing west at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Leaping Frog Lane facing east at its intersection with Lonesome Lilly Way.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Leaping Frog Lane facing west at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Leaping Frog Lane facing west at its intersection with Lonesome Lilly Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Lonesome Lilly Way facing south at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Lonesome Lilly Way facing west at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of New Meister Lane facing east at its intersection with Schultz Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing east at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing west at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing south at its intersection with Star Gazer Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing north at its intersection with Star Gazer Way.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing east at its intersection with Springbrook Rd.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Springbrook Drive facing south at its intersection with New Meister Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Star Gazer Way facing north at its intersection with Willow Walk Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Star Gazer Way facing north at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Star Gazer Way facing south at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Star Gazer Way facing west at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Star Gazer Way facing west at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Star Gazer Way facing east at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Willow Walk Drive facing east at its intersection with Springbrook Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Willow Walk Drive facing west at its intersection with Pencil Cactus Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Dogwood Blooms Lane facing north at its intersection with Autumn Sage Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Autumn Sage Way facing east at its intersection with Dogwood Blooms Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Autumn Sage Way facing west at its intersection with Dogwood Blooms Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Star Gazer Way facing east at its intersection with Autumn Sage Way.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Autumn Sage Way facing south at its intersection with Star Gazer Way.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Autumn Sage Way facing north at its intersection with Star Gazer Way.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Autumn Sage Way facing east at its intersection with Schultz Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Autumn Sage Way facing west at its intersection with Star Gazer Way.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pencil Cactus Drive facing west at its intersection with Springbrook Road.
Steeds Crossing Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Secretariat Ridge Lane facing south at its intersection with County Road 138.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of St. Leger Street facing east at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of St. Leger Street facing west at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of St. Leger Street facing south at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Derby Day Avenue facing south at its intersection with County Road 138.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Byerly Turk Drive facing south at its intersection with St. Leger Street.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of St. Leger Street facing north at its intersection with Darley Arabian Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Darley Arabian Drive facing west at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Darley Arabian Drive facing east at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Darley Arabian Drive facing west at its intersection with Byerly Turk Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Byerly Turk Drive facing east at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Royal Ascot Drive facing east at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Royal Ascot Drive facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Royal Ascot Drive facing west at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Godolophin Court facing north at its intersection with Royal Ascot Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Aquaduct Avenue facing east at its intersection with Secretariat Ridge Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Aquaduct Avenue facing west at its intersection with Grand National Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Grand National Avenue facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Shire Street facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Gelding Lane facing south at its intersection with Shire Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Winners Ribbon Circle facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Steeds Crossing facing north at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Steeds Crossing facing south at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Gelding Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Steeds Crossing facing east at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Morgans Choice Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Morgans Choice Lane facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Trotters Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Trotters Lane facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Racers Ford Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Racers Ford Lane facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Pacers Gait Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pacers Gait Lane facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Jumpers Delight Lane facing north at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Jumpers Delight Lane facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Fast Filly Avenue facing south at its intersection with Steeds Crossing.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Fast Filly Avenue facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Trotters Lane facing south at its intersection with Morgans Choice Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Racers Ford Lane facing south at its intersection with Morgans Choice Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pacers Gait Lane facing south at its intersection with Morgans Choice Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Steeds Crossing facing west at its intersection with Derby Day Avenue.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Steeds Crossing facing east at its intersection with Derby Day Ave.
Stone Hill Town Center
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Town Center Drive facing south at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Town Center Drive facing north at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Town Center Drive facing east at its intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hilltop Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with Town Center Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Town Center Drive facing west at its intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stone Hill Drive facing west at its intersection with FM 685.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing south at its intersection with Stone Hill Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stone Hill Drive facing east at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner Limestone Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with Stone Hill Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Stone Hill Drive facing west at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hilltop Commercial Drive facing south at its intersection with Stone Hill Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stone Hill Drive facing east at its intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Hilltop Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with Stone Hill Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Pfluger Farm Lane facing south at its intersection with Town Center Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing east at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing south at its intersection with Wilke Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with Limestone Commercial
Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing west at its intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Hilltop Commercial Drive facing south at its intersection with Limestone Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of westbound Stone Hill Drive facing south at its intersection with a private drive located
approximately 400 feet east of Stone Hill Drive's intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of eastbound Stone Hill Drive facing north at its intersection with a private drive located
approximately 400 feet east of Stone Hill Drive's intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/422
A stop sign at the Southwest corner of eastbound Stone Hill Drive facing west at its intersection with a private drive located
approximately 400 feet east of Stone Hill Drive's intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the Northeast corner of westbound Stone Hill Drive facing east at its intersection with a private drive located
approximately 400 feet east of Stone Hill Drive's intersection with Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Town Center Drive facing west at its intersection with the private driveway 450 feet east of
Hilltop Commercial Drive;
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Town Center Drive facing east at its intersection with the private driveway 450 feet east of
Hilltop Commercial Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing south at its intersection with the private driveway 850 feet
north of Town Center Drive;
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with the private driveway 850
feet north of Town Center Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Limestone Commercial Drive facing north at its intersection with Town Center Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Terrell Lane facing south at its intersection with Town Center Drive.
Sun Light Near Way
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Sun Light Near Way facing south at its intersection with East Pecan Street.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Helios Way facing east at its intersection with Sun Light Near Way.
Swenson Farms Subdivision
A stop sign at southwest corner of Mayapple Street facing west at its intersection Canyon Maple Drive.
A stop sign at northeast corner of Mayapple Street facing east at its intersection Canyon Maple Drive.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Canyon Maple Road facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southeast corner of Swenson Farms Boulevard facing south at its intersection Black Locust Drive East.
A stop sign at northeast corner of Laurel Oak Trail facing east at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Mayapple Street facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Pear Court facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of River Birch Way facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Canyon Maple Road facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Mayapple Street facing west at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at southwest corner of Mayapple Street facing west at its intersection Laurel Oak Trail.
A stop sign at northeast corner of White Poplar Path facing east at its intersection Laurel Oak Trail.
A stop sign at northeast corner of Laurel Oak Trail at its north end, facing east at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at northeast corner of Laurel Oak Trail at its south end, facing east at its intersection Swenson Farms Boulevard.
A stop sign at northwest corner of Swenson Farms Boulevard facing north at its intersection Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at southeast corner of Swenson Farms Boulevard facing south at its intersection Pfennig Lane West.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Private Kaden Prince Drive facing east at its intersection with Swenson Farms Blvd.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Private Landon Samuel Loop facing east at its intersection with Swenson Farms Blvd.
The Colored Addition Subdivision
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Caldwell Lane facing north at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Russell Street facing north at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Caldwell Lane facing south at its intersection with Lincoln Avenue.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Lincoln Avenue facing west at its intersection with Russell Street.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Taylor Avenue facing east at its intersection with Caldwell Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Taylor facing west at its intersection with Russell Street.
Verona Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Scoria Drive facing north at its intersection with Obsidian Drive
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Scoria Drive facing south at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Quebrada Ave facing north at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Quebrada Ave facing south at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Kimberlite Drive facing north at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kimberlite Drive facing south at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Quebrada Drive facing south at its intersection with Cele Road.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gabbro Drive facing east at its intersection with Quebrada Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Gabbro Drive facing west at its intersection with Quebrada Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Brittle Lane facing west at its intersection with Quebrada Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Gabbro Drive facing east at its intersection with Elk Horn Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Brittle Lane facing east at its intersection with Elk Horn Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Rookery Trail facing south at its intersection with Brittle Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Kimberlite Drive facing south at its intersection with Brittle Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Rookery Trail facing south at its intersection with Obsidian Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Obsidian Drive facing east at its intersection with Elk Horn Drive.
Village on Legacy Subdivision
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Beechtree Lane facing east at its intersection with Warm Springs Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Aspen Grove Drive facing south at its intersection with Beechtree Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Legacy Drive facing south at its intersection with Aspen Grove Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Legacy Drive facing north at its intersection with W. Pfennig Lane.
Wells Point Pass Subdivision
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Broken Feather Trail facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Tanner Trail facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Dust Leather Court facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Spanish Ridge Cove facing north at its intersection with Settlers Valley Drive.
West Park Subdivision
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/422
A stop sign at the northwest corner Ardisia Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Quincy Drive facing east at its intersection with Ardisia Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Quincy Drive facing west at its intersection with Dashwood Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dashwood Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dashwood Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Black Isle Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Black Isle Drive facing west at its intersection with North Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dashwood Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Black Isle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Dashwood Creek Court facing east at its intersection with Dashwood Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Willow Bluff Drive facing east at its intersection with Dashwood Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Avena Valley Drive facing north at its intersection with Willow Bluff Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Willow Bluff Drive facing east at its intersection with North Heatherwilde Boulevard.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Avena Valley Drive facing south at its intersection with Wiseman Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest Corner of Dashwood Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Isle Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Wiseman Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Isle Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Simsbrook Drive facing north at its intersection with Black Locust Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Dashwood Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Wiseman Drive.
Willow Creek Subdivision
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Meadow Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Oak Ridge Cove facing east at its intersection with Meadow Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Oak Ridge Cove facing west at its intersection with Meadow Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Willow Wood Lane facing east at its intersection with Meadow Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Cedar Ridge Drive facing east at its intersection with Meadow Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing west at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing south at its intersection with Oak Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the Northwest corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Oak Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the Northwest corner of Rocky Creek Drive facing north at its intersection with Willow Wood Lane.
A stop sign at the Northwest corner of Valley View Drive facing north at its intersection with Cedar Ridge Drive.
A stop sign at the Southwest corner of Cedar Ridge Drive facing west at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the Southwest corner of Applewood Drive facing west at its intersection with Farm-to-Market Road 685.
A stop sign at the Southeast corner of Valley View Drive facing south at its intersection with Applewood Drive.
A stop sign at the Southwest corner of Oak Ridge Drive facing west at its intersection with Valley View Drive.
A stop sign at the Southwest corner of Willow Wood Lane facing west at its intersection with Valley View Drive.
Windermere Subdivision
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/422
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Orchard Park Circle facing south at its west intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Orchard Park Circle facing south at its east intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Framingham Circle facing north at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Cresswell Drive facing north at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Ivybridge Drive, facing east at its intersection with Cresswell Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Ivybridge Drive facing west at its intersection with Cresswell Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Essex Cove facing south at its intersection with Ivybridge Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Bates Cove facing south at its intersection with Ivybridge Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Ivybridge Drive facing east at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Pitcairn Drive facing east at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Batavia Drive facing north at its intersection with Cresswell Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Pitcairn Drive facing west at its intersection with Cresswell Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Cresswell Drive facing south at its intersection with York Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Colwyn Bay Cove facing south at its intersection with York Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Autumn Mist Road facing north at its intersection with York Castle Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of York Castle Drive facing east at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Ramble Creek Drive facing east at its intersection with Grand Avenue Parkway.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Autumn Mist Road facing south at its intersection with Ramble Creek Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Ramble Creek Drive facing east at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Framingham Circle facing west at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Knottingham Drive facing south at its intersection with Framingham Circle.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of York Castle Drive facing north, at its intersection with Framingham Circle.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Knottingham Drive facing south at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Halo Drive facing south at its intersection with Edgerly Lane.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Edgerly Court facing north at its intersection with Edgerly Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Edgerly Lane facing west at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Malden Drive facing east at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Malden Cove facing west at its intersection with Malden Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Norwell Lane facing west at its intersection with Malden Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Norwell Lane facing east at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Malden Drive facing south at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Nimbus Drive facing east at its intersection with Pflugerville Loop West.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Nimbus Drive facing west at its intersection with Fitchburg Circle.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Vapor Drive facing north at its intersection with Nimbus Drive.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/422
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Vapor Drive facing west at its intersection with Halo Drive.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Halo Drive facing north at its intersection with Nimbus Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stoneham Circle at its north end, facing east at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Stoneham Circle at its south end, facing east at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fitchburg Circle at its north end, facing west at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Fitchburg Circle at its south end, facing west at its intersection with Windermere Drive.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Knottingham Drive facing east at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Knottingham Drive facing west at its intersection with Edgemere Drive.
Woodhaven
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Drifting Meadows Drive facing north at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Meandering Meadows Drive facing east at its intersection with Drifting Meadows Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Drifting Meadows Drive facing north at its intersection with Quiet Meadows Cove.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Copper Point Lane facing north at its intersection with Drifting Meadows Drive.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Copper Point Cove facing west at its intersection with Copper Point Lane.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Copper Point Lane facing south at its intersection with Tranquility Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Drifting Meadows Drive facing west at its intersection with Tranquility Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Maiden Grass Drive facing west at its intersection with Tranquility Lane.
A stop sign at the southwest corner of Meandering Meadows Drive facing west at its intersection with Tranquility Lane.
A stop sign at the northeast corner of Tranquility Lane facing east at its intersection with Murchison Ridge Trail.
A stop sign at the northwest corner of Maiden Grass Drive facing north at its intersection with Meandering Meadows Drive.
A stop sign at the southeast corner of Coneflower Cove facing south at its intersection with Meandering Meadows Drive.
(Ord. 908-07-09-25, passed 9-25-07; Ord. 930-08-02-12, passed 2-12-08; Ord. 1173-14-03-25, passed 3-25-14; Ord. 1186-14-09-09,
passed 9-9-14; Ord. 1193-14-11-25, passed 11-25-14; Ord. 1199-15-02-24, passed 2-24-15; Ord. 1279-16-08-09, passed 8-9-16; Ord.
1345-18-02-27, passed 2/27/18; Ord. 1346-18-02-27, passed 2/27/18; Ord. 1349-18-04-24, passed 4-24-18; Ord. 1366-18-10-23,
passed 10-23-18)
CHAPTER 73: PARKING ENFORCEMENT
§ 73.01 AUTHORITY OF PARKING ENFORCEMENT VOLUNTEERS.
(A) Parking enforcement volunteers are hereby authorized to issue citations on any vehicle found to be in violation of the City of
Pflugerville Code of Ordinances Chapter 71, the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 681, and the TEXAS
TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 684. The term “parking enforcement volunteers” shall include all personnel designated by the
Chief of Police as having the authority to issue parking citations as part of their job functions, regardless of job title.
(B) The Chief of Police shall have the authority and sole discretion to appoint and remove any person who is a citizen of the
United States to issue disabled parking and/or fire lane citations for any vehicle found to be parked in violation of the City of
Pflugerville Code of Ordinances Chapter 71 and/or the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 681 or Chapter 684.
(C) Each parking enforcement volunteer appointed pursuant to this section shall complete an application, and satisfactorily
complete a course of training on the Pflugerville Code of Ordinances Chapter 71, the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter
681 and the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 684 to be developed and conducted by the Chief of Police.
(D) The application required by subsection (C) of this section shall show the correct name, current address and telephone number
of the applicant. The Chief of Police, or his/her designee, is specifically authorized to require additional information from the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/422
applicant. Upon receipt of the application required by subsection (C) of this section, the Chief of Police will then make the final
decision regarding the application.
(E) Parking enforcement volunteers are hereby authorized to issue citations on any vehicle found to be in violation of the City of
Pflugerville Code of Ordinances Chapter 71, or found to be in violation of the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 681, or
found to be in violation of the TEXAS TRANSPORTATION CODE Chapter 684 in the same manner as any law enforcement officer
of the State or County or Municipality of the State of Texas, subject to the following limitations:
(1) No parking enforcement volunteer shall be deemed a peace officer, nor receive any compensation from the City of
Pflugerville while in the capacity of a parking enforcement volunteer.
(2) No parking enforcement volunteer shall be required to complete training as a police officer.
(3) No parking enforcement volunteer shall have the power or duty to enforce other traffic or civil or criminal laws.
(4) No parking enforcement volunteer shall possess or carry firearms or other weapons for the purpose of enforcing the
disabled parking or fire lane law.
(5) No parking enforcement volunteer shall be entitled to any indemnification from the State of Texas, Travis County
or the City of Pflugerville for any injury or property damage sustained as a result of enforcement activities. Each parking
enforcement volunteer shall specifically acknowledge that such parking enforcement volunteer has no rights to any claim
of injury or property damage resulting from parking enforcement activities.
(6) No government, agency, department or other officer of the State of Texas, Travis County or the City of Pflugerville
shall be liable or accountable for any act or omission of any person appointed to issue disabled parking or fire lane
citations pursuant to this section. Each parking enforcement volunteer shall specifically hold harmless the City of
Pflugerville, its employees, officers and agents from any such liability for any such act or omission by such parking
enforcement volunteer.
(Ord. 589-00-06-27, passed 6-27-00)
CHAPTER 74: TOW TRUCKS
§ 74.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
CONSENT TOW. A tow of a motor vehicle initiated by the owner or operator of the vehicle or by a person who has possession,
custody or control of the vehicle.
NONCONSENT TOW. A tow of a motor vehicle that is not a consent tow and is initiated by a Texas Peace Officer or a City of
Pflugerville Code Compliance Officer. This term does not include the towing of a vehicle off private property initiated by the
property owner or his/her agent.
TOW TRUCK. A motor vehicle, including a wrecker, equipped with a mechanical device used to tow, winch, or otherwise move
another motor vehicle.
TOWING COMPANY. A person operating a tow truck registered under Chapter 643 of the Texas Transportation Code and registered,
licensed and in good standing with Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation. The term includes the owner, officer, manager,
operator, employee or agent of the towing company, but does not include a political subdivision of the State of Texas.
VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY. A garage, parking lot, or other facility that is owned by a person other than a governmental entity,
and is used to store or park vehicles that have been towed to such facility without the consent of the owner or operator of the vehicle.
§ 74.02 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAW.
A towing company shall comply with all state laws, regulations, administrative rule and TDLR orders as may be amended from time
to time that relate to towing. A towing company that recklessly violates a state law or regulation related to towing commits an
offense under this chapter.
§ 74.03 NONCONSENT TOWS BY CONTRACT ONLY.
A towing company may not conduct a nonconsent tow within the corporate city limits of the City of Pflugerville unless they have
previously contracted with the City to perform this service.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/422
§ 74.04 SOLICITING ON PUBLIC STREETS PROHIBITED.
A towing company is prohibited from soliciting business from a City street to provide service to a vehicle that has been disabled in
an accident on a City Street. This prohibition applies to a solicitation to tow, remove, repair, wreck, store, trade, sell or purchase the
vehicle.
§ 74.05 NOTIFICATION OF VEHICLE REMOVAL.
(A) A towing company that removes a vehicle in accordance with Texas Transportation Code or in executing a repossession shall
notify the Pflugerville Police Department not less than one hour after removal.
(B) The notification shall include:
(1) The name of the towing company;
(2) The date, time, and location of the removal;
(3) The physical description, license number and vehicle identification number of the vehicle removed;
(4) The name of the tow truck operator who performed the removal; and
(5) The storage location of the vehicle.
§ 74.06 VEHICLE STORAGE FACILITY; REQUIRED INSPECTIONS.
(A) A towing company shall own a vehicle storage facility to store vehicles removed in a nonconsent tow that is:
(1) Licensed by the State of Texas; and
(2) Located with [within] 1,000 feet of the corporate city limits of the City of Pflugerville.
(B) All vehicle storage facilities that may be used to store a nonconsent tow or records concerning nonconsent tows shall be open
to inspection by the Pflugerville Police Department Monday through Friday between the hours of 8 a.m. and 5 p.m.
(C) Upon request by the City the financial records of a towing company that operates a vehicle storage facility that is used to store
a nonconsent tow may be audited twice a year upon request by the City of Pflugerville.
(D) All financial records of a towing company concerning nonconsent tows in the City of Pflugerville shall be maintained at the
company's vehicle storage facility.
§ 74.07 ACCIDENT SCENE ACCESS RESTRICTED.
Except as provided under this chapter, a towing company may not enter an accident scene or other site under a peace officer's control
without being directed to do so by the officer and:
(1) The person is summoned to the scene by a Texas Peace Officer or by a person involved in the accident; or
(2) It is necessary to prevent death or bodily injury, and emergency medical personnel are not present.
§ 74.08 AUTHORIZATION FOR VEHICLE REMOVAL.
A tow truck operator summoned to an accident scene may not begin preparations to remove a disabled vehicle from the scene until a
Texas Peace Officer authorizes its removal. A City of Pflugerville Peace Officer may direct the vehicle be towed to vehicle storage
facility owned or used by the City. A tow truck operator shall obey all lawful commands of a Texas Peace Officer at an accident
scene.
§ 74.09 PENALTY.
Any person including a Tow Truck Company who recklessly violates any portion of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
Misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ord. 1022-09-10-27, passed 10-27-09)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/422
CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS*
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 90.01 TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Animal Control Ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.02 DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ANIMAL. A nonhuman live, vertebrate creature, wild or domestic.
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER. The person duly designated to carry out the duties of the Animal Control Officer as prescribed in
this chapter; unless otherwise specifically designated by the City Council, the Chief of Police of the city shall be the Animal Control
Officer.
CITY POUND. A facility operated or used by the city for the purposes of impounding animals as prescribed in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT. Any commercial operation which is reasonably calculated to provide shelter, care,
maintenance, training, breeding, treatment of, or the provision of services to ten or more animals at one time.
DANGEROUS ANIMAL. Any animal that is not tame or gentle, but is of a wild nature or disposition and which, because of its size,
nature, or other characteristics would constitute a danger to human life or property if it was not kept or maintained in a safe manner
or in secure quarters.
ESTRAY. A stray horse, stallion, mare, gelding, filly, colt, mule, hinny, jack, jennet, hog, sheep, goat, or head of any species of cattle.
OWNER. Any person, partnership, firm, corporation, company, or association who has, harbors, or keeps an animal on or about its
premises. An animal is harbored if it is fed or sheltered for three or more consecutive days.
PERMIT. A printed or written certificate issued by the designated representative of the city authorizing the holder to operate a
commercial animal establishment within the corporate limits of the city.
PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes but is not limited to any animal that:
(1) Molests passersby or passing vehicles;
(2) Acts in a threatening manner in any location other than the property of its owner toward any person other than its
owner;
(3) Attacks or chases another animal, when the animal is on the property of its owner or custodian;
(4) Causes trash or garbage to be removed from a trash or garbage container;
(5) Defecates on the property of another person;
(6) Trespasses on school grounds;
(7) Is at large;
(8) Damages private or public property;
(9) Makes frequent or long continued noise which is disturbing to a person who has normal nervous sensibilities and
ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living; or
(10) Causes an offensive odor which is detectable across its owner's property line.
RESTRAINT.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/422
(1) The securing of an animal by leash or lead;
(2) The securing of an animal by confinement in a structure, cage, vehicle, wall or fence of sufficient strength or
construction to prevent the animal from escaping;
(3) The securing of an animal by the actual physical control of the owner or owner's agent.
VICIOUS ANIMAL. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals.
WILD ANIMAL. Any live monkey or nonhuman primate, raccoon, skunk, fox, panther, tiger, lion, lynx, or any other animal normally
found in the wild state.
(B) Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 868-07-03-27, § I, passed 3-27-07)
§ 90.03 ADOPTION OF THE RABIES CONTROL ACT OF 1981.
The Rabies Control Act of 1981, TEX. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE, Chapter 826, as amended, and the standards and regulations
adopted by the state Board of Health pursuant to the act, are adopted and incorporated into this chapter as minimum standards;
however, to the extent that this chapter provides standards that are compatible with, equal to, or more stringent than the act or the
standards and regulations adopted by the state Board of Health, this chapter prevails over the act and the standards and regulations.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.04 LOCAL HEALTH AUTHORITY.
For purposes of the Rabies Control Act of 1981, TEX. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE, Chapter 826, as amended, the Animal Control
Officer of the city is designated as the Local Health Authority.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 90.20 AUTHORITY; RECORDS.
(A) General authority. The procedures established in this chapter shall be administered by the Animal Control Officer, who may
employ the personnel, equipment, and facilities of the Police Department to hire or authorize persons, equipment, and facilities as
necessary to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Records required. The Animal Control Officer shall maintain for each commercial animal establishment or impounded animal
coming under the purview of this chapter:
(1) A file that includes but is not limited to a record of all pertinent names, addresses, and dates; copies of all
correspondence, notices, applications, permits and certificates; and a record of all other related activities; and
(2) An accurate accounting of all fees and charges and of funds and payments collected, including date of payment and
identification of payee.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.21 FEES.
(A) A receipt for all fees paid under this chapter shall be furnished to the person paying.
(B) All fees collected under this chapter shall be turned over to the City Treasurer of the city.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.22 HEARING.
(A) Upon the written request of an addressee of a notice under §§90.48 or 90.71 of this chapter for a hearing, the City Manager, or
a designated representative, shall conduct an informal hearing.
(B) Written notice of the place, date, and time of such hearing shall be given to the person requesting the hearing, and the person
must be given the opportunity to present any evidence that may be pertinent to the hearing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/422
(C) The City Manager, or a designated representative, must determine, after reviewing the evidence presented, whether the
addressee was in fact in violation of the chapter, and make his or her ruling as set out in §§ 90.49(B) and 90.73(B) of this chapter.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 90.40 PERMIT REQUIRED.
A permit is required in order to operate a commercial animal establishment within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.41 PERMIT APPLICATION.
An applicant for a new permit, or a permit renewal or transfer, must make application on a form provided by the city, accompanied
by the permit fee set out in § 90.42.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.42 PERMIT FEE.
(A) The fees related to commercial animal establishments are as follows:
(1) The owner of a commercial animal establishment must pay an annual permit fee of $75 to operate the commercial
animal establishment; however, the fee for permit applications made during the second half of a fiscal year is $37.50;
(2) A permit transfer fee of $10 must be paid to transfer a permit for a commercial animal establishment to a new
owner or operator; and
(3) A reapplication fee of $10 must be paid if reapplication is made within 180 days from the date of a permit denial; if
reapplication is made after 180 days from the date of denial, the applicant must pay the fee set out in division (A)(1) of
this section.
(B) All fees paid under this section are non-refundable.
(C) No permit fees are required of any government-operated zoological park or any veterinary hospital or clinic; however,
facilities exempted from permit fees are not exempted from the requirement to obtain a permit.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.43 TERM OF PERMIT.
(A) Permits expire on the last day of the fiscal year in which they are issued.
(B) Upon the change of ownership or operation of a commercial animal establishment, the new owner or operator must have any
existing current permit transferred to the new owner or operator's name. The transferred permit expires on the last day of the fiscal
year in which it is issued.
(C) Renewals of existing permits must be issued on the first day of the city's fiscal year, subject to compliance with applicable
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.44 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
(A) All commercial animal establishments within the city shall meet and maintain the following minimum standards:
(1) Be located not closer than 100 feet from any:
(a) Building used for residential purposes by anyone other than the person maintaining the commercial animal
establishment or the person's immediate family;
(b) School, hospital, church, public park, restaurant, food store, or building where people are employed; or
(c) Public way, other than an alley.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/422
(2) Maintain premises and surrounding grounds in a clean and sanitary manner, in order to keep them free from
accumulations of manure, decaying food, and refuse.
(3) Utilize airtight receptacles or containers for the storage of manure, decaying food, and refuse.
(4) Dispose of solid waste in a manner that is not offensive or unsanitary:
(5) Be constructed and maintained in order to prevent infestation by rats or other rodents. The presence of rats in a
commercial animal establishment is prima facie evidence that the establishment is maintained in violation of this chapter.
(B) Any permit holder who fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter is in violation of this chapter.
(C) In addition to the requirements of this section, all commercial animal establishments must comply with the city zoning
ordinance and all other applicable ordinances, laws, and governmental rules and regulations.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.45 INSPECTIONS.
It is a condition of the issuance of any permit that the Animal Control Officer is permitted, at any time, to inspect the commercial
animal establishment, its animals, and the property on which such establishment is located.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.46 PERMIT REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.
(A) A new or renewal permit may be refused, or an existing permit revoked, if:
(1) Permission for an inspection in accordance with the provisions of § 90.45 above is refused;
(2) Upon inspection, the premises of a commercial animal establishment are found:
(a) Not to be in compliance with the minimum standards established in § 90.44 of this chapter;
(b) To be in an unsanitary or offensive condition affecting the health, safety, and general welfare of the public and
the animals being maintained on the premises;
(3) The permit holder has falsified any information on the application for a permit;
(4) The permit holder has been convicted in a court having jurisdiction over these matters of:
(a) The offense of cruelty to animals; or
(b) Refusal or failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or of any other law governing the protection
and keeping of animals.
(B) Upon the revocation of, or refusal to renew, a commercial animal establishment permit, the permit holder must humanely
dispose of all animals owned, kept, or harbored at such commercial animal establishment within ten days.
(C) Any person who is denied a permit or whose permit is revoked:
(1) May not reapply for a period of 30 days from the date of the denial or revocation; and
(2) Will be considered to be a new applicant, unless reapplication is made within 180 days from the date of denial or
revocation.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.47 NOTICE OR REFUSAL OR REVOCATION.
(A) Any person who is denied a permit or whose permit is revoked must be given notice of the denial or revocation.
(B) The notice must:
(1) Be dated and in writing;
(2) State the reason for the denial or revocation;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/422
(3) Advise that a written request for an informal hearing to show cause why the permit should not have been denied or
revoked must be made within five working days of the date of the notice by mailing the request to:
City Manager
P. O. Box 589
Pflugerville, Texas 78691-0589
(4) Advise, if applicable, that the person must humanely dispose of all animals within ten days from the date of the
notice.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.48 HEARING.
(A) Timely filing of a written request for an informal hearing stays the denial or revocation of a permit until final action is taken
by the City Manager, or a designated representative.
(B) A permit will not be denied or revoked if, after hearing by the City Manager, or a designated representative, it is determined
that the Owner was not in violation of the chapter.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
IMPOUNDMENT
§ 90.70 GENERAL AUTHORITY.
(A) The Animal Control Officer, or a designated representative, may order impoundment in the city pound of an animal, if the
animal:
(1) Is found to be running at large within the city; or
(2) Has bitten or injured any person within the city; or
(3) Is dangerous, vicious, or wild and is not securely confined in such a manner that it cannot come in contact with, or
do harm to, any person or other animal.
(B) Should the owner of an animal fail or refuse to allow the impoundment of the animal, or attempt to interfere with the
impoundment, the Animal Control Officer may use reasonable means to accomplish the impoundment.
(C) Estrays within the city shall be reported to the County Sheriff for impoundment, pursuant to the provision of the TEX.
AGRICULTURAL CODE, Chapter 142.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.71 NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT.
(A) In addition to, or in lieu of, impounding an animal, the Animal Control Officer, based on the reasonable belief that the owner
is in violation of this chapter, may issue to the owner of the animal a notice of ordinance violation requiring appearance of the owner
in the municipal court of the city for prosecution of the alleged violation or violations of this chapter.
(B) When the owner of an animal that is impounded is known, or reasonably thought by the Animal Control Officer to be
identifiable, the Animal Control Officer must give written notice to the owner of the impoundment, provided, that no notice is
required if the owner voluntarily retrieves the animal from impoundment prior to giving of the written notice.
(C) The notice must contain the following information for animals impounded for any reason:
(1) Date of notice;
(2) Date and location of an animal's impoundment;
(3) Reason for impoundment;
(4) Description of the animal, including identifying marks and characteristics;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/422
(5) Location of impoundment facilities and hours during which an animal can be retrieved by the owner;
(6) If the animal is over four months of age and subject to contracting rabies, the Animal Control Officer may not
release the animal into the owner's possession unless the owner provides satisfactory evidence that the animal has had a
rabies vaccination within the preceding twelve months or the Animal Control Officer has issued a citation to the owner
for violation of § 90.77 (G) of this chapter;
(7) That the owner of an impounded animal may not take possession of the impounded animal until the fees and
charges incurred during the impoundment have been paid in full; and
(8) (a) That the owner has a right to an informal hearing before the City Manager, or a designated
representative, to show cause why the owner should not be subjected to fees for return of the animal; and
(b) That a written request for an informal hearing must be sent to and received by the City Manager, or a
designated representative, within five working days of the date of the notice; the request must be addressed to:
City Manager
P. O. Box 589
Pflugerville, Texas 78691-0589
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.72 FEES IMPOSED; COLLECTED.
(A) Fees Imposed. The following fees will be charged by the city and collected by the Animal Control Officer in accordance with
this chapter for each animal impounded hereunder:
(1) A fee of $20 for the first and second impoundments within the previous 12-month period;
(2) After an animal has been impounded twice during the previous 12-month period, $20 multiplied by the number of
times the animal has been impounded during the previous 12-month period, but not exceeding $500;
(3) A fee of $5 for each day an animal remains impounded;
(4) Actual cost for the preparation and posting or mailing of each notice required under this chapter;
(5) Charges for long distance telephone calls in connection with the administration of this section;
(6) The cost of additional personnel and specialized equipment necessary during an animal's apprehension and
impoundment;
(7) Medical costs, including but not limited to veterinarian fees, vaccines, and other specialized care and equipment;
and
(8) Any other expenses incurred incidental to the impoundment of an animal hereunder.
(B) Fees Collected.
(1) All fees and charges incurred under this section will be charged against and are the obligation of the owner of an
impounded animal, regardless of the disposition of the animal.
(2) Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the owner, adopter, or purchaser may not take possession of an
impounded animal until the fees and charges incurred during the impoundment of the animal have been paid in full.
(3) For purposes of purchase or adoption of an animal, if the fees and charges incurred during the impoundment of an
animal are more than the reasonable value of the animal and prevent its purchase or adoption, the Animal Control Officer
may fix a charge for the purchase or adoption of the animal which reasonably relates to the animal's value.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.73 HEARING.
(A) Timely filing of a written request for an informal hearing stays the proceedings under this chapter until final action is taken by
the City Manager, or a designated representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/422
(B) The fees and charges imposed under §90.72 above shall not be imposed if, after hearing by the City Manager, or a designated
representative, it is determined that the owner was not in violation of the chapter, or that the animal should not have been impounded
under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.74 DISPOSITION OF ANIMALS.
(A) Impounded animals, other than an animal being impounded for biting, shall be kept impounded for not less than five (5)
calendar days. Written or oral notice shall be given to the owner of an impounded animal soon as reasonably practical. This section
shall not apply to animals that have been determined to be terminally ill, terminally injured or suffering from a disease that is a threat
to the public health or the health of other animals.
(B) No animal over the age of four months and subject to contracting rabies may be released to the owner until the Animal Control
Officer has received evidence sufficient to demonstrate that the animal has had a rabies vaccination within the preceding three years,
or the Animal Control Officer has issued a citation for violation of §90.77(G) of this chapter to the owner.
(C) No animal may be released to a person other than the owner or the owner's authorized representative unless the requirements
of the TEX. HEALTH & SAFETY CODE, Chapter 828, which relates to sterilization of dogs and cats, have been satisfied.
(D) If the animal is adopted by a person other than the owner and the Animal Control Officer has not received evidence to
demonstrate that the animal has had a rabies vaccination within the preceding three years, and has been sterilized, the purchaser must
provide sufficient evidence of the rabies vaccination and sterilization to the Animal Control Officer within 30 days of the sale of the
animal. Failure to provide evidence of vaccination or sterilization within 30 days of the sale of the animal is in a violation of this
chapter and subject to fines.
(E) Any animal described in subsection (A) of this section that is not claimed by its owner within the time period designated in this
section, becomes the property of the city. The city may then either sell the animal or humanely dispose of it.
(F) At any time prior to its sale, adoption, or disposal, the owner of an animal may claim it from the city after satisfying the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 706-03-05-27, passed 5-27-03; Ord. 868-07-03-27, § II, passed 3-27-07)
§ 90.75 DESTRUCTION OF ANIMAL.
(A) The Animal Control Officer may destroy or authorize the destruction of an animal under the following circumstances:
(1) When the animal is attempting or threatening injury to any person or another animal, and such destruction appears
to be the most reasonable means available to prevent such injury;
(2) When there is evidence that any person or another animal has been bitten or scratched by an animal which is
attempting or threatening escape, and the owner of the animal inflicting such injury is unknown or cannot be located; or
(3) When there is evidence that the animal is terminally ill or injured or is suffering from a disease that is a threat to
public health.
(B) Any animal destroyed pursuant to division (A) of this section must be tested for rabies.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95)
§ 90.76 BITING ANIMAL.
(A) An animal impounded for biting shall be confined for at least ten days. At the request of its owner, and with the consent of a
veterinarian, the animal may be confined at facilities maintained by a licensed veterinarian.
(B) When the owner of an animal impounded for biting is known, or reasonably thought by the Animal Control Officer to be
identifiable, the Animal Control Officer must attempt to personally contact the owner in order to determine if and when the animal
has been vaccinated for rabies.
(C) In addition to all of the notice requirements listed in §90.71(C), the notice must contain the following information for animals
impounded for biting:
(1) That the animal will be confined for at least ten days;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/422
(2) That, if the owner has not already done so, the owner should immediately contact the Animal Control Officer to
discuss if and when the impounded animal was vaccinated for rabies; and
(3) That the owner may not take possession of the impounded animal until the Animal Control Officer has received a
certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal is free of transmissible rabies.
(D) No animal impounded for biting shall be released to its owner until the Animal Control Officer has received either:
(1) A certificate signed by a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal is free of transmissible rabies; or
(2) If the animal is over the age of four months and subject to rabies, evidence sufficient to satisfy the Animal Control
Officer that it has had a rabies vaccination within the preceding three years or that it has been given the required
vaccination during its period of impoundment.
(E) An animal impounded for biting becomes the property of the city if the owner of the animal fails or refuses to claim the animal
from the city pound or from the veterinarian, if the animal was confined by the veterinarian. The veterinarian confining the animal
must release the animal into the custody of the city. The city may then either sell the animal or humanely dispose of it. At any time
prior to its sale or disposal, its owner may claim it from the city.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 706-03-05-27, passed 5-27-03)
§ 90.77 PROHIBITIONS.
It is a violation of this chapter to:
(A) Maintain a public nuisance defined by §90.02;
(B) Allow an unspayed female dog, while the dog is in heat, to be upon the streets and in public places of the city;
(C) Own or operate a commercial animal establishment without having in force or effect a permit issued in accordance
with this chapter;
(D) Allow an animal to run at large;
(E) Fail to keep an animal under restraint;
(F) Tamper with any trap or animal-catching device set out by the Animal Control Officer or a designated
representative;
(G) Keep within the city an animal subject to contracting rabies which is over the age of four months and fail to:
(1) Have the animal vaccinated at least once every three years for rabies; or
(2) Affix around the animal's neck a collar with a current rabies tag attached when it is not on the property of the
owner;
(H) Keep, maintain, use, or have a dangerous, vicious, or wild animal, unless it is securely confined in a manner that it
cannot come in contact with, or do harm to, any person or another animal;
(I) Interfere with, hinder, or molest any city employee in the performance of the employee's duties under this chapter;
(J) Do any act which otherwise is proscribed in this chapter;
(K) Transport or carry on any public place any animal in an unenclosed motor vehicle (including but not limited to
convertibles, pickup trucks and flatbed trucks), without restraining the animal by a vented container or cage, or by chain,
rope or other device cross-tied to prevent the animal from falling or jumping from the motor vehicle or from strangling on
a leash;
(L) Leave any animal in any standing or parked motor vehicle in such a way as to endanger the animal's health or
safety; or
(M) Fail to promptly remove and sanitarily dispose of feces left on public or private property by an animal being
handled by the person, other than property owned by the owner or handler of the animal.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95; Am. Ord. 706-03-05-27, passed 5-27-03; Ord. 868-07-03-27, § III, passed 3-27-07) Penalty, see
§ 90.99
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/422
AGGRESSIVE DOGS
§ 90.80 PURPOSE DEFINED.
The City Council has determined that some dogs exhibit aggressive behavior and threaten the health, safety and welfare of the
Citizens of Pflugerville and other animals. The owners of an aggressive dog, bear the ultimate responsibility for the actions of their
dog and should be held accountable for these aggressive actions.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.81 LEVELS DEFINED.
Classification of a dog as aggressive shall be based upon specific behaviors exhibited by the dog. For purposes of this chapter,
behaviors establishing various levels of aggressive dogs are the following:
(A) Level 1 behavior is established if a dog at large is found to menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive
behavior or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of a domestic animal.
(B) Level 2 behavior is established if a dog, while at large, causes serious bodily injury to any domestic animal or
livestock.
(C) Level 3 behavior is established if:
(1) A dog, while at large, kills or causes the death of any domestic animal or livestock; or
(2) A dog classified as a level 2 aggressive dog that repeats the behavior in subsection (B) after the owner or
keeper receives notice of the level 2 classification.
(D) Notwithstanding subsections (A), (B), and (C), the director of animal control shall have discretionary authority to
refrain from classifying a dog as aggressive, even if the dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in subsections (A),
(B), and (C), if the director of animal control determines that the behavior was the result of the victim abusing or
tormenting the dog or was directed towards a trespasser or other similar mitigating or extenuating circumstances.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.82 APPEALS; RESTRICTIONS PENDING APPEAL.
(A) The director of animal control shall have authority to determine whether any dog has engaged in the behaviors specified in §
90.81. This determination may be based upon an investigation that includes observation of and testimony about the dog's behavior,
including the dog's upbringing and the owner's or keeper's control of the dog, and other relevant evidence as determined by the
director of animal control. These observations and testimony can be provided by animal control officers or by other witnesses who
personally observed the behavior. They shall sign an affidavit attesting to the observed behavior and agree to provide testimony
regarding the dog's behavior if necessary.
(B) The director of animal control shall have the discretion to increase or decrease a classified dog's restrictions based upon
relevant circumstances.
(C) The director of animal control shall give the dog's owner or keeper written notice by certified mail or personal service of the
dog's specified behavior, of the dog's classification as aggressive, and of the restrictions applicable to that dog by reason of its
classification. If the owner or keeper denies that the behavior in question occurred, the owner or keeper may appeal the director of
animal control's decision to the municipal court.
(D) Upon receipt of notice of the dog's classification as a level 1, 2, or 3 aggressive dog pursuant to subsection (C), the owner or
keeper shall comply with the restrictions specified in the notice unless reversed on appeal. Failure to comply with the specified
restrictions shall be a violation of this chapter for which a fine can be imposed. Additionally, the director of animal control, shall
have authority to impound the dog pending completion of all appeals.
(E) If the director of animal control's decision finds that a dog has engaged in aggressive behavior, the dog may be impounded
pending the completion of any appeals.
(F) Any dog classified as a level 3, that is found to have repeated level 3 behavior as defined under this code, shall be humanely
destroyed.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.83 HEARINGS; NOTICE OF HEARINGS; APPEAL.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/422
(A) Notice of appeal of a classification of aggressive dog must be given to the director of animal control within fifteen (15)
working days of the date the dog is classified as aggressive by the director of animal control. The director of animal control or his
designee shall set an aggressive animal hearing. The owner shall be notified of said hearing by certified mail, return receipt
requested. Failure of the owner of the animal to appear at the hearing shall result in a final classification with no further appeal. The
owner may be represented by counsel.
(B) A municipal court judge shall sit as the administrative appeal hearing officer. The Judge shall conduct a de novo appeal and
shall make a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence. The judge shall prepare a written order. The judge may
order any remedial measures that the animal control officer is authorized to by this section that is reasonably necessary to safeguard
the public from the aggressive dog.
(C) The result of the administrative appeal hearing is final.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.84 REGULATION.
In addition to the other requirements of this chapter, the owner or keeper of an aggressive dog shall comply with the following
conditions:
(A) Dogs classified as level 1 dogs shall be restrained, so as not to be at large, by a physical device or structure, in a
manner that prevents the dog from reaching any public sidewalk, or adjoining property and must be located so as not to
interfere with the public's legal access to the owner's or keeper's premises whenever that dog is outside the owner's or
keeper's home and not on a leash. The director of animal control may order sterilization of the animal.
(B) Dogs classified as level 2 dogs shall be confined within a secure enclosure whenever the dog is not on a leash. The
secure enclosure must be located so as not to interfere with the public's legal access to the owner's or keeper's premises. In
addition, the director of animal control may require the owner or keeper to obtain and maintain proof of public liability
insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). In addition, the owner or keeper may be required
to complete a responsible pet ownership program as prescribed by the director of animal control or the Municipal Judge.
The director of animal control may order sterilization of the animal.
(C) Dogs classified as level 3 dogs shall be confined within a secure enclosure whenever the dog is not on a leash. The
secure enclosure must be located so as not to interfere with the public's legal access to the owner's or keeper's premises,
and the owner or keeper shall post warning signs, which are provided by the director of animal control, on the premises
where the dog is kept, in conformance with rules to be adopted by the director of animal control. In addition, the director
of animal control may require the owner or keeper to obtain and maintain proof of public liability insurance in the amount
of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The owner or keeper shall not permit the dog to be off the owner's or
keeper's premises unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by an adequate leash and under the control of a capable
person. In addition, the director of animal control may require the owner or keeper to satisfactorily complete a pet
ownership program. The director of animal control may order sterilization of the animal. The director of animal control,
or upon appeal, the municipal judge, may order the animal be humanely destroyed.
(D) To ensure correct identification, all dogs that have been classified as aggressive shall be microchipped and
photographed, and may be fitted with a special tag or collar determined by the director of animal control at the owner's
expense. The director of animal control shall adopt rules specifying the type of required identification.
(E) The owner or keeper of a level 3 aggressive dog shall not permit the warning sign to be removed from the secure
enclosure. The owner or keeper of any aggressive dog shall not permit the special tag or collar to be removed from the
dog. The owner or keeper of an aggressive dog shall not permit the dog to be moved to a new address or change owners
or keepers without providing the director of animal control with ten (10) days' prior written notification.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.85 DECLASSIFICATION.
Declassification will be automatic pursuant to this section.
(A) The following conditions must be met:
(1) Level 1 or level 2 dogs have been classified for one (1) year without further incident, and two (2) years for
level 3 dogs;
(2) There have been no violations of the specified regulations; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/422
(3) If ordered by the director of animal control or Municipal Judge at the time of classification:
(a) The owner or keeper provides the director of animal control with written certification of satisfactory
completion of obedience training for the aggressive dog with the owner or keeper; and
(b) The owner or keeper provides the director of animal control with written verification that the classified
dog has been sterilized from a licensed veterinarian.
(B) When the owner or keeper of an aggressive dog meets all of the conditions in this chapter, the restrictions for level
1 and level 2 classified dogs may be removed. Restrictions for level 3 may be removed, with the exception of the secure
enclosure.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.86 DEFENSES.
It shall be a defense to prosecution that the dog was:
(A) A dog in service of a local, state or federal law enforcement agency;
(B) Being taunted or teased at the time of the incident;
(C) Injured and responding to pain;
(D) Being aggressive in response to a willful trespass or other tort or crime being committed upon the premises
occupied by the owner or person in control of the dog in question;
(E) Acting in defense of its owner or a third person from an unjustified attack or assault.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.87 COST.
The City may impose a charge upon the owner of a dog found to be aggressive under the terms of this section. The City Council may
set fees by resolution for microchipping, photographing, signage, training, collars, tags, licenses, impoundment or destruction of an
aggressive dog.
(Ord. 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 90.99
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person found guilty of violating a provision of this chapter for which no other specific penalty has been set forth shall be
subject to the penalty set forth in §10.99 of this code of ordinances.
(B) Any person found to be violating the provisions set out in §90.77 is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, is subject to
a fine not to exceed $500.00. Each day of such violation constitutes a separate offense.
(C) The fines stated in §90.72(A):
(1) Are cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have; and
(2) May be imposed notwithstanding provisions for the denial or revocation of a permit to operate a Commercial
Animal Establishment or the impoundment of an animal under this chapter, and whether or not any of the procedures
provided for in this chapter are initiated or carried out.
(D) Leaving any animal in a parked or standing motor vehicle when the outside temperature is 85 degrees Fahrenheit or greater for
any period of time and the animal appears to be in distress; or confining any animal in a motor vehicle for more than four hours
without adequate water shall constitute a per se danger to the animal's health and safety.
(E) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this chapter that the animal was being used for bona fide law enforcement purposes.
(F) Notwithstanding §95.05 of the City of Pflugerville Code of Ordinances it shall be a defense to prosecution under §90.77(E)
that the animal was on the premises of a city park designated as a dog park by the City Manager and posted as such with official
signage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/422
(G) It shall be a defense to prosecution under §90.77(E) that the animal was a service animal being used by a disabled person as
defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §§12101 et seq., as amended.
(H) A person in violation of §§ 90.80–90.87 shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00
nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by
Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with.
(Ord. 417-95-04-11, passed 4-11-95; Ord. 868-07-03-27, § IV, passed 3-27-07; Ordinance 1066-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
CHAPTER 91: FIRE PREVENTION*
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 OPEN BURNING; PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) Permit Required. No person shall kindle or maintain any open fire, or authorize such fire to be kindled or maintained, on any
private land or on any public street, alley, road, or other public grounds within the city without first having obtained a permit for such
fire from the Fire Marshal of the city or his authorized representative unless the open fire qualifies under one of the following
exceptions:
(1) Firefighter training if authorization has been provided by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ)
pursuant to 30 Texas Administrative Code §§111.201 et seq., as amended, or by the rules, regulations, and orders of the
TCEQ (collectively referred to as “TCEQ Regulations”);
(2) Fires for recreational or ceremonial purposes, in the noncommercial preparation of food, or used exclusively for the
purpose of supplying warmth during cold weather as long as the fires otherwise comply with TCEQ Regulations.
(Ord. 696-03-02-11, passed 2-11-03)
(B) Restrictions. A permit under this section shall be given only for good cause shown and shall be subject to such restrictions as
may be deemed necessary to limit the hazardous effects thereof on residents and property within the city. Restrictions on proposed
open fires under such permit shall include, but not be limited to , the following:
(1) The location of such open fire shall not be less than 50 feet from any structure, and adequate provision shall be
made to prevent such fire from spreading within 50 feet of any structure; or such fire shall be contained in an approved
waste burner located safely no less than 15 feet from any structure.
(2) Such open fire shall be constantly attended by a competent person until the fire is extinguished, and such person
shall have a garden hose connected to a water supply or have other fire-extinguishing equipment readily available for use.
(C) Open Fires Prohibited. The above notwithstanding, the Fire Marshal, or his authorized representative, may prohibit any or all
open fires:
(1) When atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fires hazardous; and
(2) Which would be in violation of Tex. Health & Safety Code, §§ 382.001 et seq., as amended, or with the rules,
regulations, and orders of the TCEQ, pursuant thereto.
(Ord. 696-03-02-11, passed 2-11-03)
(D) Interpretation. This section shall not be administered, construed, or interpreted in any manner which would render this section
in conflict with, or inconsistent with, Tex. Health & Safety Code, §§ 382.001 et seq., as amended, and with the rules, regulations, and
orders of the Air Control Board of the State of Texas. Rather this section shall be deemed to be supplementary to Tex. Health &
Safety Code, §§ 382.001, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the Texas Air Control Board adopted pursuant thereto, so that
authorization for such burning under said statute, and the rules, regulations, and orders of the Texas Air Control Board adopted
pursuant thereto, require additional authorization under this section to protect against fire hazards.
(Ord. 207-85-8-13, passed 8-13-85) Penalty, see § 10.99
FIREWORKS
§ 91.15 DEFINITIONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/422
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
FIREWORKS. Firecrackers, skyrockets, torpedoes, roman candles, sparklers, fire balloons, and all substances, in whatever
combination and by whatever name, which are intended for use in obtaining visible or audible effects by combustion, explosion or
detonation. Such term shall include all articles or substances within the ordinary meaning of the term fireworks, whether or not
specifically designated herein.
PERSON. Any natural person, association or persons, partnership or corporation and shall include any agent, officer, or employee of
the foregoing.
(Ord. 395-94-03-22, passed 4-26-94)
§ 91.16 DECLARATION OF NUISANCE.
Except as provided in § 91.18, the transporting, storing, offering for sale, sale, possession, assembly, manufacture, use or discharge
of fireworks within the city and the offering for sale or sale of fireworks within 5,000 feet outside the city limits is hereby declared to
be illegal and a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to transport, store, offer for sale, sell, have in his possession,
use, discharge, cause to be discharged, ignite, detonate or otherwise set into action any fireworks within the city.
(Ord. 395-94-03-22, passed 4-26-94) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference–Authority of city to prohibit or further regulate fireworks, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2154.004.
§ 91.17 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
The duly appointed and acting Fire Marshal of the city or his authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter any premises
where the unlawful presence of fireworks is suspected in order to determine whether fireworks are present, and to seize, remove and
cause to be destroyed any fireworks found within the city or within 5,000 feet outside the city limits in violation of this subchapter.
(Ord. 395-94-03-22, passed 4-26-94)
Cross-reference--Fire Marshal, see § 30.01.
§ 91.18 EXCEPTIONS.
(A) This subchapter shall not apply to signal flares transported or used by railroads in connection with their operations; signal
flares or rockets for police use; auto safety flares; paper caps containing less than .25 of a grain of explosive material per cap,
designed for use in toy guns or toy cannons; or to blank cartridges used in connection with athletic or similar events.
(B) This chapter shall not apply to pyrotechnic displays designed to entertain the general public, which have been approved by the
Fire Marshal in advance and which are supervised by the Fire Marshal or his authorized representative.
(Ord. 395-94-03-22, passed 4-26-94)
CHAPTER 92: HEALTH AND SANITATION
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
§ 92.01 COVERING OF WELLS, CISTERNS AND HOLES.
(A) It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for the owner or operator of any well, cistern, or hole having a depth
of six feet or greater and a diameter of four inches or greater:
(1) To fail to keep it securely covered at all times when not in actual use with a locked lid capable of sustaining a
human weight of at least 250 pounds; or
(2) To maintain an unused or abandoned facility, as above described, unless it has been completely filled from its total
depth to the surface or plugged at a depth of not less than six feet from the surface and completely filled from the plug to
the surface.
(B) The plugging of any well shall be in accordance with standards promulgated by the Texas Water Well Drillers Board, to the
extent applicable.
(C) This section shall be enforced by the Building Official of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/422
(Ord. 267-87-12-8, passed 12-8-87; Am. Ord. 866-07-02-27, passed 2-27-07) Penalty, see § 10.99
PUBLIC NUISANCES
§ 92.15 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions will apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
GARBAGE. All vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, storage or consumption of food, and animal
waste.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any motordriven or propelled vehicle required to be registered under the laws of this state or any vehicle which
is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks, campers, go-carts, golfcarts,
snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, racing vehicles, and motorcycles.
PRIVACY FENCE. A fence constructed of wood or masonry that completely screens the view of objects located on the opposite side
of the fence.
PUBLIC NUISANCE.
(A) Any act, thing, occupation, condition or use of property that is of such a nature and continues long enough to:
(1) Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose or safety of the public;
(2) Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
(3) Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage any
street, alley, highway, navigable body of water or other public way.
(B) Public nuisances include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) Decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink sold or offered for sale to the public;
(2) Animal carcasses not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death of the
animal;
(3) Accumulations of garbage or refuse in which disease-carrying insects, rodents, or other vermin may breed or
may reasonably be expected to breed;
(4) Stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects may breed;
(5) Containers with garbage or refuse that are not covered by solid, tight-fitting lids, that have any uncovered
holes or for which at least weekly removal of garbage and refuse is not provided;
(6) Vegetation that:
(a) Harbors or aids in harboring rodents, snakes, or vermin;
(b) Harbors or hosts disease or insects that may reasonably be expected to injure other forms of life (except
insects, such as those commonly called lady bugs, used for pest control);
(c) Is prohibited by law or ordinance, including noxious weeds;
(d) By reason of its location or condition, constitutes an imminent danger to any person or property;
(e) Hinders the removal of accumulations of junk, garbage, refuse and debris;
(f) Is unmanaged and in excess of eight inches in height; except for cultivated flowers, ornamentals, or food
plants (vegetation in excess of eight inches, unless predominantly composed of cultivated wild flowers or food
plants, and vegetation which interferes with or obstructs the view or passage on any street, alley or other
public way will be presumed unmanaged);
(7) The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases, fly ash or industrial dust within the city
limits or within one mile from the city limits in quantities that endanger the health of persons or threaten or cause
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/422
substantial injury to property, but excluding smoke emanating from residential fireplaces and fireplaces of
commercial properties that are burning wood products typically used in such fireplaces;
(8) The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water by sewage, creamery or
industrial wastes or other substances;
(9) Any use of property, substances or things within the city limits or within one mile of the city limits, emitting
or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious or disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely
repulsive to the physical senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the health of
any appreciable number of persons within the city;
(10) Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation, deterioration or decay; of faulty construction; open
to intrusion; abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter; extremely unsound; in danger of
collapse or failure; or endangers the health and safety of the public;
(11) Unsightly articles that are visible from adjoining property or from public or private thoroughfares including,
but not limited to, household appliances not in actual use, auto parts, garden maintenance equipment not in actual
use, furniture in disrepair or not in actual use, lumber, plant waste, shrub or tree clippings, metals or bulk materials;
(12) Any motor vehicle or trailer having service or maintenance work done, including but not limited to, vehicles
or trailers supported on stands or blocks, for a period of more than forty-eight hours except in enclosed garages or
other structures;
(13) Dumpsters, trash containers, or trash container stands located on a public right-of-way, unless owned, leased
or under the control of the city; provided that trash containers may be placed on publicly-owned right-of-way
adjacent to the pavement on the day the trash in the container is scheduled for removal by a trash hauler;
(14) Other actions, conduct, omissions, conditions or things defined or specified in the city's Code of Ordinances
as nuisances or public nuisances.
REAR YARD. That portion of the yard between lines that extend from the outside rear corners of the subject structure on the lot
perpendicularly to the back property line.
REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes, including rubbish, debris, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned
or inoperable household appliances, moveable furniture not designed for or modified to withstand the elements and outdoor use,
solid wastes and industrial wastes.
TRAILER. A vehicle that is designed or used to carry a load wholly on its own structure and is drawn or designed to be drawn by a
motor vehicle, such as, but not limited to, semitrailers, truck-trailers, boat trailers, or trailer houses.
§ 92.16 PROHIBITION.
(A) No person may erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to exist any public nuisance on any property within the
city.
(B) The procedures and remedies set forth in §§92.17 and 92.18 may be used in the alternative or in consonance with or in lieu of
any other remedy or procedure authorized by law for the removal of violations or nuisances.
§ 92.17 FILING COMPLAINTS; INSPECTIONS; NOTICE TO ABATE; FAILURE TO ABATE; ABATEMENT BY
CITY; APPEAL.
(A) All complaints alleging the existence of a public nuisance must be filed with the Building Official's office.
(B) The Building Official will promptly inspect the premises or cause them to be inspected and make a written report on the
findings of the inspection. Whenever practical, photographs of the premises will be attached to the written report. The Building
Official must keep all written reports on file for at least three years.
(C) If the Building Official determines that there is no public nuisance that presents a danger to the public health, safety, and
welfare, the complainant may present its case to the City of Pflugerville Municipal Court. The complaint must comply with all rules
of the court, including payment of filing fees sufficient to cover court costs. The complainant bears the burden of proof in any case
before the court.
(D) Upon determining that a public nuisance exists on private property and that there is danger to the public health, safety, or
welfare, the Building Official will deliver written notice to the owner of the property where the public nuisance exists in accordance
with §342.006 of the Health and Safety Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/422
(E) The notice must:
(1) Specifically describe the public nuisance;
(2) Direct the owner of the private property where the public nuisance exists to abate or remove the public nuisance
within ten days of service or posting of the notice;
(3) Contain the telephone number and name of the city officer or employee who made the inspection resulting in the
notice, and state that telephone inquiries may be made;
(4) State that, unless the public nuisance is abated or removed, the city will cause it to be abated or removed, that the
cost thereof will be charged to the owner and that the cost will be a lien on the real property where the public nuisance
was abated or removed;
(5) State that the failure of the owner to abate the public nuisance as required by the notice will be deemed an implied
consent for the city to abate or remove the public nuisance and that the implied consent will be deemed to form a contract
between the owner and the city; and
(6) Advise that the determination of the existence of a public nuisance may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment
within the time allowed for abating or removing the public nuisance.
(F) If a public nuisance is not abated or removed after notice under this section and within the time specified in the notice, the
Building Official may cause the abatement or removal of the public nuisance. The cost of abatement and removal is a lien on the real
property where the public nuisance was abated or removed.
(G) The owner of the private property where the public nuisance exists who fails to abate or to remove the public nuisance
required by this section thereby consents, under the terms of this section, to have the city abate or remove the public nuisance at the
expense of the owner.
(H) The person upon whom a notice to abate a public nuisance is served or the property owner, tenant or other affected person may
appeal the determination of public nuisance in writing to the Board of Adjustment. The written appeal must be made within the time
period for abating the public nuisance as stated in the notice, and the appeal will be placed on the agenda of the next regular Board of
Adjustment meeting that is at least four days after the receipt of the written appeal. The Board of Adjustment may extend the time
within which the public nuisance must be abated, determine that a public nuisance does not or no longer exists, or that the public
nuisance must be abated within the time period set out in the notice or immediately, if the period set out in the notice has run. If the
public nuisance was determined to be an emergency and the opportunity for an appeal was not available due to the short period of
time extended to abate the public nuisance, an appeal may be heard after the abatement of the public nuisance by the city. In that
event, the Board of Adjustment may determine that the appellant is liable for the costs, or that, upon good cause shown, that the
appellant is not liable for the costs and that a lien should not be filed by the city upon the property.
§ 92.18 COST OF ABATEMENT AS A LIEN.
(A) The Building Official will provide the Finance Director with the total cost of abatement and removal of any public nuisance
incurred by the city. The Finance Director will cause a bill to be delivered to the same persons and in the same manner as the notice
of the public nuisance was served. Whenever a bill for the reasonable costs of abatement or removal of a public nuisance pursuant to
this chapter remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been sent, the Finance Director will file a notice of lien in the Real Property
Records of Travis County, Texas. Any notice of lien under this chapter will be filed within 90 days after the cost of abatement or
removal of the public nuisance has been incurred by the city. The notice must include a sworn statement setting out: (1) a description
of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; (2) the amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable
by the city; and (3) the date or dates when the cost and expense was incurred by the city. However, any purchaser whose rights in
such real estate have arisen subsequent to removal of the public nuisance and before the filing of the notice will not be held liable for
the costs of abatement or removal, and the lien of the city will not have priority as to any mortgage, judgment creditor or other
lienholder whose rights in and to such real estate arose before to the filling of such notice.
(B) Costs and expenses under this chapter include, but are not limited to, the actual costs and expenses in time of city employees
or city-authorized contractors and in materials for abatement or removal of the public nuisance under this chapter; transportation to
and from the property; title searches or certifications; preparation of lien documents, foreclosures and other related expenses,
including reasonable attorney's fees and expenses.
(C) A copy of the notice of lien must be mailed by the Finance Director to the owner of the property or to the person or persons in
whose name such real estate was last billed for property tax purposes.
(D) The real estate subject to a lien for an unpaid assessment of costs and expenses may be sold, and the proceeds of the sale
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/422
(E) The City Attorney may institute proceedings in the name of the city in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against
any property or the owner or occupant of the property for costs and expenses that have remained unpaid 30 days after the notice of
lien is filed and a statement of such costs and expenses has been mailed to the property owner or to the person or persons in whose
name the property was last billed for property tax purposes. The action authorized by this subsection is in addition to, and without
waiver of, any other remedy.
(F) Upon payment of all costs and expenses, plus interest from the date 30 days after the bill was sent, the Finance Director or
designee will file a release of the lien in the Real Property Records of Travis County, Texas.
§ 92.19 EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY.
Whenever in this chapter duties are given to the Building Official, such duties may be performed by an employee of the city assigned
to such duty by the Building Official.
§ 92.20 VIOLATIONS.
(A) A separate offense is committed on each day that a violation of §92.16 exists unabated after the deadline for abatement and
removal established by §92.17. Any person violating this provision will be fined not less than $10.00 nor more than $2,000.00 per
offense unless otherwise limited by applicable laws.
(B) The provisions for remedying violations of this chapter are in addition to other applicable remedies, including an action for an
injunction.
(Ord. 323-90-09-11, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 583-00-05-09, passed 5-9-00; Ord. 631-01-04-24, passed 4-24-01; Ord. 656-01-12-
11, passed 12-11-01; Ord. 866-07-02-27, passed 2-27-07)
CHAPTER 93: JUNKED VEHICLES
§ 93.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ANTIQUE VEHICLE. A passenger car or truck that is at least 35 years old.
JUNKED VEHICLE. A vehicle that is self propelled and is:
(1) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(2) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) 48 consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) 14 consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
MOTOR VEHICLE COLLECTOR. A person who:
(1) Owns one or more antique or special interest vehicles; and
(2) Acquires, collects, or disposes of an antique or special interest vehicle or part of an antique or special interest
vehicle for personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
SPECIAL INTEREST VEHICLE. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been changed from original manufacturer's specifications
and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by a hobbyist.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73; Am. Ord. 848-06-11-14, passed 11-14-06)
State law reference--Tex Transportation Code, § 683.077.
§ 93.02 JUNKED VEHICLES DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE.
Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to
the safety and welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire
hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic
welfare of the city, by producing urban blight, and such vehicles are therefore declared to be a public nuisance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/422
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73; Am. Ord. 848-06-11-14, passed 11-14-06)
§ 93.03 PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT AND REMOVAL.
Junked vehicles declared to be public nuisances may be abated, removed, and disposed of by following the procedures stated herein.
(A) Notice.
(1) Nuisance on Private Property. For a nuisance on private property, not less than ten days notice stating the
nature of the public nuisance on private property shall be given. Notice shall state that it must be removed and
abated within ten days and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The
notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the
junked motor vehicle, to any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the
public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is
unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known
registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the
United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days
after the date of the return.
(2) Nuisance on Public Property. For a nuisance on public property, not less than ten days notice stating the nature
of the public nuisance on public property or on a public right-of-way shall be given. Notice shall state that the
nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days and that a request for a hearing must be made before
expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be mailed by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the
last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, to any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant
of the public premises, or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-of-way on which the
public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is
unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known
registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the
United States Post Office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days
after the date of the return.
(B) Reconstruction Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for a vehicle to be reconstructed or made operable after it has been
removed from property pursuant this chapter.
(C) Public Hearing Required for Public Nuisance. A public hearing is required before the removal of the vehicle or
vehicle part as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the Municipal Court Judge, if a hearing is requested by
the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public
right-of-way on which the vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. The Judge shall
make a determination based upon a preponderance of the evidence. At the hearing it is presumed, unless demonstrated
otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. An order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must
include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if the
information is available at the site.
(D) Notice Required to State Department of Highways. Notice of removal shall be given to the state Department of
Highways and Public Transportation not later than the fifth day after the date of removal. The notice must identify the
vehicle or vehicle part. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant to the
Certificate of Title Act, TEX. REV. CIV. STAT., Art. 6687-1.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73; Am. Ord. 848-06-11-14, passed 11-14-06; Ord. 872-07-04-10, passed 4-10-07) Penalty, see §
10.99
Statutory references–Regulation of abandoned and junked motor vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 683.001 et seq.; junked vehicles, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 683.071 et seq.
§ 93.04 LIEN ON JUNKED VEHICLE.
A lien for all costs incurred in the impounding, storing and advertising for sale of personal property pursuant to this chapter shall
exist and inure to the benefit of the person actually impounding such property. Such lien shall be prior and superior to all other liens
of every kind, save and except liens for ad valorem taxes, and the impounder may retain possession of such property until all costs
are paid and may sell the same as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73)
§ 93.05 SALE OF JUNKED VEHICLE.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/422
(A) Notice. Before selling any junked vehicle, or part thereof, as provided for in this chapter, the impounder shall post two notices
thereof, one at the county courthouse door and one at the city hall, and shall cause a copy thereof to be published in a daily
newspaper published in the city once a week for two consecutive weeks, the date of the first publication to be at least 14 days prior to
the day of sale. The notice of sale shall describe the impounded property, state the same as unredeemed, state the same will be sold,
designate the place of sale, the manner of sale, and state a time and date of sale which shall not be less than 14 days from the date of
the first posting of such notice. A copy of such notice shall be mailed to the record owner of such impounded property and to anyone
who may have a lien thereon.
(B) Procedure. When any impounded property is not redeemed by the date and time designated in the notice of sale, the
impounder shall sell such property at a public auction.
(C) Disposition of Proceeds of Sale. After deducting the fee and costs incurred, pursuant to this chapter, the Police Chief shall hold
the balance of the proceeds of such sale, if any, to pay the same to the owner or entitled lienholder of the property for 90 days. If such
proceeds are not claimed within such period, they shall be deposited in a special fund, and any taxes due thereon, for the payment of
auction, towing, preserving, storage, and all notice and publication costs which resulted from placing other abandoned or junked
vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of such other abandoned or junked vehicles, are insufficient to meet these
expenses and costs.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73; Am Ord. 848-06-11-14, passed 11-14-06)
§ 93.06 EXCEPTIONS.
This chapter does not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is:
(A) Completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or
private property;
(B) Stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business or a licensed vehicle dealer
or junkyard, or that is an antique or special interest vehicle stored by a motor vehicle collector on the collector's property,
if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are:
(1) Maintained in an orderly manner;
(2) Not a health hazard; and
(3) Screened from ordinary public view by appropriate means, including a fence, rapidly growing trees, or
shrubbery.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73)
Statutory reference–Texas Transportation Code, § 683.077.
§ 93.07 ADMINISTRATION.
This chapter shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city, except that removal of a vehicle or parts
thereof may be by any duly authorized person.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73)
§ 93.08 SCRAPPING.
The city may enter into a contract with a commercial enterprise, (sometimes herein called “impounder”), capable of picking up and
disposing of junked vehicles, and authorizing said enterprise to pick up and dispose of vehicles or parts thereof, found to be public
nuisances.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73)
§ 93.09 COSTS.
The net costs of disposing of such vehicle shall be charged against the party given notice by the Police Chief as above stated, or such
other person as may be responsible for such vehicle and such person shall be indebted to the city for the net costs. By net costs is
meant the cost of pick up, storage, and handling of the vehicles by the commercial operator, less the value of the vehicle as scrap.
Should these be a positive value, after deducting such costs, it shall be refunded to the person given notice, or such person as may be
found to be the owner. Nothing herein shall prevent the imposition of fine or penalty as herein provided.
(Ord. 46-73-11-19, passed 11-19-73; Am. Ord. 848-06-11-14, passed 11-14-06)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/422
CHAPTER 94: NOISE CONTROL
§ 94.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the Noise Control Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 291-88-10-11, passed 10-11-88)
§ 94.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
CONSTRUCTION. Any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, or similar action, excluding Demolition,
for or of public or private right-of-ways, structures, utilities, or similar property.
DECIBEL DB(A). Sound pressure level as measured by a sound level meter using the “A” weighting network and the slow meter
response as specified by the American National Standards Institute.
DEMOLITION. Any dismantling, intentional destruction, or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces,
or similar property.
EMERGENCY. Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage which
demands immediate action.
EMERGENCY WORK. Any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage
threatened or caused by an Emergency.
LEGAL HOLIDAY. A day officially designated by the governing body of the city as an official city holiday.
MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is propelled or drawn on land by a motor, such as, but not limited to, passenger cars, trucks,
truck-trailers, semitrailers, campers, go-carts, snowmobiles, amphibious craft on land, dune buggies, or racing vehicles, but not
including Motorcycles.
MOTORCYCLE. An unenclosed Motor Vehicle having a saddle for the use of the operator and two or three wheels in contact with
the ground, including, but not limited to, motor scooters and minibikes.
NOISE DISTURBANCE. Any sound which:
(1) Endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals;
(2) Annoys or disturbs a reasonable Person of normal sensitivities;
(3) Endangers or injures personal or real property;
(4) Creates a vibration that can be felt at a distance greater than 30 feet from the source; or
(5) Exceeds the sound level of 85db(A).
PERSON. Any individual, association, partnership or corporation, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or
instrumentality of a state, or any political subdivision of a state.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE. Any sound that can be detected by a Person using his or her unaided hearing faculties. For example, while
investigating a noise complaint the officer hears a song coming from a vehicle's sound system. The officer does not need to identify
the song, specific words or the artist performing it. The detection of the rhythmic bass component of the music is sufficient to
constitute a Plainly Audible sound.
POWERED MODEL VEHICLE. Any self-propelled airborne, waterborne, or landborne plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not
designated to carry Persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car, or rocket.
PROPERTY LINE. With respect to single occupancy properties, the line along the ground surface and its vertical extension that
separates the real property owned, leased, or occupied by one Person from that owned, leased, or occupied by another Person. With
respect to shared occupancy properties, the imaginary line that represents the legal limits of occupancy of any Person who owns,
leases, or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office, or any other type of occupancy from that of
other occupants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/422
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley, or similar place, which is owned or controlled by
a governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE. Any real property, or structures thereon, which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY BOUNDARY. A line along the ground's surface which separates the real property owned by one Person from that
owned by another Person.
WEEKDAY. Any day, Monday through Friday, which is not a Legal Holiday.
(Ord. 291-88-10-11, passed 10-11-88)
§ 94.03 NOISE DISTURBANCE.
(A) No Person may make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any Noise Disturbance.
(B) In addition to those acts declared to be violations of this chapter in subsection (A), above, the following acts, and the causing
thereof, are prohibited by this chapter:
(1) Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television, phonograph, drum, musical
instrument, sound amplifier, or similar device which produces, reproduces, or amplifies sound:
(a) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to create a Noise
Disturbance across a Real Property Boundary; or
(b) In such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at any time with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for a Person who is within the property or premises and who
are voluntary listeners.
(2) Using or operating for any purpose any loudspeaker, public address system, or similar device:
(a) In such a manner that the sound therefrom creates a Noise Disturbance across a Real Property Boundary; or
(b) Between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day on a Public Right-of-Way or Public Space.
(3) Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows,
squawks, craws, or makes other sounds which create Noise Disturbance across a residential Real Property Boundary.
(4) Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or otherwise handling boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage
cans, or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner as to cause a
Noise Disturbance across a residential Real Property Boundary.
(5) Operating, or permitting the operation of, any tools or equipment used in Construction, drilling, or Demolition work
between sunset and 7:00 a.m. the following day in such a manner that the sound therefrom creates a Noise Disturbance
across a residential Real Property Boundary, except:
(a) For Emergency Work by public service entities; or
(b) Prior approval to pour concrete has been granted by the Building Official.
(6) Repairing, rebuilding, modifying, or testing any Motor Vehicle, Motorcycle, or motorboat in such a manner as to
cause a Noise Disturbance across a residential Real Property Boundary.
(7) Using or firing explosives, firearms, or similar devices which create impulsive sound, so as to cause a Noise
Disturbance across a Real Property Boundary or on a Public Space or Public Right-of-Way.
(8) Operating, or permitting the operation of, Powered Model Vehicles so as to create a Noise Disturbance across a
residential Real Property Boundary or in a Public Space between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(9) Sounding, or permitting the sounding of, any signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device
intended primarily for nonemergency purposes from any place for more than one minute in any hourly period.
(10) Intentionally sounding, or permitting the sounding outdoors, of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren,
whistle, or similar stationary Emergency signaling device, except for Emergency purposes or for testing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/422
(11) Operating, or permitting the operation of, any mechanically powered saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden
tool, blower, or similar device used outdoors between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day, so as to
cause a Noise Disturbance across a residential Real Property Boundary.
(12) Operating, or permitting the operation of, any Motor Vehicle for a period longer than ten minutes in any hour
while the vehicle is stationary, for reasons other than traffic congestion, on a Public Right-of-Way or Public Space within
150 feet of a residential Real Property Boundary, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
(13) The operation of any amplified sound in such a manner as to be Plainly Audible from a moving or stationary
vehicle at a distance of 30 feet from the vehicle at any time. The operator (driver) or the Person in control of a stationary
vehicle from which the sound is produced is presumed to be the Person who committed the violation.
(Ord. 291-88-10-11, passed 10-11-88; Am. Ord. 722-03-11-11, passed 11-11-03; Ord. 793-05-07-26, passed 7-26-05) Penalty, see
§10.99
§ 94.04 EXCEPTIONS.
The provisions of § 94.03 and § 94.05 shall not apply to the emission of sound:
(A) For the purpose of alerting Persons to the existence of an Emergency; or
(B) In the performance of law enforcement activity or Emergency Work; or
(C) By stationary bells or chimes used in conjunction with places of religious worship; or
(D) By events held on public school grounds authorized by school officials; or
(E) By events authorized by the City Council, City Manager or Police Chief which are conducted on public property.
(Ord. 291-88-10-11, passed 10-11-88
§ 94.05 MAXIMUM SOUND LEVELS.
(A) In addition to the violations established by the preceding sections of this chapter, no Person shall conduct, permit, or allow any
activity or sound source to produce a sound discernible beyond the property on which the sound is being generated that when
measured by a Type 1 or Type 2 calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-weighting scale and the slow meter response as
specified by the American Standards Association exceeds 85db.
(B) Any sound that exceeds 85db(A) level set forth in this section under the measurement criteria set forth in this section is a
violation of this chapter. Evidence that an activity or sound source produces a sound that exceeds the 85db(A) level of this section
shall be prima facie evidence of a sound nuisance that unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace,
or safety of others in violation of this chapter.
(C) Regardless of the measurable db(A) level established and measured as provided above, the generator of any sound of such a
nature as to cause Persons occupying or using any property other than the property upon which the sound is being generated to
experience physically detectable sound, vibrations or resonance, at a distance of thirty (30') feet from the source of the sound, caused
by the sound shall also be prima facie evidence of a sound that unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort repose health,
peace or safety of others in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 836-06-07-25, passed 7-25-06)
§ 94.06 METHOD OF SOUND MEASUREMENT.
Measurements must be taken so as to provide a proper representation of the sound being measured. Meters must be positioned so as
not to create any unnatural enhancement or diminution of the measured sound. Measurements of sound generated must be taken from
the Property Line where the sound is generated and taken toward the source of the sound.
(Ord. 836-06-07-25, passed 7-25-06)
§ 94.07 VIOLATIONS.
(A) It is a violation of this chapter to do any act that is prohibited by this chapter.
(B) Each day that a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
(C) The Persons responsible for violations of this chapter are identified as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/422
(1) At private residences. Any adult resident present at the time of the offense, and any adult guest or adult trespasser
with the ability to control the level of noise at the time of the offense when no adult resident is present at the time of the
offense.
(2) At business locations. Any business owner, operator, manager, employee in charge, and all Persons in control or in
possession of the noise nuisance generating instrument or property at the time of the offense.
(3) At any location where any Person leaves an unattended noise nuisance producing machine, device, instrument,
child, animal, or any combination of same, which thereafter commences producing noise in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 291-88-10-11, passed 10-11-88; Am Ord. 793-05-07-26, passed 7-26-05; Ord. 836-06-07-25, passed 7-25-06) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 95: PARKS AND RECREATION
PARK REGULATIONS
§ 95.01 SHORT TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Public Parks Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86)
§ 95.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
ANIMAL RESTRAINT. The securing of an animal by a leash or a lead.
LITTER. Any rubbish, refuse, trash, or garbage, including, but not limited to, loose paper, cans, bottles, sacks, boxes, cloths, ashes,
manure, or waste materials.
PARK. Any public park, playground, trail, edifice, or recreation area operated or maintained by the city as a part of its system of
public parks.
TRAIL. Any public path that is operated or maintained by the city as a part of its system of public parks.
VEHICLE. Any motor driven device or vehicle, including motor vehicles, motorcycles, motor bikes, or motor scooters.
WEAPON. A bow and arrow, or any firearm, pistol, or gun capable of projecting lead, or any other instrument in which the
propelling force is gunpowder, a spring, or air, or that is capable of being used for the purpose of hunting.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 356-92-7-14, passed 7-14-92; Ord. 831-06-06-13, passed 6-13-06)
§ 95.03 ENFORCEMENT OF PARK REGULATIONS.
It shall be the duty of the Police Chief and any other person designated by the City Council, to enforce the provisions of this
subchapter.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86)
§ 95.04 PARK HOURS.
The parks shall, except as hereafter set out, be open for public use from dawn until 10:00 p.m.; provided, however, that the trails
shall be open 24 hours a day for purposes of walking, hiking, jogging, and bicycling. In case of an emergency, or for other good
cause, a park, or any part thereof, may be closed to the public by a city official.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 356-92-7-14, passed 7-14-92)
§ 95.05 PROHIBITED ACTS.
Except to the extent that a special permit has been granted pursuant to § 95.06, allowing conduct otherwise prohibited herein, it shall
be unlawful for any person in a public park to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/422
(A) Drive a vehicle on any area, except the paved park roads or parking areas, or such areas as may on occasion be
specifically designated as temporary areas for the purpose of loading or unloading freight or in the construction,
maintenance, or repair of the parks;
(B) Throw, deposit, place, or drop any litter, except in receptacles provided for that purpose;
(C) Discharge or use any form of weapon for the purpose of hunting, molesting, harming, frightening, killing, trapping,
pursuing, chasing, or teasing any person, animal, wildlife, reptile, or bird;
(D) Camp or stay overnight;
(E) Expose or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or articles;
(F) Bring glass containers into public parks;
(G) Use or be in a park when it is not open to the public;
(H) Use a trail for purposes other than walking, hiking, jogging, or bicycling.
(I) Operate a motorized vehicle on the city trail system unless the vehicle is being used for emergency or trail
maintenance purposes;
(J) Fail to keep an animal under an Animal Restraint or fail to exercise proper care and control of an animal to prevent
it from becoming a public nuisance as described in § 90.02(A) of this code or allow any of the prohibited occurrences
listed in § 90.77 of this code; or
(K) Create or cause to be created a fire on any public land, unless the fire is made in a barbeque grill.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 356-92-7-14, passed 7-14-92; Ord. 831-06-06-13, passed 6-13-06) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.06 SPECIAL PERMIT.
The City Manager, or his or her duly authorized designee, may for good cause:
(A) Grant a special permit allowing conduct otherwise prohibited by this subchapter; and
(B) Impose such terms and conditions on the permit holder as are deemed necessary and desirable.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 356-92-7-14, passed 7-14-92) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 95.07 RESERVATION FEES.
Use fees and deposits for the reservation of any portion of park land shall be established by resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-28-86)
§ 95.08 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person found to be knowingly violating the provisions of this subchapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day of such violation may constitute a
separate offense. The penalty herein provided for shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may
have.
(B) It shall be deemed a defense to a charge that this subchapter has been violated, that the alleged violator:
(1) Has been granted a special permit pursuant to § 95.06 to engage in the conduct for which the alleged violator has
been charged; or
(2) Is an officer, employee, or agent of:
(a) The city, who is acting in his or her authorized capacity for the city; or
(b) A contractor who is acting under authorization of the city.
(Ord. 228-86-4-29, passed 4-29-86; Am. Ord. 356-92-7-14, passed 7-14-92; Am. Ord. 1019-09-10-13, § 2, passed 10-13-09) Penalty,
see § 10.99
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/422
PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
§ 95.20 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Parks and Recreation Commission Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville,
Texas.
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86)
§ 95.21 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
COMMISSION. The Parks and Recreation Commission of the city.
DEPARTMENT. The Parks and Recreation Department of the city.
DIRECTOR. The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department of the city.
PARK. Any public park, playground, trail, edifice, or recreation area operated or maintained by the city.
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89)
§ 95.22 PARKS DEPARTMENT.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created a Parks and Recreation Department of the city. The Department shall be overseen by the
Parks and Recreation Director.
(B) Director. The position of Parks and Recreation Director of the city is hereby established. The Director shall be under the
supervision of the City Manager.
(C) Funding.
(1) Funds for the operation of the Department shall be allocated in the city budget for each fiscal year.
(2) The City Manager shall submit to the City Council and the Parks and Recreation Commission a monthly statement
of all receipts and disbursements of the Department in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the
Department.
(3) The Commission shall make timely recommendations to the City Council for the budgeting of the Department
funds in the preparation of the fiscal year budget.
(Ord 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89)
§ 95.23 CREATION OF COMMISSION; MEMBERSHIP.
(A) Creation. There is hereby created the Parks and Recreation Commission of the city.
(B) Membership.
(1) The Commission is composed of seven regular members and one alternate member who may serve in the absence
of a regular member. Membership shall include residents of both genders. One regular member of the Commission shall
be a high school student.
(2) All Commission members shall be appointed by the City Council and shall serve without compensation.
(3) The term of office of Commission members is two years and shall commence on the first day of January. The term
of the alternate is for one year and shall commence on the first day of January of each year. The term of the student
member thereafter is for one year, commencing on the first day of June of each year..
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 348-92-2-25, passed 2-25-92; Ord. 727-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03; Ord. 856-07-01-09,
§ 2, passed 1-9-07)
§ 95.24 ORGANIZATION.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/422
(A) The Commission shall select from its members a Chairperson and a Secretary. Such officers shall hold office for terms of one
year or until their successors take office.
(B) The Commission shall adopt, subject to the approval of the City Council, such rules and regulations governing its proceedings
as it may deem proper. Such rules and regulations shall not be inconsistent or in conflict with the ordinances, resolutions, and
regulations of the city.
(C) The Commission shall abide by all rules and regulations established in the Public Parks Ordinance of the city. (See §§95.01
through 95.08)
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89)
§ 95.25 DISMISSAL FROM COMMISSION.
(A) Members of the Commission shall be subject to dismissal by the Council for cause in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) Before the Council may take action to dismiss any member of the Commission, such member shall first receive
notice of the proposed dismissal and notice of the Council meeting at which the dismissal will be considered.
(2) Any member of the Commission informed of the action of the Council to dismiss such member may request a
hearing before the City Council, prior to such dismissal becoming effective, by filing with the City Secretary a written
request for hearing within five days from the date of notification of the City Council's dismissal action.
(3) Upon filing of request for hearing, the member shall be provided with a bill of particulars which specifies the basis
of the proposed dismissal and date and time of hearing thereon, which shall be at least five days after receipt of the bill of
particulars.
(4) Dismissal from the Commission shall become automatically effective and final if no request for hearing is received
by the City Secretary by the end of such five-day period.
(B) Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission, or moving one's residence outside the city limits, shall
automatically create a vacancy on the Commission with respect to the position held by such Commission member.
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86)
§ 95.26 COMMISSION MEETINGS.
(A) The Commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and shall fix regular meeting dates at a regular meeting
place. Special meetings may be called as necessary for the receipt of public input.
(B) A majority of the Commission members serving shall constitute a quorum to do business.
(C) Special meetings may be held upon call of the Chairperson, Mayor, City Manager, City Attorney, Director, or upon request of
three or more members of the Commission. All meetings shall be held in accordance with the Texas Open Meeting Act (TEX.
GOV'T CODE, §§551.001 et seq.), as it now exists, or as same may hereafter be amended or codified.
(D) Every regular or special meeting of the Commission shall be open to the public, except as may be authorized by the Texas
Open Meetings Act.
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89)
§ 95.27 DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall make recommendations to the Council related to the Department concerning those matters set forth in the
Charter of the city, Charter Sec. 8.07(c) and shall serve as the affiliate of the City of Pflugerville as a member of Keep Texas
Beautiful and execute additional duties so as to maintain standing.
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89; Am. Ord. 1071-11-02-22-0046, passed 2-22-11)
§ 95.28 JURISDICTION.
The jurisdiction of the Commission shall not extend to property under the control or responsibility of any public works department of
the city, including, but not limited to, well sites, sewer plants, drainage facilities, streets, and alleys. In the event of any conflict of
jurisdiction arising between the Commission and any other department of the city, or in regard to any administrative detail thereof,
the same shall be referred to the City Council and its decision thereon shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/422
(Ord. 229-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86; Am. Ord. 311-89-12-12, passed 12-12-89)
PROTECTION OF LAKE PFLUGERVILLE
§ 95.30 PROTECTION OF LAKE PFLUGERVILLE.
(A) Lake Pflugerville shall be open for public use from 5:00 a.m. until 10:00 p.m., provided, however, that Lake Pflugerville shall
be open 24 hours a day for the purposes of actively fishing and in possession of valid Texas Fishing License as required by State
Law; except in cases of an emergency or other good cause for closing Lake Pflugerville.
(B) In case of an emergency, or other good cause, the city may close Lake Pflugerville when the City Manager declares closing
Lake Pflugerville to be appropriate.
(C) Driving or operating a motorized boat of any kind on Lake Pflugerville is prohibited, unless:
(1) The operator of the boat is city staff or has been authorized by city staff to use the motorized boat and is doing so in
the ordinary course of carrying out city business; or
(2) The boat is an electric powered fishing boat or electric powered model boat.
(D) Horses are not allowed on the public lands or trails abutting or adjacent to Lake Pflugerville.
(E) Throwing, depositing, placing or dropping any materials (including glass containers) into Lake Pflugerville or on the land or
trails abutting or adjacent to Lake Pflugerville is prohibited.
(F) Swimming in Lake Pflugerville is prohibited in the area between the buoys near the intake structure and the dam.
(G) Starting, creating, or maintaining a fire, except in a barbeque grill, is prohibited.
(H) Operating a motorized vehicle on the land or trails abutting or adjacent to Lake Pflugerville is prohibited unless the vehicle is
being used for emergency or trail maintenance purposes.
(I) Bathing, urinating, or defecating in Lake Pflugerville or on the public lands or trails abutting or adjacent to Lake Pflugerville is
prohibited.
(J) Camping on the public lands or trails abutting or adjacent to Lake Pflugerville is prohibited.
(Ord. 831-06-06-13, passed 6-13-06; Ord. 1019-09-10-13, § 1, passed 10-13-09)
PUBLIC TREE PROTECTION
§ 95.40 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of this subchapter is to protect existing trees, promote the planting of new trees, and establish a city policy regarding the
planting, maintenance, and removal of specified trees within the city and its environs. The intent of this subchapter is that it apply to
all trees located on public property in the city limits.
§ 95.41 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this subchapter, the following terms shall have the special meanings ascribed to them below, which shall govern
in case of any conflict with other definitions set forth in this code:
(A) PRIVATE TREE. Any trees, shrubs, bushes, and woody vegetation on private property.
(B) PUBLIC TREE. Any trees, shrubs, bushes, and woody vegetation on city parks or city-owned property.
(C) TOP OR TOPPING. The indiscriminate cutting of tree branches to stubs or lateral branches that are not large
enough to assume the terminal role. Topping shall include “heading,” “tipping,” “hat racking” and “rounding over.”
§ 95.42 ESTABLISHMENT OF A TREE CARE ADVISORY BOARD.
(A) Board Membership. The city council hereby creates an advisory board known as the tree care advisory board, hereinafter
referred to as the board, and appoints the members of the parks and recreation commission to serve as members of the board.
(B) Duties. The duties of the board shall include:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/422
(1) Coordinating and promoting Arbor Day activities;
(2) Developing and updating a five-year plan to plant and maintain trees on city property;
(3) Developing public awareness and education programs relating to trees;
(4) Reviewing parks and recreation department concerns relating to tree care;
(5) Submitting an annual report of its activities to the city council;
(6) Submitting the annual application to renew the Tree City USA designation; and
(7) Other duties that may he assigned by the city council.
§ 95.43 CARE OF PUBLIC TREES.
(A) The parks and recreation director and/or their designees shall have the responsibility to plant, prune, maintain and remove
trees and woody plants on all city streets, rights-of-way, and/or city parks. The parks and recreation director and/or their designee in
appropriate cases, and upon consultation with a property owner and written permission, may remove or prune a tree on private
property which threatens the safety of those who may use a public place.
(B) Property owners are responsible for the reasonable and routine maintenance of trees on the right-of-way which is an extension
of the property owner's front yard and/or setback. This shall include maintaining a clearance over the sidewalk of eight feet (8').
(C) The parks and recreation director or their designee may recommend the removal of any tree or part of a tree that threatens the
safety of any person, property or structure or by reason of its location. This shall include but is not limited to threats against electric
lines, telephone lines, gas lines or any municipal water or sewer lines or any public improvement. Any tree which is affected by any
injurious fungus, insect or other damaging biotic organism may also be removed.
(D) No person shall remove, destroy, prune, top or cause the removal, destruction, pruning or topping of a tree on city property or
in any city park without first having obtained written permission for such removal, destruction, pruning, or topping from the parks
and recreation director.
(E) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to attach any cable, wire, rope or sign to any city tree, plant or shrub
without first having obtained written permission from the parks and recreation director.
§ 95.44 PUBLIC TREE FUND.
A Public Tree Fund shall be established for the planting of new trees and the maintenance thereof on public property. All fine monies
received for infractions of the Public Tree Care Ordinance shall be contributed to the Public Tree Fund. All tree mitigation monies
received shall be contributed to the Public Tree Fund.
§ 95.45 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subchapter or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $100.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be
a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated
and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 893-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 959-08-08-26, passed 8-26-08; Ord. 1125-12-11-27, passed 11-27-12)
RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS STANDARDS OF CARE
§ 95.50 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
This subchapter and the standards of care established in this subchapter are adopted by the city in compliance with Human Resources
code 42.041(b)(14) in order to exempt city parks and recreation programs from state child-care licensing requirements. These
standards of care are intended to be minimum standards by which the city will operate its parks and recreation department recreation
programs. The programs operated by the city are recreational in nature and are not child-care programs. State law requires the
adoption of health and safety standards to ensure the safety of children in our city programs.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.51 DEFINITIONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/422
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this subchapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section,
except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSISTANT SUPERVISOR. A part-time employee of the department, who is responsible for assisting in scheduling and providing a
developmentally appropriate, safe recreational environment for youth participating in the program.
COUNSELOR. A part-time employee of the department who is responsible for providing a day to day developmentally appropriate,
safe recreational environment for youth participating in the program.
DEPARTMENT. The parks and recreation department of the city.
PARENT. A person who:
(1) Is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, or a stepparent of a youth;
(2) Is, under court order, the guardian of a youth or is a public or private agency with whom a youth has been placed by
a court; or
(3) Otherwise has legal custody or is the primary caregiver and has the authority to enroll a youth in the recreation
program.
PARTICIPANT. A youth whose parent has completed all required registration procedures and who is determined by the director to be
eligible to participate in the recreation program.
PROGRAM DIRECTOR. The director of the parks and recreation department or the director's authorized representative.
PROGRAM EMPLOYEE OR EMPLOYEE. Any person hired to work for the department who is assigned responsibility for
managing, administering, or implementing some portion of the recreation program. The term includes program director, recreation
superintendent, supervisor, assistant supervisor, and counselor.
PROGRAM MANUAL. A notebook of policies, procedures, required forms, and organizational and programming information
relevant to the city's recreation program, as promulgated or otherwise approved by the director.
PROGRAM SITE. Facilities and/or administrative sites for the recreation programs.
RECREATION PROGRAM OR PROGRAM. A city-sponsored recreational program for youth that may be offered by the parks and
recreation department after school or at other hours. The term also includes any program or activity to which attendees are free to
come and go at will without regard to the presence of a parent or other responsible adult to care for them.
RECREATION SUPERINTENDENT. A full-time professional employee of the department who is responsible for managing the
recreational facility, where the recreation program is conducted and managing the daily or seasonal operations of the recreation
program including activity planning, staff training, scheduling and supervision, enforcement of all rules, and is responsible for
managing, overseeing planning, and administration, of the city's recreation center and implementation of the recreation program.
STANDARDS OF CARE. All provisions contained in this subchapter.
SUPERVISOR. An employee of the department who is responsible for scheduling and providing a developmentally appropriate, safe
recreational environment for the youth participating in recreational programs.
YOUTH. A person who is no more than 15 years of age.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.52 ADMINISTRATION.
(A) The director shall implement, administer, and enforce the recreation program standards of care. The director may, by written
order establish such rules, regulations, and policies, not inconsistent with this subchapter, as the director determines are necessary to
discharge any duty under to effectuate the policies of this subchapter.
(B) No recreation program may be advertised as a child-care program or facility.
(C) When registering for the recreation program, each participant's parent will be provided an opportunity to read and/or have a
copy of these standards of care and will be informed that the recreation program is not licensed by the state. A current copy of the
standards of care shall also be available at the program site for inspection and review by the public and by program employees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/422
(D) The director, through the human resources department of the city, shall cause a criminal background check to be conducted on
each prospective after-school or recreation program employee who is 16 years or older. If results of that criminal background check
indicate that an applicant has been convicted of any of the following offenses, the applicant will not be considered for employment:
(1) A felony or a misdemeanor classified as an offense against a person or family;
(2) A felony or a misdemeanor classified as public indecency;
(3) A felony or a misdemeanor violation of any law intended to control the possession or distribution of any controlled
substance;
(4) Any offense involving moral turpitude; or
(5) Any offense that would potentially put participants or the city at risk.
(E) The provisions of this subchapter are administrative in nature and are not subject to criminal penalties.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.53 INSPECTION, MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT.
(A) The recreation superintendent, supervisor, or assistant supervisor shall initiate an inspection report for the recreation program
to confirm that the standards of care are being met. Each inspection report will be sent to the director for review and kept on record
for at least three years.
(B) When programs are in session, the recreation supervisor or recreation superintendent shall make a monthly inspection of the
recreation program site for compliance with the standards of care and shall provide a report to the director. The director shall review
the report and establish deadlines and criteria for program compliance with the standards of care, as necessary.
(C) Any complaint regarding enforcement of the standards of care at the recreation program must be directed to the recreation
superintendent or supervisor. The recreation superintendent or supervisor shall take necessary steps to resolve each problem. The
complaint and its resolution must be recorded with the director. The director shall address any complaint regarding enforcement of
the standards of care that cannot be resolved by the recreation superintendent or supervisor.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.54 ENROLLMENT.
Before a youth is enrolled in the recreation program, a parent must sign registration forms that contain the following information:
(1) The youth's name, date of birth (with proof of age), age, address, home telephone number, grade level, and school
name. Children are to be no more than 15 (fifteen) years of age;
(2) The name and address of each parent, a home telephone number, and a telephone number where each parent may be
reached during program hours;
(3) The name and telephone number of the youth's physician;
(4) The name and telephone number of the person that can be contacted in case of an emergency if the parent cannot be
reached;
(5) The name, telephone number, driver's license number and relationship to the youth of each person to whom the
child may be released;
(6) A statement of the youth's special problems or needs if any;
(7) A statement of the youths allergic reactions;
(8) A list of medications the youth is taking;
(9) Transportation authorization;
(10) Photo release;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/422
(11) An emergency medical authorization;
(12) A liability waiver; and
(13) An acknowledgement that the parent has been informed and understands that the program is not licensed by the
state as a child-care facility.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.55 SUSPECTED ABUSE.
Every program employee shall report child abuse or neglect in accordance with the Texas Family Code.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.56 RECREATION SUPERINTENDENT.
(A) The recreation superintendent must meet all of the following qualifications:
(1) Be at least 21 years of age;
(2) Have a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university or the equivalent in one of the following areas:
(a) Recreation administration or general recreation;
(b) Elementary education;
(c) Physical education; or
(d) Any other comparable degree plan that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment;
(3) Have 2–3 years of experience in providing recreation or leisure time services;
(4) Have a minimum of one-year administrative and supervisory experience;
(5) Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; and
(6) Have a valid state driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance
requirements.
(B) The recreation superintendent is responsible for:
(1) The overall operation of the city's recreation center;
(2) Planning, developing and implementing programs, while managing daily facility and staff operations;
(3) Providing staff assistance to the director;
(4) Monitoring program compliance with appropriate federal, state and local rules and regulations;
(5) Monitoring and evaluating city-sponsored recreation programs;
(6) Maintaining appropriate records and preparing requested reports; and
(7) Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies and procedures that apply to citysponsored
recreation programs.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.57 SUPERVISOR QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) The supervisor must meet all of the following qualifications:
(1) Be at least 19 years of age;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/422
(2) Have experience in one of the following areas:
(a) Recreation administration or general recreation;
(b) Elementary education;
(c) Physical education;
(d) Any other experience that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment; or
(e) Working with school age children in a recreational or child-care setting;
(3) Have a minimum of one-year experience planning and implementing recreational activities or related experience;
(4) Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances;
(5) Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first-aid and cardio
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards;
(6) Have a valid state driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance
requirements; and
(7) Have a high school diploma or GED.
(B) The supervisor is responsible for:
(1) Managing the daily operations of the recreation program in compliance with the standards of care;
(2) Enforcing the standards of care;
(3) Scheduling, supervising, training and preparing the payroll of employees for the recreation program;
(4) Planning, implementing and evaluation the recreation program; and
(5) Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies and procedures that apply to the
recreation program.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.58 ASSISTANT SUPERVISOR QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) The assistant supervisor must meet all of the following qualifications:
(1) Be at least 18 years of age;
(2) Have experience in one of the following areas:
(a) Any experience that lends itself to working in a public recreation environment;
(b) Have experience working with school age children in a recreational or child-care setting;
(3) Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances;
(4) Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first-aid and cardio
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards;
(5) Have a valid state driver's license and a driving record which meets current city auto liability insurance
requirements; and
(6) Must be working towards their high school diploma or GED.
(B) The assistant supervisor is responsible for:
(1) Assisting in managing the daily operations of the recreation program in compliance with the standards of care;
(2) Assisting with supervision of activities and counselors;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/422
(3) Assisting in enforcing the standards of care;
(4) Assisting with scheduling, supervising, and training for the recreation program and activities;
(5) Assisting with planning, implementing and evaluation of the recreation program;
(6) Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies and procedures that apply to the
recreation program; and
(7) Assisting with supervision of field trips and parent communications including newsletters.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.59 COUNSELOR'S QUALIFICATIONS AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
(A) Each counselor must meet all of the following qualifications;
(1) Be 16 years of age or older;
(2) Have successfully completed a course and obtained certification for the current year in first-aid and cardio
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) based on either American Heart Association or American Red Cross standards;
(3) Pass a background investigation including but not limited to testing for illegal substances; and
(4) Must be working towards their high school diploma.
(B) A counselor is responsible for:
(1) Conducting activities, while interacting and supervising youth; and
(2) Knowing and following all city, departmental, and program standards, policies and procedures that apply to the
recreation program.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.60 TRAINING AND ORIENTATION.
(A) The department shall provide training and orientation to program employees relating to working with youth in general and
relating to the specific job responsibilities of each employee. The recreation center superintendent or a coordinator shall provide staff
with a program manual specific to the recreation program.
(B) Each program employee will be trained in appropriate procedures for handling emergencies and in other areas including but
not limited to city, departmental, and program policies and procedures, provisions of recreation activities and safety issues.
(C) Each program employee will be required to sign an acknowledgement that the employee received the training required under
this section.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.61 STAFF PARTICIPANT RATIO.
(A) In seasonal camp recreation programs, the maximum ratio of participants to staff will be 12:1.
(B) At all times at least one employee who is 16 years of age or older must be present at the program site.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.62 DISCIPLINE.
(A) A program employee shall implement discipline and guidance in a consistent manner based on the best interests of program
participants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/422
(B) No corporal punishment or treatment may be used. A program employee may use brief, supervised separation of a participant
from the group, if necessary.
(C) As necessary, program employees shall provide discipline reports to the parents of participants. A parent will be asked to sign
a participant's discipline report to indicate that the parent has been advised about a specific problem or incident.
(D) An excessive number of discipline reports or discipline reports of a severe nature, as described in the program manual, may
result in a participant being suspended from a program.
(E) Any participant who poses a danger to other participants or staff will be removed from the program site as soon as possible.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.63 PROGRAMMING.
(A) A program employee shall plan, organize, instruct, direct and provide activities according to the participant's ages, interests
and abilities. The activities shall be appropriate, structured, and well prepared to each participant's health, safety, and well-being.
(B) A program employee shall encourage all youth to participate in the various program activities.
(C) A program employee shall stress friendliness, fair play and good sportsmanship to all participants.
(D) A program employee shall be attentive and considerate of the participants' safety on field trips and during any transportation
provided by the program. A program employee must have a written list of all participants in each group and shall check the roll
frequently.
(E) During trips, each program employee who supervises participants shall maintain immediate access to the emergency medical
forms and emergency contact information for each participant. First-aid supplies and a guide to first-aid and emergency care must be
readily available to each program employee on every field trip.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.64 COMMUNICATION.
The program site must have a mobile telephone/radio for use in contacting department personnel and making emergency calls.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.65 TRANSPORTATION.
(A) Before a participant may be transported to or from a city-sponsored activity, a transportation form, completed by a parent of
the participant, must be filed with a coordinator.
(B) Every program vehicle used for transporting youth participants must be equipped with:
(1) First-aid supplies and a first-aid emergency care guide that are easily accessible to program employees in the
vehicle; and
(2) An operable fire extinguisher that is installed in the passenger compartment of the vehicle and that is easily
accessible to program employees in the vehicle.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.66 RELEASE OF PARTICIPANTS.
(A) A participant will be released from the recreation program only to a parent or to a person designated by the parent in the
registration forms.
(B) If the parent or other person designated by the parent to pick up the youth is unknown to program staff, a participant will be
released from the recreation program only after photo identification is reviewed against the information provided in the registration
forms.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/422
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
§ 95.67 FACILITY STANDARDS.
(A) Safety.
(1) Program employees shall inspect the program site daily to detect sanitation and safety concerns that might affect the
health and safety of the participants. All sanitation or safety concerns shall be reported by program employees to the
coordinator or the recreation superintendent, who will keep a log of the concerns reported and how each concern was
handled. The log will be kept for a minimum of three years.
(2) All buildings, grounds, and equipment at the program site must be inspected, cleaned, repaired, and maintained to
protect the health of the participants. Program employees shall report any needed repairs or damage to the recreation
facility to the coordinator or the recreation superintendent. The recreation superintendent will cause the repair or damage
to be taken care of immediately and will keep a log of the outcome for a minimum of three years.
(3) All equipment and supplies used in a program must be safe for use by the participants.
(4) First-aid supplies must be readily available to all program employees at the program site, during transportation to an
off-site activity, and for the duration of any off-site activity. A program employee shall maintain first-aid supplies in a
designated location, readily available to staff. Each program employee must at all times have immediate access to a guide
to first-aid and emergency care.
(5) Air conditioners, electric fans and heaters at the program site must be mounted out of the participants' reach or have
safeguards that keep participants from being injured.
(B) Fire.
(1) In case of fire, danger of fire, explosion, or any other emergency, a program employee's first priority is to evacuate
the participants to a designated safe area.
(2) The program site must have at least one fire extinguisher that is readily available to all program employees.
(3) Fire drills will be initiated at the program site twice a year.
(C) Health.
(1) Illness or injury.
(a) A youth who is considered to be a health or safety concern to other participants or employees will not be
admitted to a program.
(b) Illnesses and injuries will be handled in a manner that protects the health of all participants and employees.
(c) A program employee shall follow plans to provide emergency care for injured participants with symptoms of
an acute illness as specified in the program manual.
(d) Each program employee shall follow the recommendation of the state department of health concerning the
admissions of any participant after a communicable disease.
(2) Medication. Only the supervisor will be allowed to administer oral, nasal, topical or EpiPen medications to
participants. The supervisor will record each instance when medication is administered. Parents must have signed a
medications form to include:
(a) Name of medication;
(b) Amount of medication;
(c) Time of day medication is to be administered;
(d) Duration (not to exceed one week). If duration will be longer than one week, a new medication form will be
needed.
(3) Toilet facilities. The program site must have toilets and be equipped so that participants can use them independently
and program employees can supervise as needed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/422
(4) Sanitation.
(a) The program site must have adequate light, ventilation and heat.
(b) The program must be provided with an adequate supply of water meeting the standards of the state department
of health for drinking water. A program employee shall ensure that water is supplied to participants in a safe and
sanitary manner.
(c) Program employees shall ensure that garbage is removed daily from the program site and ensure that all food
and crumbs have been swept and thrown away.
(Ord. 1112-12-05-22, passed 5-22-12; Ord. 1145-13-05-28, passed 5-28-13; Ord. 1175-14-05-13, passed 5-13-14; Ord. 1220-15-05-
26, passed 5-26-15; Ord. 1259-16-05-24, passed 5-24-16; Ord. 1304-17-05-09, passed 5-9-17; Ord. 1351-18-05-22, passed 5-22-18)
CHAPTER 96: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS*
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 OBSTRUCTING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS.
(A) A person commits an offense if, without legal privilege or authority, he intentionally, knowingly, or recklessly:
(1) Obstructs or injures, or causes to be obstructed or injured in any manner whatsoever, any public sidewalk, median,
curb, shoulder, improved shoulder, street, highway, roadway or public right-of-way in the city; provided, however, that
the parking of motor vehicles in compliance with the ordinances of the city shall not be construed to be an obstruction; or
(2) Disobeys a reasonable request or order to move the cause of an obstruction issued by a person the actor knows to be
or is informed is a peace officer, a fireman, or a person with authority to control the use of the premises:
(a) To prevent obstruction of any area mentioned in subsection (1); or
(b) To maintain public safety by dispersing those gathered in dangerous proximity to a fire, riot, or other hazard.
(B) For purposes of this section, “obstruct” means to render impassable or to render passage unreasonably inconvenient or
hazardous and “obstruction” means the causative effect of such rendering.
(C) Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a
fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day of violation shall be cumulative and the foregoing
penalty shall not be exclusive of any other rights and remedies which the city may have.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69; Ord. 1274-16-07-26, passed 7-26-16) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.02 OPEN CELLAR OR TRAP DOORS; PERMITTING SIDEWALK TO REMAIN IN DISREPAIR.
No person shall keep, leave open or allow to be left open any cellar door, trap door, sidewalk lifts or the grating of any vault in or
upon any sidewalk, street, thoroughfare or passageway, make, keep or maintain any uncovered opening in any sidewalk or footwalk
or footway or allow any sidewalk or footway, which it is his duty to maintain or repair, to become broken or continue so broken,
uneven or out of repair as to endanger life or limb, shall be deemed guilty of maintaining a nuisance and a misdemeanor.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.03 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ALTERATIONS, OBSTRUCTIONS.
No person, under any pretext whatever, shall interfere with, obstruct, injure or alter in any manner any sidewalk in the city without a
written permit from the Board of Commissioners. Each day such interference, obstruction, alteration or injury shall be permitted to
remain after a notification by the Board of Commissioners to remove the same shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.04 LIABILITY OF ABUTTING PROPERTY OWNERS.
The abutting property owner or person enjoying the use of any property abutting on a sidewalk or curb that has become defective and
has resulted in causing damage or injury as a result of such defective condition shall be primarily liable in damages for any loss or
damage sustained as a result of such defective condition. The city shall not be held as assuming any such liability by reason of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/422
inspection or reinspection authorized herein or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any access, facilities, surfacing or
appurtenance not made in accordance with standards or specifications of this subchapter.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.05 LIABILITY OF PERSONS MAKING SPECIAL USE OF SIDEWALKS OR CURBS.
It shall be the duty of any property owner, landlord, tenant, lessee, sublessee, person, firm or corporation making special use of any
sidewalk or curb for the purpose of ingress or egress, for loading elevators, downspout drains or any other special use of whatsoever
kind or character, whether recited herein or not, to keep such sidewalk, parkway, curb and driveway abutting such property in a good
and safe condition and free from any defects and hazards of whatsoever kind and character. Such special user shall be liable in
damages for any loss or damage sustained as a result of any defective condition of the sidewalk, driveway, curb, loading elevator,
downspout drain or any other special use or facility of whatsoever kind or character.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.06 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGES.
This subchapter shall not be construed to relieve from or to lessen the responsibility or liability for damages of any person owning,
controlling or installing any surfaces to persons or property caused by any defect therein.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69)
§ 96.07 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
No person shall construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove, replace, pave, repave, surface or resurface any walk, drive, curb, gutter,
paved area or appurtenance on public property in the city without first obtaining a permit so to do.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 96.08 REPAIR OF DEFECTIVE SIDEWALKS.
When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter or appurtenance becomes defective, unsafe or hazardous, it shall be the duty of the owner of
the abutting property to reconstruct or repair same and the expense of such work shall be borne by the abutting property owner.
When a sidewalk, driveway, curb, gutter, or appurtenance is found to be defective, unsafe or hazardous, the City Council shall notify
the owner of the abutting property to reconstruct or repair same. Any owner who fails to reconstruct or repair such defective, unsafe
or hazardous condition within 30 days from the date of the written notice from the City Council to do so shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Ord. 24-69-4-21, passed 4-21-69)
§ 96.09 BRAKING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
(A) No person shall operate or permit the operation of the engine of a motor vehicle so as to assist in braking or slowing the
vehicle through the use of gears or through the use of any engine brake or engine retarding device on any public right-of-way,
including, but not limited to, state-maintained roadways FM 685 and FM 1825, within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 794-05-07-26, passed 7-26-05)
EXCAVATIONS
§ 96.20 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Utility Construction Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.21 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
PERSON. A natural person, partnership, cooperative association or corporation, corporation whether or not organized for profit, and
governmental entity, and specifically includes the contractor and subcontractor performing work for a public utility.
PLANT MATERIAL. Grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, and other ground cover.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/422
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. A public street, highway, alley, and public easement in the corporate limits of the city.
PUBLIC UTILITY. Any person, not an agent or representative of the city, who installs, constructs, or maintains facilities in the
corporate limits of the city to provide electric, gas, water, sewer, telecommunication, or cable television service to members of the
public, whether residing in or out of the corporate limits; provided that it includes any person who constructs, installs, or maintains
facilities in the city for intrastate or interstate telecommunication services.
WORK. Digging, excavating, tunneling, or boring in or under any public right-of-way, or cutting or breaking the paved surface in any
public right-of-way, in connection with the Construction, repair, or maintenance of utility facilities; provided that work directly and
specifically required for the Construction, repair, or maintenance of overhead utilities and service line connections to individual
customers is not included in this definition.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.22 COMPLIANCE RESPONSIBILITY.
The public utility and its contractors and subcontractors are individually and jointly responsible, both civilly and criminally, for
compliance with this subchapter and with any work permit issued pursuant to this subchapter.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.23 PERMITS.
(A) A work permit issued by the City Manager is required as a condition to performance of work by a public utility in the public
right-of-way, except in the case of emergency work. There is no fee for a work permit.
(B) A public utility requiring a permit shall file a written, dated application with the City Manager on a form provided by the city.
The application shall include the following:
(1) The nature and location of the work being proposed;
(2) The dates and hours the work is proposed to be performed;
(3) The nature of the surface of the right-of-way;
(4) An erosion control plan;
(5) A restoration plan, including designation of the time within which the applicant plans to complete the restoration in
accordance with the requirements of § 96.25 of this chapter; and
(6) Such other information as may be required by the City Manager.
(C) If the work proposed by the applicant entails the traversing of a paved roadway, boring under the street shall be required rather
than cutting the pavement, provided that the City Manager may authorize pavement cuts in lieu of boring, upon review and
recommendation of the City Engineer, where boring is found not to be feasible.
(D) The City Manager shall issue the work permit if, based upon all information made available to him, he is satisfied that:
(1) Appropriate safeguards will be taken to protect the public interest; and
(2) The plans and specifications are consistent with the requirements of all city chapters, rules, and regulations.
(E) In the event a public utility does work as an emergency, it shall, as soon as practicable, notify the City Manager of the work,
and make an application for such work. The emergency work may be performed subject to issuance of a permit therefor, and must
comply with all provisions of this subchapter.
(F) A work permit granted by the City Manager may vary from the application and may be modified by the City Manager at any
time while the work is in progress.
(G) A work permit shall be issued for a specified period of time. Work authorized thereunder may be performed only during such
specified period. The City Manager may, upon application by the public utility or contractor, grant an extension of the work permit
period.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.24 REGULATIONS FOR WORK.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/422
(A) The following regulations apply to public utilities performing work in the public right-of-way:
(1) Not more than one traffic lane of a public right-of-way shall be closed at any time.
(2) No public right-of-way shall be completely closed to traffic.
(3) Work shall not be performed during hours of darkness.
(4) Divisions (1), (2), and (3), above, shall not apply to emergency repairs necessary to restore public utility service or
to prevent harm to persons or property.
(5) All unnecessary equipment and debris shall be kept off the public right-of-way and the work shall be performed so
as to facilitate the normal flow of traffic.
(6) Excavations and pavement cuts shall be maintained so as to avoid a hazard to vehicles and pedestrian traffic until
permanent repairs are completed.
(7) Barricades, signs, lights, warnings, and traffic-control procedures shall be utilized in accordance with the current
requirements of the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, adopted by the State Department of Highways
and Public Transportation.
(8) All applicable state and municipal trench safety standards shall be met.
(9) All work in the public right-of-way shall be diligently conducted and completed as soon as practicable.
(B) The City Manager may exempt the public utility from any of the above regulations for good cause, and, where alternate
arrangements are required to protect the public interest, such alternate arrangements are noted on the face of the permit.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.25 REPAIR AND RESTORATION.
(A) Upon completion of work, each public utility shall remove all debris and excess spoil, permanently repair any paving in the
public right-of-way that has been cut, broken, or damaged, and restore the public right-of-way and any plant material that has been
disturbed to the condition existing prior to the work in accordance with the requirements set out in division (B), below.
(B) Plant material shall be considered to be restored when at least two inches of growth covers at least 85% of the area disturbed
by the work; provided that no barren areas larger than ten square fee remain. Trees, shrubs, and larger plants shall be replaced. If
grass is used in the restoration, its seeding shall be consistent with the standards set out in the following table:
RESEEDING STANDARDS
Time of Year Seed Type
October – February Mixture of Unhulled Bermuda and Winter Rye
March – September Hulled Bermuda
(C) The city shall, within ten days from receipt of a written request to inspect from a public utility, perform an inspection. If all the
requirements of this subchapter have been met, the City Manager shall issue a certificate of completion with the date of approval set
forth thereon. If the city fails to start its inspection within such ten-day period, any certificate of completion issued shall bear the date
of receipt of the written inspection request.
(D) The public utility shall maintain such repairs and restoration, other than grass that subsequently dies, in good condition for a
period of one year from the date of the certificate of completion. Nothing herein is intended to absolve the public utility from
responsibility for the proper installation, repair, and maintenance of any work; the one-year maintenance period applies only to the
repair and restoration.
(E) The city shall notify the public utility in writing if, during the one-year maintenance period, the repairs or restoration are or
become in need of maintenance, or if the plant material replaced by the public utility, other than grass, dies. If such maintenance is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/422
not performed within a scheduled time period agreed upon by the public utility and the city, or if no agreement is reached as to a
schedule within 60 days after notice from the city, or if no response is received by the city within two weeks after such notification,
the city may have such maintenance performed and bill the costs to the public utility which shall be liable for such costs.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
§ 96.26 CORRECTION OF HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.
(A) If repairs to the public right-of-way are deemed necessary by the city in order to correct a hazardous condition and the need
for such repairs is caused by work (including defective repairs or failure to repair) by a public utility, the city shall notify the public
utility. If the public utility does not provide an acceptable schedule for making the repairs within 24 hours after receipt of such
notice, the city may have such repairs done.
(B) Pending repair of a hazardous condition as set out in division (A), above, the city may take necessary action to mitigate the
hazard.
(C) The city may bill the costs of repair or mitigation, as set out in divisions (A) and (B), above, to the public utility which shall be
liable for such costs.
(Ord. 331-91-01-22, passed 1-22-91)
CHAPTER 97: ALARMS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
ALARM SITE. A single premises or location served by an alarm system that is under the control of one owner, tenant or lessor, or a
composite of tenants when served by an alarm system supplying service to more than one tenant, owner, or lessor.
ALARM SYSTEM. A device or system that transmits a signal intended to summon aid in a robbery, burglary, personal hostage, fire,
medical or other emergency.
ALARM SYSTEM does not include a system installed on a vehicle or a system designed to alert only the persons within a premises
which does not emit a signal visible or audible outside of the premises.
CHIEF. The City of Pflugerville's Chief of Police or his authorized representative.
DISCONNECT. To disable an alarm to prevent any direct or indirect notification to the Police Department by an alarm system,
relaying intermediary or monitoring service. This definition does not apply to a local alarm.
FALSE ALARMS. Include alarms resulting from: operator error; improper installation or maintenance; activation by animals; or other
internal or external initiators.
FALSE ALARMS caused by abnormal weather conditions and other acts of nature are exempted from this definition unless a
specific alarm system's history shows that an inordinate number of FALSE ALARMS have occurred.
FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION. A direct or indirect alarm notification to the Police or Fire Department when responding personnel
find no evidence of actual or attempted robbery, burglary, personal hostage, fire, medical or other emergency.
FALSE FIRE ALARM NOTIFICATION. A direct or indirect alarm notification to the Fire Department when responding fire personnel
find no evidence of fire or smoke.
LOCAL ALARM. An alarm system that emits a signal at an alarm site that is audible or visible from the exterior of the alarm site.
PERMITTEE. A person who has either applied for or has been issued a permit under this chapter.
PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership, association, governmental entity, or similar entity.
RELAYING INTERMEDIARY. A person or monitoring station that receives an alarm notification from an alarm site and
communicates or transmits notice of the alarm notification to an emergency response entity.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/422
ALARM SYSTEM PERMITS
§ 97.10 PERMIT REQUIRED.
(A) The owner or person in control of a proposed alarm site must obtain a permit from the city before installing an alarm system or
possessing an activated alarm system. A separate permit is required for each alarm site and for each individual alarm system on the
same alarm site.
(B) A permit is not assignable or transferable to another person.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96 ) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.11 PERMIT ISSUANCE.
The Chief may issue a permit if the permittee satisfies the following conditions:
(A) The permittee submits a complete application;
(B) The permittee pays a $10.00 initial fee for each alarm system;
(C) The permittee pays any fees required by this chapter for any previous permits; and
(D) The permittee installs and will operate the alarm system in compliance with this chapter.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.12 TERM AND RENEWAL.
A permit issued under this section is valid until December 31 of the year of its issuance. The permittee may renew the permit
annually by filing a renewal request and paying a $10 renewal fee before January 1 of each year.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.13 APPLICATION.
(A) An application for a permit must contain the following information:
(1) Name, business address, home address, business telephone number and home telephone number of the permittee;
(2) Name, business telephone number, and home telephone number of two persons who have been authorized by the
permittee to receive, and who have agreed to receive, notification that they must come to the alarm site within 30 minutes
of receiving the notification from responding emergency personnel;
(3) Classification of the alarm site as residential, commercial, or banking institution;
(4) Purpose of the alarm system, i.e., burglary, robbery, fire or medical assistance; and
(5) Any other information required by the Chief to insure compliance with all provisions of this chapter.
(B) The permittee must notify the Chief of any change in information contained in the application within five days of the change.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.14 GROUNDS FOR DENIAL OF APPLICATION.
(A) The Chief may deny a permit application for any of the following reasons:
(1) The permittee makes a false statement on the application or in connection with the application;
(2) The permittee has not paid a false alarm fee assessed under § 97.99; or
(3) The Chief has revoked the permittee's permit and the permittee has not corrected the violation that caused the
revocation.
(B) The Chief may deny a permit application for an alarm system that does not comply with Article 5.33A, Section 6(a)(2) of the
Texas Insurance Code, which requires that: “All exterior structure openings are contacted; the system includes an interior AND
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/422
exterior siren; all equipment is Underwriter's Laboratory approved and is Underwriter's Laboratory approved and monitored by a
U.L. approved central station; and, sales, services, installation, and monitoring of the system are done in compliance with the Private
Investigations and Private Security Agencies Act (Articles 4413 (29bb)), Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes).”
(C) The Chief may set standards for issuing permits for burglary alarm systems and may refuse to issue a permit for particular
systems that he determines have a history of unreliability.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96 )
§ 97.15 REVOKING A PERMIT.
The Chief may revoke a permit if he determines that:
(A) The permittee made a false statement of a material nature in the application for a permit;
(B) The permittee has violated any provision of this chapter; or
(C) The permittee is delinquent in payment of fees for false alarm notifications assessed under § 97.99
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.16 CANCELLING A PERMIT.
The Chief may cancel a permit for non-renewal after providing at least 30 days notice.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.17 NOTICE OF ACTION.
If the Chief refuses to issue or renew a permit, or revokes a permit, a written notice must be sent to the permittee by certified mail,
return receipt requested. The notice must explain the action and the reason(s) for the action, and state the permittee's right to an
appeal.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.18 APPEALS.
(A) The permittee may appeal the Chief's decision to the City Manager by filing a written request for a hearing within ten days of
receipt of the notice. The request must explain the reasons for the appeal. If the permittee does not appeal within the ten day period,
the Chief's action is final.
(B) If the appeal is from the revocation of a permit, the permittee may continue to use the alarm system after filing the request for
a hearing and during the administrative appeal process.
(C) Upon receipt of a proper appeal, the City Manager will hold a hearing. He will serve as the hearing officer and may consider
evidence presented by any interested person. Formal rules of evidence do not apply at an appeal hearing. The City Manager will
decide based upon a preponderance of evidence, and may affirm, reverse or modify the Chief's decision.
(D) The City Manager will notify the permittee of the decision in writing within 15 days of the hearing. The City Manager's
decision is final.
(Ord 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
§ 97.30 AUTOMATIC SHUTOFF REQUIRED.
A local alarm installed after April 1, 1996, must be designed and maintained to terminate an audible signal within 15 minutes of
activation. A local alarm that sounds for a period in excess of 15 minutes is prima facie proof that the permittee has violated this
provision.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.31 MAINTENANCE OF SYSTEM.
A permittee must maintain an alarm system to assure proper operation and to minimize false alarm notifications.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/422
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.32 MANUAL RESET REQUIRED.
If an alarm notification is sent directly to any emergency monitoring entity, the permittee must adjust the mechanism so that the
alarm system will not transmit another alarm notification before being manually reset.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.33 REPORTING OF ALARM SIGNALS.
A permittee may not allow an alarm notification to be reported through a relaying intermediary that is not licensed by the Texas
Board of Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies if they are required to have a license.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96) Penalty, see § 97.99
§ 97.34 INDIRECT ALARM REPORTING.
A person who relays alarm notifications to the city must communicate or transmit the alarm notification in the manner and form
designated by the Chief.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96) Penalty, see § 97.99
RECORDS AND FALSE ALARMS
§ 97.45 ALARM DISPATCH RECORDS.
The Chief will maintain a written record of all alarm notifications, including the following information:
(A) Name of permittee;
(B) Location of alarm site;
(C) Date and time of alarm notification;
(D) Name and badge number of the responding police officer or firefighter in charge of the response;
(E) Weather conditions; and
(F) Whether the notification was a false alarm notification.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.46 FALSE ALARM NOTIFICATION AND FEES.
(A) The permittee must pay a fee of $25 for each false alarm notification subject to the following conditions:
(1) The city may not consider a false burglary alarm to have occurred unless a response is made by the Police
Department within 30 minutes of the alarm notification and the Police Department determines from an inspection of the
interior or exterior of the premises that the alarm was false.
(2) No fee may be assessed for the first three false alarm notifications received during any calendar year. For alarm
systems that were not in existence and use at the time of issuance of a permit, no fee may be assessed for false alarm
notifications received during the first 30 days of the operation of the system or for the first three false alarm notifications
received during any calendar year.
(B) The Chief will file a monthly report with the City Manager stating the false alarm notifications for which a fee must be
charged. The City Manager will send a statement for fees due to the affected permittees. The statement will be sent to the address
stated on the permit. The fees must be paid by the permittee within 30 days of the statement's date, and are delinquent after the 30
day period.
(C) If governmental entities maintain their alarm systems to assure that false alarm notifications are minimized, they are exempt
from any false alarm notification fee.
(D) If the permittee is delinquent in paying the false alarm fees required by this section, the Chief may terminate law enforcement
responses to the permittee's alarm site or cancel the permit, or both.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/422
(E) Until the permittee advises the Chief that the permittee has relinquished control of the alarm site and cancels the permit or the
Chief cancels the permit, the permittee is responsible for any fees associated with that permit.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.98 VIOLATION.
If a person fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that imposes a duty or responsibility on the person, they violate this
chapter. Each day or portion of a day that the violation exists is a separate offense.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 97.99 PENALTY.
A person in violation of this section shall be guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not less than $1.00 nor more
than $200.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of
the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with.
(Ord. 436-96-04-23, passed 4-23-96; Am. Ord. 448-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96; Am. Ord. 1046-10-08-10, passed 8-10-10)
CHAPTER 98: TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURES
§ 98.01 RESIDENTIAL.
TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURE means a structure designed for temporary storage use and not permanently attached to the
ground.
(A) No more than one (1) temporary structure shall be allowed per dwelling unit in a residentially zoned [sic] or on a
lot that is residential in use and shall not remain on the site longer than ten (10) consecutive days.
(B) No more that four (4) temporary structures may be placed on a residentially zoned [sic] or on a lot that is residential
in use per calendar year and there shall be a minimum of sixty (60) days between the placement.
(C) No temporary structure shall exceed a height of eight feet (8'), a width of eight feet (8'), or floor area of 128 square
feet.
(D) Temporary structures shall be placed on improved surfaces of concrete, asphalt or brick or screened from view of
the right-of-way and adjacent properties by a screening fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(E) Temporary structures shall be placed outside the site triangle.
§ 98.02 COMMERCIAL.
TEMPORARY STORAGE STRUCTURE means a structure designed for temporary storage use and not permanently attached to the
ground.
(A) No more than one (1) temporary structure shall be allowed per platted lot in an area that is zoned commercial or on
a lot that is commercial in use and shall not remain on the site longer than ten (10) consecutive days without a permit.
(B) No more that four (4) temporary structures may be placed on a commercially zoned [sic] or on a lot that is
commercial in use per calendar year and there shall be a minimum of sixty (60) days between the placement.
(C) No temporary structure shall exceed a height of eight feet (8'), a width of eight feet (8'), or floor area of 128 square
feet.
(D) Temporary structures shall be placed on improved surfaces of concrete, asphalt or brick or screened from view of
the right-of-way and adjacent properties by a screening fence at least six feet (6') in height.
(E) Temporary structures shall be placed outside the site triangle.
(F) No more than four (4) permits may be issued to a property per calendar year and there shall be a minimum of sixty
(60) days between the issuance of permits.
(G) Permits may be approved for up to one hundred eighty (180) days. Permits shall be issued by the building official
or his designee. Permits shall be posted in view from the right-of-way for the duration of the use. Permits shall cost
fifteen dollars ($15.00).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/422
§ 98.03 NONCONFORMING USE.
Temporary storage structures located within the boundaries of the Central Business District on or before June 1, 2007, shall be
permitted as a nonconforming use. The individual claiming the nonconforming use shall register their temporary storage structure
with the building official by August 3, 2007. The nonconforming use is not assignable and shall terminate in the event the temporary
structure is removed from the premises, damaged by more than fifty percent (50%) or destroyed. In the event the owner or lessee of
the premises transfers ownership or ceases to rent or lease the premises on which they were registered as a nonconforming use the
nonconforming use shall terminate.
§ 98.04 PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a
strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated
and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 897-07-07-10, passed 7-10-07)
CHAPTER 99: MAINTENANCE OF FENCES
§ 99.01 MAINTENANCE.
A fence shall be maintained in sound structural condition. All fences in violation of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. Fences shall be maintained by the owner of the property in compliance with the requirements of this chapter including but
not limited to the following maintenance standards:
(A) A property owner shall maintain fences, including those existing prior to the adoption of this chapter, at all times in
a state of good repair, with all braces, bolts, nails, supporting frames and fastenings free from deterioration, termite
infestation, rot, rust or loosening, and able to withstand at all times the wind load for which they were designed.
(B) A fence more than four (4) feet in height shall not be out of vertical alignment more than one (1) foot from the
vertical measured at the top of the fence. A fence four (4) feet or less in height shall not be more than six (6) inches from
the vertical measured at the top of the fence.
(C) Property owners shall not erect or maintain a fence determined by the city engineer to be a visual obstruction to
traffic or otherwise interfering with the line of sight or sight triangle.
(D) Property owners shall regularly maintain painted fence supports, gates, structural members and exterior surfaces
that are covered with paint to prevent rusting, peeling or blistering surfaces.
(E) Property owners shall not affix signs or maintain graffiti, writings and other symbols on a fence except for those
which are permitted as signs under this municipal code or which pertain to the address or occupancy of a property.
(F) Property owners shall replace broken, damaged, removed or missing parts of a fence within ten (10) days of the day
the owner received notice of the violation, with the same material, or material with comparable composition, color, size,
shape and quality of the original fence to which the repair is being made. No person shall use materials not specifically
manufactured as fencing materials such as plywood, corrugated steel panels, or fiberglass panels as fencing materials. A
fence not required by a specific order of the city council, the zoning code of the city, or required to enclose a swimming
pool or spa, may be completely removed within the 10-day period rather than repaired.
(G) If the city determines the existing fence is unsafe, dilapidated, or a public nuisance the fence must be repaired with
materials approved by this code or removed. The repairs must be made in complete sections extending a minimum of
support post to support post. If the extent of repair on any existing fence (materials in noncompliance) is in excess of fifty
(50) percent of the linear length of the total fence or more than a combined 100 linear feet, then the entire fence must be
replaced with materials approved by this code.
§ 99.02 NONCONFORMING USE.
Existing fences that were constructed prior to the adoption of this chapter that were constructed with materials not currently
permitted by this code may be maintained as long as no part of the fence is or becomes unsafe, dilapidated, or a public nuisance.
§ 99.03 PENALTY; OFFENSE.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/422
strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated
and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 939-08-03-11, passed 3-11-08)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 110: FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the food establishment ordinance of the city.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary language.
AUTHORIZED AGENT OR EMPLOYEE. The designated employees of the regulatory authority.
CITY COUNCIL. The Pflugerville city council.
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. An operation that stores, prepares, packages, serves, or otherwise provides food for human consumption
such as a: food service establishment, retail food store, catering operation, institution, temporary food establishment, mobile food
unit, and/or a roadside food vendor.
FOOD HANDLER. Any person in a food establishment who handles food or drink during preparation or serving; or who comes in
contact with any eating or cooking utensils; or who is employed in an area where food or drink is prepared, served, transferred,
stored, packed, sold, or otherwise handled.
HEALTH OFFICIAL. The authorized representative of the city.
NONPROFIT FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment operated by a federal tax exempt charitable organization for
fundraising or other events.
REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The City of Pflugerville.
STATE LAWS. The state laws found in Chapter 437 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
STATE RULES. The state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas Food
Establishment Rules.
TEMPORARY FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. A food establishment operating for a temporary period of no less than four (4) hours and
no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days in conjunction with a fair, carnival, circus, public exhibition, or other public gathering.
WORKING DAYS. The days that the regulatory authority is open to conduct business with the public.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 369-92-10-27, passed 10-27-92; Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1025-09-
10-27, § 1, passed 10-27-09; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12; Ord. 1250-16-03-22, § 2, passed 3-22-16)
§ 110.03 CONSTRUCTION OF CHAPTER.
Wherever in this chapter a reference is made to a statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation which has been amended or superseded, the
reference shall be deemed to mean the amended or superseding provision to the extent that such is a reasonable application.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.04 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/422
(A) Except as provided in subsection (B) below, the regulations of this chapter shall apply to all food establishments within the
city.
(B) The following are exempt from this chapter:
(1) Governmental entities, provided that they show proof of a contractual relationship with another approved
jurisdiction to provide food inspection services.
(2) Temporary food establishments as defined in this chapter.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 369-92-10-27, passed 10-27-92; Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1025-09-
10-27, § 2, passed 10-27-09; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
PERMITS
§ 110.20 PERMITS.
A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from
one person to another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this chapter. All permits expire on
December 31 each year. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food establishment regulated by this chapter.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.21 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT AND FEES.
(A) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the
regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food
establishment and the applicable fee. An incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or
falsifying information required may result in denial or revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis
and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(B) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the
proposed food establishment to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with
state laws and rules may be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. The establishment shall remain closed until the corrections
are made to bring the establishment into compliance.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.22 REVIEW OF PLANS.
Whenever a food establishment is constructed or extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a
food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to
the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20% or greater of the area of the food
establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement,
mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities.
The plans and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this
chapter. The approved plans and specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.23 REGISTRATION OF FOOD HANDLERS.
It shall hereafter be unlawful for any person operating any food establishment, to work or employ a food handler until such food
handler is in possession of a food handler's certificate that is valid during the time of such employment.
(1) Recognition of certificates. The regulatory authority shall recognize certificates from food handlers who attend a
state sanctioned food handler's class offered online or at various sites in the county.
(2) Education and examination of applicant. No food handler's certificate shall be recognized by the regulatory
authority for any person required by law or by this article to have or exhibit such certificate until the applicant shall have
met the following requirements:
(a) Complete a state approved class in basic food sanitation. The primary emphasis of this class will be directed
toward the food workers' sanitation practices and behavior when working in a food establishment. It will be the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/422
responsibility of the person in charge of the food establishment to ensure that safe food practices are in use at all
times.
(3) Manager and supervisory personnel. Managers, assistant managers, and shift supervisors who have completed the
certified food protection manager certification program must post their certification from the state with the employee's
certifications.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12; Ord. 1250-16-
03-22, § 2, passed 3-22-16)
§ 110.24 RESERVED.
Editor's note–Former § 110.24 pertaining to suspension of a permit was omitted by Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12. Previously this section derived from
the following: Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89 and Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04.
§ 110.25 RESERVED.
Editor's note–Former § 110.25 pertaining to revocation of a permit was omitted by Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12. Previously this section derived from
the following: Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89 and Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04.
§ 110.26 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Food establishments shall be inspected a determined number of times during a calendar year according to risk factors set by
the department of state health services. High-risk establishments, that prepare and serve potentially hazardous food and/or serve a
highly susceptible population, shall be inspected a minimum of four (4) times a calendar year. Establishments that serve only
prepackaged, non-potentially hazardous foods shall be inspected a minimum of two (2) times a calendar year.
(B) Additional inspections of food establishments shall be performed as deemed necessary to protect against public health hazards
or nuisances. Additional fees are charged to the establishment for these visits. Visits associated with unsubstantiated complaints
received by this office will not require an additional fee.
(C) Following are guidelines for enforcement of these rules in an establishment that earns more than thirty (30) demerits on
multiple inspections during a twelve (12) month period:
(1) First failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall be posted on front door or window and shall not be covered from
sight, defiled, or removed until an inspection is performed earning thirty (30) or fewer demerits. The follow-up inspection
will occur within two (2) working days of the failed inspection.
(2) Second failure within twelve (12) months of first failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall remain/be posted on
front door or window and shall not be covered from sight, defiled, or removed until an inspection is performed earning
thirty (30) or fewer demerits. The permit shall be suspended and the operations of the establishment shall cease
immediately. The establishment shall remained closed for a minimum of 48 hours and fulfill the following requirements
before reopening:
(a) The management of the establishment must meet with and submit a written plan of action to the health official
or his appointee. The plan of action shall address critical violations of the previously failed inspections.
(b) A reinstatement fee of $100.00 will be paid to the city located at 201-B E. Pecan Street, Pflugerville, Texas
78660.
(c) A follow-up inspection will be conducted within one working day of fulfillment of the requirements listed
under subsections (1) and (2) above.
(d) The establishment shall be placed on a thirty (30) day inspection schedule until two (2) consecutive
inspections result in a score of thirty (30) or fewer demerits.
(3) Third failure within twelve (12) months of first failure. “UNSATISFACTORY” placard shall remain/be posted on
front door or window and shall not be covered from sight, defiled, or removed. The person in charge shall be notified in
writing of the intent of the regulatory authority to permanently revoke their permit.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12)
§ 110.27 FEES.
The city council shall establish by resolution a fee schedule to be paid in connection with this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the city secretary and may be amended only by action of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/422
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 369-92-10-27, passed 10-27-92; Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-
12-11, passed 12-11-12)
SANITATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 110.40 ADOPTION OF TEXAS FOOD ESTABLISHMENT RULES AND APPLICATION OF STATE LAW.
The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Executive Commissioner of the Health
and Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code chapter 228 regarding the regulation of food establishment
in this jurisdiction. In the event that there is a conflict between the Executive Commissioner of the Health and Human Services
Commission and this chapter, the more stringent, as determined by the health official, shall prevail.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12; Am. Ord.
1250-16-03-22, § 2, passed 3-22-16)
§ 110.41 APPLICATION OF SUBCHAPTER.
The regulations set out in sections 110.40 through 110.51 [sic] shall apply to all food establishments, including temporary food
establishments and mobile food units, except as specifically otherwise stated in this chapter.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.42 RESTROOMS.
(A) Every food establishment shall provide its employees with at least one restroom with associated handwashing facilities
conveniently located within the establishment. Food establishments with five or more employees on duty at one time shall provide
two restrooms, one each for males and females. Restrooms required under subsections (B) and (C) of this section may be utilized as
employee restrooms if the restrooms are located within the food establishment or within 75 feet of the main food preparation area of
the food establishment.
(B) A new or extensively remodeled food establishment that provides reusable tableware, or serves alcoholic beverages, or has
seating for 20 or more persons shall have available for public use at least two restrooms, one each for males and females, which are
conveniently accessible from the seating or dining area of such food establishment. Such restrooms shall conform with the
requirements of the city construction code related to handicapped access.
(C) If two or more new or extensively remodeled small food establishments share a common seating or dining area, such food
establishments may also share public restrooms, provided that the restrooms are in compliance with the requirements of subsection
(B) above.
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 110.70 RESERVED.
Editor's note–Former § 110.70 pertaining to hearings was omitted by Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12. Previously this section derived from the
following: Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89 and Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04.
§ 110.71 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter and any person who is the holder of a permit or who otherwise operates a
food establishment that does not comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to a fine not to exceed the maximum amount authorized by law for violation of a city ordinance, as set forth in
section 10.99. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of
any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(B) The city, including the city's police department, and the inspector of food establishments may seek to enjoin violations of this
chapter.
(C) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or its duly authorized designees from taking other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation of this chapter.
(D) It shall not be necessary for the complaint to allege or to prove that the act or omission was knowingly done or omitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/422
(Ord. 301-89-07-25, passed 7-25-89; Am. Ord. 427-95-10-24, passed 10-24-95; Ord. 733-04-01-13, passed 1-13-04; Ord. 1025-09-
10-27, § 3, passed 10-27-09; Ord. 1127-12-12-11, passed 12-11-12) Penalty, see § 10.99
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
Terms not defined in this section are construed in accordance with customary usage.
AGGRESSIVE MANNER.
(1) Intentionally or recklessly making any physical contact with or touching another person in the course of the
solicitation without the person's consent;
(2) Following the person being solicited, if that conduct is:
(a) Intended to or likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or
(b) Intended to or reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation;
(3) Continuing to solicit a person within five feet of the person being solicited after the person has made a negative
response;
(4) Intentionally or recklessly blocking the safe or free passage of the person being solicited or requiring the person, or
the driver of a vehicle, to take evasive action to avoid physical contact with the person making the solicitation;
(5) Using obscene or abusive language or gestures toward the person being solicited;
(6) Approaching the person being solicited in a manner that is:
(a) Intended to or is likely to cause a reasonable person to fear imminent bodily harm or the commission of a
criminal act upon property in the person's possession; or
(b) Intended to or is reasonably likely to intimidate the person being solicited into responding affirmatively to the
solicitation.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE. A device, linked to a bank's account records, which is able to carry out banking transactions.
AUTOMATED TELLER FACILITY. The area comprised of one or more automatic teller machines, and any adjacent space that is
made available to banking customers.
BANK. Includes a bank, savings bank, savings and loan association, credit union, trust company, or similar financial institution.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS. A person in the business of cashing checks, drafts, or money orders for consideration.
CITY MANAGER. The City Manager of the city or any individual employed by such department that he designates to perform any of
his functions specified in this chapter.
INDIVIDUAL. A natural person.
MINOR. An individual who has not attained the age of 18.
PEDDLE or PEDDLER. Any person who engages in commercial activities within city limits by carrying goods or merchandise and
selling or offering for sale for immediate delivery such goods or merchandise from house-to-house, business-to-business, or upon
public property. Peddler also includes a person who distributes handbills or flyers for a commercial purpose, advertising an event,
activity, good or service that is offered for subsequent purchase, donation, or delivery. Peddle means to conduct any of the abovedescribed
activities.
PERSON. Includes any natural person, firm, partnership, corporation or association.
POLICE DEPARTMENT. The police department of the City of Pflugerville.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/422
PUBLIC AREA. An outdoor area to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, a sidewalk, street, highway, park,
parking lot, alleyway, pedestrian way, or the common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility,
or shop.
PUBLIC ROADWAY. The area including the road, median, shoulder or easement from property line to property line alongside the
road.
SOLICIT or SOLICITOR. To request, by the spoken, written, or printed word, or by other means of communication an immediate
donation or transfer of money or another thing of value from another person for philanthropic, religious or other nonprofit objectives,
including the benefit of poor, needy, sick, refugee or handicapped persons; the benefit of any church or religious society, sect, group
or order; the benefit of a patriotic or veterans' association or organization; the benefit of any fraternal, social or civil organization; or
the benefit of any educational institution or individual. Soliciting does not include activities to the benefit of any political group or
political organization that is subject to financial disclosure under state or federal law. Solicitor means any person who conducts any
of the above-described activities.
§ 111.02 SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS PROHIBITED WITHOUT INVITATION.
Solicitation or peddling in and upon the premises of a private residence or commercial establishment in the city, for the purpose of
soliciting or peddling, whenever the premises are posted with a sign containing the phrase “no solicitation,” or some similar sign [is
prohibited].
§ 111.03 UNLAWFUL SOLICITATION AND PEDDLING.
A person commits an offense if the person solicits or peddles:
(A) Without a permit as required by this chapter;
(B) In violation of any provision of this chapter;
(C) After the expiration of a permit as required by this chapter;
(D) To solicit for a purpose other than the purpose identified in the permit issued to a person;
(E) To allow a minor to solicit funds on a public roadway;
(F) In an aggressive manner in a public area, residence or business;
(G) Within 25 feet of:
(1) An automated teller facility;
(2) The entrance or exit of a bank; or
(3) The entrance or exit of a check cashing business; or
(H) At a marked crosswalk;
(I) At a sidewalk cafe or the patio area of a bar or restaurant;
(J) In the Central Business District of the City of Pflugerville, Texas, as defined in Chapter 155 of this Code, between
7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.; or
(K) Upon or within the public right-of-way of an interstate highway, state highway, farm-to-market road or any arterial
roadway.
(L) A culpable mental state is not required, and need not be proved, for an offense under subsections (B) or (C) of this
section.
(M) This chapter is not intended to proscribe a demand for payment for services rendered or goods delivered.
§ 111.04 FALSE OR MISLEADING SOLICITATION.
Any person that makes a false or misleading representation in the course of solicitation violates this chapter. False or misleading
representations include, but are not limited to, the following:
(A) Stating that the solicitation of funds is being carried out on behalf of an organization that does not exist.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/422
(B) Stating that the solicitor represents an organization when such statement is false.
(C) Exhibiting military, medical, or religious order uniform or other indication of military service or membership in a
medical profession or religious order when the person soliciting funds is neither a present nor former member of the
service indicated or a member of a medical profession or religious order, unless the person is soliciting funds on behalf of
the military branch, medical profession or religious order indicated in the statement.
(D) Exhibiting an indication of physical disability or using makeup or a device to stimulate any deformity or disability,
when the person soliciting funds does not suffer the deformity or disability indicated.
§ 111.05 HOURS WHEN PEDDLING AND SOLICITATION PROHIBITED.
No peddler or solicitor may operate on the residence of another person or the public rights-of-way in the city limits of the City of
Pflugerville between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
§ 111.06 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR PEDDLERS.
Every peddler or solicitor must obtain a permit from the City Manager before peddling or soliciting and it is the duty of the Police
Department to make an investigation of all persons requesting such a permit to determine their authority for making such sales and
taking such orders and before issuing such permit must determine that they actually represent the parties they claim to represent and
that they are actual bona fide representatives of a reliable concern. In order to make such determinations concerning whether an
individual actually represents the party they claim to, each peddler or solicitor must present a valid state photo identification card,
operators' license or company photo identification card to the Police Department in order to receive a permit. A representative of an
organization who wishes to solicit to private residences, businesses or on public roadways must also present a valid state photo
identification card, operators' license or organization photo identification card.
§ 111.07 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR SOLICITORS.
Any person who seeks to solicit within the corporate limits of the city must file with the Police Department a permit, on forms
provided by the Police Department, containing the following:
(A) The name of the person registering to solicit.
(B) Whether the person registering is an individual, partnership, corporation or association, and:
(1) If an individual, his or her business or residence address and telephone number.
(2) If a partnership, the names of all partners and the principal business address and telephone number of each
partner.
(3) If a corporation, whether it is organized under the laws of Texas or is a foreign corporation, the mailing
address, business location, telephone number, and name of the individual in charge of the Pflugerville office of the
corporation.
(4) If an association, the association's principal business address and telephone number, if any, and the names and
principal business or residence addresses and telephone numbers of five members and two officers of the
association. If the association is part of a multistate organization or association, the mailing address and business
location of its principal headquarters must be given, in addition to the mailing address and business location of its
local office.
(C) A brief description of the purpose for which the funds are to be solicited and the intended use of the funds toward
that purpose.
(D) The time period within which the solicitation is to be made, giving the date of the beginning of solicitation and its
projected conclusion.
(E) A description of the means and methods by which the solicitation is to be accomplished, including whether such
means and methods will include any solicitation of occupants of vehicles on public streets.
(F) A statement to the effect that if a permit is granted, such permit will not be used as or represented to be an
endorsement by the city or any of its officers or employees.
(G) As to each, if any, officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current agent or employee engaging in the solicitation of
funds who within the past seven years has been convicted of (or been incarcerated for any conviction of) a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the name of the individual, the nature of the offense, the name of the state where
the conviction occurred, and the year of the conviction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/422
(H) An explanation of the reasons, if the person registering is unable to provide any of the foregoing information, why
such information is not available.
(I) The signature of an individual on behalf of the person registering. If the person registering is an individual, this is
the applicant. If the person registering is a partnership, this is the partner charged with disbursing the funds solicited. If
the person registering is a corporation or an association, this is its officer charged with disbursing the funds solicited. The
individual signing the permit must sign the statement and swear before an officer authorized to administer oaths that he or
she has carefully read the permit and that all the information contained therein is true and correct.
§ 111.08 PERMIT APPLICATION FEE.
Every request for a permit to peddle or solicit must be accompanied by a registration fee of $35.00 from each organization, company,
entity or business to compensate the city for the cost of administering this chapter. Such fee will be nonrefundable, irrespective of
whether a permit is issued.
§ 111.09 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS TO PEDDLE OR SOLICIT.
A request for a permit to peddle or a permit to solicit must be filed not later than the eleventh day before the date the solicitation or
peddling is to begin. Within five working days of the receipt of the application for a permit, the Police Department will either issue a
permit, as provided in §111.07 or notify the person registering that the application does not comply with the requirements of §111.07
and specifically point out what information or explanation has not been furnished that is required before a permit can be issued. An
applicant for a permit may appeal the denial of a permit to the City Manager within ten days to the City Council which will conduct a
hearing at a time and place designated for the purpose of determining whether or not there was good cause for such revocation.
§ 111.10 FORM OF PERMITS.
The Police Department will prescribe the form of each permit, each of which will be printed in black except that the following will
be printed prominently thereon in red: “The issuance of this permit is not an endorsement by the City of Pflugerville or any of its
departments, officers or employees.” Each permit must specify the period of its validity and bear a registration number.
§ 111.11 PERMIT DISPLAY.
Each peddler or solicitor will carry his or her permit at all times while engaging in business in the city. Upon request or demand, the
peddler or solicitor must display his or her permit bearing his or her name. The peddler or solicitor must exhibit the permit to indicate
compliance with all of the relevant requirements of this chapter.
§ 111.12 TRANSFER OF PERMIT PROHIBITED.
A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter is not transferable, and the authority a permit confers is conferred only to the
holder named therein. The permit will have endorsed thereon in red letters the words “NOT TRANSFERABLE.”
§ 111.13 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
Any permit issued pursuant to the above section is subject to revocation upon discovery of any false or misleading statements
contained in the application, or for failure of the applicant to fulfill obligations which he incurs to purchasers or potential purchasers,
or for other good cause. Upon revocation of such permits the permit holder may appeal such revocation within ten days to the City
Manager who will conduct an investigation at a time and place designated for the purpose of determining whether or not there was
good cause for such revocation.
§ 111.14 EXPIRATION OF PERMIT.
Each permit issued by the Police Department expires not later than one year from the date of issuance, or upon the termination of the
solicitation or peddling period specified, whichever is less.
§ 111.15 PUBLIC DISCLOSURE.
All permits to peddle and solicitation permits filed with the Police Department, whether or not a permit has been issued, are public
records and must be available for inspection by members of the public during the regular business hours of the Central Records
Department of the Pflugerville Police Department. Copies may be obtained at the fees prescribed by law for copies of city records.
§ 111.16 EXCEPTIONS.
The following are excepted from the operation of this chapter:
(1) Solicitation by any organization or association from its members;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/422
(2) Solicitation by a person when such solicitation occurs on premises owned or controlled by the person soliciting or
with the permission of the person who owns or controls the premises;
(3) The issuance of any announcement or advertisement which states that a solicitation as described in subsections (1)
and (2) above will occur or which announces or advertises an event at which unannounced solicitation as described in
subsections (1) and (2) above occurs;
(4) Exemptions specifically granted by the City Manager.
§ 111.17 VIOLATION/PENALTY.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction will be fined not more
than $500.00.
§ 111.18 PROVISIONS CUMULATIVE.
The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of any other valid and applicable laws, rules, or regulations governing solicitation or
any activity which may be associated therewith. Compliance with this chapter does not excuse compliance with any other valid and
applicable laws, rules or regulations governing the solicitation or any activity which may be associated therewith.
(Ord. 324-90-09-11, passed 9-11-90; Am. Ord. 725-03-11-25, passed 11-25-03; Ord. 858-07-01-23, passed 1-23-07)
CHAPTER 112: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 112.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter will be known, and may be cited, as the Sexually Oriented Business Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville.
§ 112.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions will apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein will be construed in accordance with customary usage. The following terms are not necessarily
mutually exclusive as one Sexually Oriented Business operation may provide more than one form of activity, entertainment or
merchandise.
ADULT ARCADE. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained
to show images to 5 or fewer Persons per machine at any time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized
by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas as defined
herein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment that offers for sale or rental any one or more of the
following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video
reproductions, slides, or other visual representations that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matters
exhibiting, depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with Specified Sexual Activities or
Simulated Nudity. This does not include items used for conception control or for protection from sexually transmitted
diseases.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT CABARET. A nightclub, bar, lounge, or similar commercial establishment which provides or features to
Customers live performances by Employees or Entertainment Personnel that are distinguished or characterized by any one or more of
the following:
(1) An emphasis on the exposure of Specified Anatomical Areas; or
(2) An emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities; or
(3) An emphasis on Nudity, State of Nudity or Simulated Nudity; or
(4) A combination of any of the above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/422
ADULT MOTEL. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment that Rents or otherwise permits a room to be occupied in
exchange for any form of consideration, and:
(1) Offers accommodations to the tenant or occupier of the room for any television transmissions, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities and/or Specified Anatomical Areas
and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way or otherwise advertises the availability of this type of adult
accommodations; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room(s) for Rent for a period of time that is less than 10 hours; or
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to Subrent the room for a period of time that is less than 10 hours;
(4) Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment has been Rented and vacated
two or more times in less than a ten-hour period creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is Operated as an
Adult Motel.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment that Regularly features non-live performances or
entertainment such as films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or describing Specified Sexual Activities and/or Specified Anatomical
Areas.
ADULT THEATER. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment that Regularly features Persons who
appear in a State of Nudity, or features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the exposure of
Specified Anatomical Areas or by an emphasis on Specified Sexual Activities.
APPLICANT. Any Person required to sign an application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy.
CANDIDATE. Any person required to sign an application for an Employee license.
CHILD CARE FACILITY. A building used as a children's boarding home, child placing agency or other place for the care or custody
of children under 14 years of age.
CHURCH. A building in which Persons Regularly assemble for religious worship and activities intended primarily for purposes
connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
CITY ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL. An authorized representative of any of the following city departments or divisions:
(1) City manager's office including, but not limited to all city employees authorized by the city manager; or
(2) Police department.
COMMISSION. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Pflugerville.
CUSTOMER. Any Person who:
(1) Enters the premises and patronizes a Sexually Oriented Business, whether or not in exchange for the payment of an
admission fee or any other form of consideration, gratuity or as a guest of a member; or
(2) Purchases, Rents, otherwise partakes of any sexually oriented merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services
while on the premises.
DWELLING. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, mobile home, or any other building used for residential
purposes, whether single family or multi-family, attached or detached, and regardless of whether tenant or owner occupies land that
is not Residentially Zoned Land.
ELDER CARE FACILITY. A building used to provide services for the elderly, whether residential, on an interim basis or on an outpatient
basis.
EMPLOYEE. Any Person on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business who receives any form of compensation, including tips or
gratuities, from the Operator, manager, Customers, other Employees or Entertainment Personnel, and in exchange therefor:
(1) Renders any work, service, performance or exhibition whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to or for a Customer; or
(2) Renders any other support service whatsoever, directly or indirectly, for or on behalf of the furtherance of the
business operations; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/422
(3) Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, bartenders, cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, Escorts, hosts, hostesses,
models, masseurs, outcall Persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses, or other Persons working on or about the
premises.
ENTERTAINMENT PERSONNEL. Any Person, including Persons traditionally regarded as “independent contractors,” who receives
any form of compensation, including tips or gratuities, from the Operator, Customers, Employees or other Entertainment Personnel
and in exchange therefor:
(1) Renders any live entertainment, service, performance or exhibition whatsoever, directly or indirectly, to or for a
Customer for the furtherance of the business operation; and
(2) Includes, but is not necessarily limited to, bartenders, cashiers, dancers, disc jockeys, Escorts, hosts, hostesses,
models, masseurs, outcall Persons, strippers, models, waiters, waitresses, or other Persons working on or about the
premises.
ESCORT. A Person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another Person, or who agrees
or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform striptease for another Person.
ESCORT AGENCY. A Person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish Escorts as one of its
primary business purposes, for a fee, tip, or other consideration.
FAMILY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT SITE. An establishment or area directed primarily to families including, but not limited to,
restaurants, movie theaters, private parks, and shopping centers.
HOSPITAL. A building used to provide health services including, but not limited to, human in-patient or out-patient medical care
facilities for the sick or injured licensed pursuant to Texas Hospital Licensing Law, Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated Health and
Safety Code Chapter 241, facilities operated by an agency of the federal government, or convalescent facilities licensed pursuant to
Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated Health and Safety Code Chapter 242.
INTERESTED PARTY. A Person who owns or leases real property within 1,500 feet of a proposed Sexually Oriented Business.
MASSAGE. Any method by which a Person utilizes his or her hands, feet or an instrument for treating the superficial parts of a
Customer's body for medical, hygienic, exercise, entertainment, relaxation, or stimulation purposes by rubbing, stroking, kneading,
tapping, pounding or vibrating.
NUDE MODELING BUSINESS. Any establishment where an Employee or Entertainment Personnel performs a Massage or
Specified Sexual Activities while appearing in a State of Nudity, Simulated Nudity or while displaying Specified Anatomical Areas,
and is also provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted to
Customers.
NUDE MODELING STUDIO. Any establishment where an Employee or Entertainment Personnel appears in a State of Nudity,
Simulated Nudity or displays Specified Anatomical Areas, and is also provided or allowed to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted to Customers.
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY. Appearing while any of the Specified Anatomical Areas are less than completely and opaquely
covered.
OPERATE or CAUSE TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in operation.
OPERATOR.
(1) The Person(s) in whose name a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been issued for a Sexually Oriented
Business pursuant to this chapter; or
(2) The Person(s) in whose name a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy would be required in order to lawfully operate
a Sexually Oriented Business pursuant to this chapter; or
(3) The Person(s) who operates or causes to be Operated any form of Sexually Oriented Business which is subject to
regulation by this chapter.
PERSON. Any individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity.
PRINCIPAL BUSINESS OPERATION. For the purposes of determining whether a business is subject to regulation, this term means
and includes any non-live, sexually oriented retail sale or rental business activity as defined herein that is 25% or more of the total
business operation at a particular location. The 25% criteria may be determined by percentages of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/422
(A) Floor space utilized, inventory of items for sale or rental;
(B) Display areas;
(C) Presentation time of entertainment or performances; or
(D) Gross revenue of the business as measured over any continuous 60-day period.
Since all live activity is subject to regulations as a sexually oriented business, the 25% criteria does not apply to any sexually
oriented business featuring or offering any form of live performances, entertainment, modeling or other live activity.
PUBLIC BUILDING. A building used by a federal, state or local governmental agency and open to the general public.
PUBLIC PARK. Any land area dedicated to or maintained by a governmental entity for traditional park-like recreational purposes,
but does not include:
(1) Privately-owned amusement parks; or
(2) Privately-owned or privately-managed golf courses.
REGULARLY. Offering, featuring, promoting or advertising a happening, occurrence or activity on a recurring basis or at fixed
intervals, or as a customary and regular aspect of the business.
RENT or SUBRENT. The act of permitting a room or other portion of the premises to be occupied in exchange for any form of
consideration.
RESIDENTIALLY ZONED LAND. Any residentially owned land within the city or a primarily residential zone that may be created
by the city council after the passage of this chapter or land located in another jurisdiction that bears a zoning district that permits
residential uses, or land outside the city that either allows residential uses or actually includes land used as residences.
SCHOOL. Includes any of the following:
(1) A building where persons regularly assemble for the purpose of instruction or education together with the
playgrounds, dormitories, stadium and other structures or grounds used in conjunction therewith; and
(2) Licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the State of Texas or by another governmental entity that
provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for children under 14 years of age for less than 24
hours per day.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
(1) The term Sexually Oriented Business will be construed to regulate:
(a) The providing, featuring or offering of Employees or Entertainment Personnel who appear on the premises
while in a State of Nudity or Simulated Nudity and provide live performances or entertainment for Customers; or
(b) As a Principal Business Operation as defined herein, provides, features or offers non-live, sexually-explicit
entertainment, materials, or items for sale or rental to Customers; or, provides or offers a service or exhibition of
materials or items that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to its Customers, if the
materials or items are distinguished by or characterized by an emphasis on subject matter depicting, describing or
relating to Specified Sexual Activities or Specified Anatomical Areas; and
(c) Includes, but is not limited to, any form of Sexually Oriented Business, Adult Arcade, adult bath, Adult
Bookstore, Adult Video Store, adult cabaret, Adult Entertainment Cabaret, Adult Motel, Adult Motion Picture
Theater, Adult Theater, Nude Modeling Business, Massage parlor, Nude Modeling Studio, adult out-call
establishment, Escort Agency, Sexually Oriented Encounter Center, or other business establishment conducting
sexually oriented activity or Sexually Oriented Entertainment as defined or regulated herein.
(2) The term Sexually Oriented Business will not be construed to regulate:
(a) An otherwise lawfully operating retail business that does not offer or feature sexually explicit merchandise,
material or items for sale or rental to Customers as a Principal Business Operation (25 percent or less) and does not
offer or feature any form of live Sexually Oriented Entertainment;
(b) Any clothing business that offers wearing apparel for sale to Customers but does not exhibit merchandise on
live models;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/422
(c) A bar, nightclub or lounge or other non-Sexually Oriented Business that occasionally promotes a swimsuit or
similar contest in which the contestants do not appear “nude” or in a State of Nudity;
(d) Any medical practice Operated by or employing licensed psychologists, physicians, physical therapists,
registered nurses, chiropractors, or athletic trainers engaged in practicing the healing arts; or
(e) Any educational courses conducted at a proprietary School licensed by the State of Texas, or conducted by a
private college or university that operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a junior college,
college or university licensed by the State of Texas; if a student must enroll at least 3 days in advance of the class in
order to participate in a class and no more than one nude model appears before the class at any time.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENCOUNTER CENTER. A commercial enterprise that, for any form of consideration or prize, offers
physical activities, contact, wrestling or tumbling between male and female Persons, or between Persons of the same sex, when one
or more of the Persons is in a State of Nudity or Simulated Nudity and the activity is intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual
gratification to its Customers.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED ENTERTAINMENT. Any variety of live or non-live performances or exhibitions that are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matters exhibiting, depicting or engaging in Specified Sexual Activities or while exposing Specified
Anatomical Areas, or that provide sexual gratification or sexual stimulation to Customers.
SIMULATED NUDITY. A state of dress in which any artificial device or covering is worn on a Person and exposed to view so as to
simulate an actual State of Nudity.
SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY. License issued by the City of Pflugerville that allows a Sexually Oriented
Business to operate at a specific location.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. One or more of the following portions of the human body:
(1) Genitals, whether or not in a state of sexual arousal;
(2) Pubic region or pubic hair;
(3) Buttock(s);
(4) The portions of the female breast(s) beginning from a point immediately above the top of the areola and continuing
downward to the lowest portion of the breast(s); or
(5) Any combination of the above.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES. One or more of the following:
(1) The fondling, massaging or other erotic touching or stimulation of Specified Anatomical Areas or of an erogenous
zone;
(2) Normal or perverted sexual activity, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in conjunction with any of the activities above.
§ 112.03 PURPOSE, INTENT, AND FINDINGS.
The following are provided as guidelines for the construction, interpretation and enforcement of this section:
(A) It is the purpose and intent of this section to regulate Sexually Oriented Business establishments to protect and
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and visitors thereto, and to prevent the decline of
residential and business neighborhoods and the growth of criminal activity, and to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations to prevent the concentration of Sexually Oriented Businesses within the city.
(B) It is the intent of this chapter that these regulations are based on evidence concerning adverse secondary effects of
Sexually Oriented Businesses on the community presented in hearings and in reports made available to the City Council,
and on findings incorporated in the cases of City Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v.
American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976); FW/PBS, Inc. v. City of Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); and City of Los
Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc., 535 U.S. 425 (2002).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/422
(C) This section intends to balance the right of the city's citizens to maintain a decent moral society and, on the other
hand, the right of individuals to express themselves freely in accordance with the guidelines of the Constitution of the
United States and United States Supreme Court rulings pursuant thereto.
(D) It is the intent of the City Council to promulgate this chapter pursuant to Chapter 243 of the Texas Local
Government Code, as amended.
(E) This chapter is also intended to deter property uses and activities conducted thereon that, directly or indirectly,
cause or would cause adverse effects on the stability of the immediate neighborhood surrounding the Sexually Oriented
Business.
(F) It is not this chapter's purpose nor is it intended to impose a limitation or restriction on the content of any
communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
(G) Similarly, it is not this chapter's purpose or intent to restrict or deny lawful access by adults to sexually oriented
materials nor to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented materials to their intended market.
(H) Similarly, it is not this chapter's purpose or intent to impose judgment on the content or merits of any
constitutionally protected form of speech or expression.
(I) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or Employee license granted under this chapter does not authorize or
legalize any conduct, activity or business that is illegal under state or federal law.
§ 112.04 ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES AND PENALTIES.
(A) Whenever a Person does an act that is forbidden, fails to perform an act that is required, or commits an act that is made an
offense by any provision of this chapter, the violation is punishable as provided by Section 243.010(b) of the Texas Local
Government Code as a Class A misdemeanor, as amended. City Enforcement Personnel may issue citations for any violations of this
chapter.
(B) Each day that a violation is permitted or continues to exist is a separate violation.
(C) When a citation is issued, the Person to whom the citation was issued must make appropriate arrangements in the city's
municipal courts to either plead guilty, plead no contest or request a docket setting within 12 days. As stated in Section 243.007 (c)
of the Local Government Code, nothing in this chapter limits the ability of plaintiffs to pursue an appeal for the denial, suspension,
or revocation of a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy or Employee license.
(D) Notwithstanding section 10.99 of this code, any Person found guilty of a violation under this chapter may be found guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor and fined up to $4,000 or up to one year in jail for each violation.
ADMINISTRATIVE REGULATIONS
§ 112.10 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS OF ANY TYPE OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS.
(A) Sexually oriented businesses are only allowed in general industrial districts (GI) subject to the limitations in this chapter. If at
such time there are no GI zoned properties that are outside of the areas outlined in subsection (B) a sexually oriented business is
permitted in the light industrial district (LI) subject to the limitations outlined in this chapter. An operator of a sexually oriented
business commits a violation if the operator operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business in a zoning district that
does not expressly permit that type of commercial use in the zoning district.
(B) In addition to being located in a proper zoning district, an operator commits a violation if the operator operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business within 750 feet, if located in the GI district, or within 1,000 feet when permitted to be located
in the LI district, of an existing:
(1) Child-care facility;
(2) Church;
(3) Dwelling;
(4) Elder care facility;
(5) Family oriented entertainment site;
(6) Hospital;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/422
(7) Public building;
(8) Public park;
(9) Other sexually oriented business;
(10) Residentially zoned land; or
(11) School.
(C) For the purpose of subsection (B), measurement of the 750-foot distance, or 1,000-foot distance when applicable, will be made
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the property line of an existing childcare
facility, church, elder care facility, family oriented business, hospital, public building, other sexually oriented business, or
school, from the boundary line of a public park or residentially zoned land. For dwellings, the 750-foot distance will be measured in
a straight line from the nearest point of the foundation to the nearest property line of the property sought to be used as a sexually
oriented business.
(D) Also for the purposes of subsection (B) above, measurement of the 750-foot distance, or 1,000-foot distance when applicable,
will also include child-care facilities, churches, dwellings, elder care facilities, family oriented businesses, hospitals, public
buildings, public parks, other sexually oriented businesses, residentially zoned land, or schools that are located in an adjoining city,
township or rural land area and that are within the 750-foot distance of the nearest property line of the property sought to be used as a
sexually oriented business within the city.
(E) Sites that are eligible to be located within the LI zoning district must comply with the base development criteria established in
Chapter 157 for LI zoned properties however are subject to the architectural standards established for office, retail, and commercial
properties in lieu of compliance with the architectural standards established for industrial properties.
§ 112.11 HOURS OF OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
A Sexually Oriented Business may only be open between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Monday through Saturday. A
Sexually Oriented Business also may not be open for business on any legal holiday recognized by the State of Texas.
§ 112.12 PROVISIONS FOR NONCONFORMING USES.
(A) If a Sexually Oriented Business obtains a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy under this chapter and such license is not
suspended or revoked, the Sexually Oriented Business is deemed conforming to the terms of this chapter and chapter 157, the Zoning
Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pflugerville, concerning location of the Sexually Oriented Business for a period of 3
years regardless of any subsequent amendments to this chapter, provided that the Sexually Oriented Business applies for a new
certificate before its current certificate expires, is suspended, or revoked.
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, if a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy would be made nonconforming by an
amendment to chapter 157, the Zoning Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pflugerville, that changes the zoning
designation that applies to the area where the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is located, the Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy shall expire and the Sexually Oriented Business must discontinue operation either before 3 years have elapsed from the
date the use becomes nonconforming or once 3 years have elapsed from the date the use becomes nonconforming. If the
nonconforming use that results from a rezoning is discontinued, interrupted or changed before the 3 years has expired, any
subsequent use of the land that the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was granted for shall be in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter and chapter 157.
§ 112.13 USE REGULATIONS FOR ALL SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
The application of the regulations in this section may be modified by prior written approval of the City Manager to reasonably
accommodate legitimate needs of a particular business to promote on-premise security and safety measures for the premises and the
Persons thereon, such as security personnel, security doors, money cages, storage rooms and limited access areas. Unless so
modified, the city or its designated representatives may issue citations for violations of the following regulations that occur on the
premises of a Sexually Oriented Business at any time the establishment is occupied or open for business:
(A) No increase of the floor area or modification in the internal structural configuration of a Sexually Oriented
Business may be made beyond the area or configuration as shown in the floor plan as approved with the issuance of the
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy. The Operator must maintain a copy of the approved floor plan posted with the
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, in a conspicuous place within the premises.
(B) The Operator of a Sexually Oriented Business must permit and cooperate with the appropriate City Enforcement
Personnel to inspect the entire premises at any time the Sexually Oriented Business is occupied or open for business and
at other reasonable times upon request, as well as all activity being conducted therein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/422
(C) Subject to reasonable accommodations for legitimate security measures, including approved internal surveillance
video systems, the Operator must maintain the entire premises sufficiently well to allow walk-through inspections by City
Enforcement Personnel without interference.
(D) The Operator must maintain every portion of the premises where Customers are permitted access equipped
throughout and illuminated at all times with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to provide reasonably
safe lighting conditions for patrons, Employees or City Enforcement Personnel walking throughout the premises.
(E) If a Sexually Oriented Business is in operation during the hours of darkness, the Operator must equip and
illuminate all parking and pedestrian areas of the premises by overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient illumination to
provide reasonably safe lighting conditions for Persons or vehicles traveling into, on or out of the property. The lighting
fixtures must be directed onto the property in accordance with section 155.207 of the city's Code of Ordinances of the
City of Pflugerville and all other applicable sections of this code regarding site lighting to avoid being directed onto
neighboring properties.
(F) The Operator may not utilize or allow restrooms or Employee dressing rooms to be utilized for Sexually Oriented
Business purposes or for the offering of any sexually oriented merchandise to Customers.
(G) The Operator must maintain at least one conspicuous sign at each public entrance which in all respects complies
with the sign ordinance located in chapter 154 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pflugerville, of a size of at least
24 inches in height and 36 inches in width, easily visible and legible to all Persons before entry into the establishment,
that contains a statement (with letters at least three inches wide and six inches tall in size) to the effect:
THIS IS A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT THAT REGULARLY FEATURES [description
of the type of activity or merchandise as permitted herein]. IF NUDITY OR ACTIVITY OF A SEXUAL NATURE
OFFENDS YOU, DO NOT COME IN. NO PERSON UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS ALLOWED ENTRY [or if
alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises]--NO PERSON UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE IS ALLOWED ENTRY.
(H) In addition, a sign shall be displayed that warns patrons of a Sexually Oriented Business of the symptoms and
causes of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS). Such sign shall comply with the sign ordinance located in
chapter 154 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pflugerville and shall be of a size of at least 24 inches in height and
36 inches in width, easily visible and legible to all Persons before entry into the establishment with letters at least three
inches wide and six inches tall in size.
§ 112.14 PROHIBITION OF THE SALE OF ALCOHOL.
The sale, use, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business is prohibited.
SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY
§ 112.20 SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
(A) A Person may not cause the establishment, operation or continuation of a Sexually Oriented Business as defined or subject to
regulation in this chapter without first obtaining a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for a Sexually Oriented Business, duly
issued by the City of Pflugerville expressly allowing the particular type of business and activity to be conducted on the premises.
(B) The fact that a Person possesses other types of state or city permits does not exempt that person from the requirement of
obtaining and thereafter maintaining a valid Specialized Certificate of Occupancy.
(C) A Person may not cause the establishment, operation or continuation of a Sexually Oriented Business establishment under any
other form of certificate of occupancy, such as a “lounge,” “nightclub,” “bar,” “tanning salon,” etc., that does not also expressly
provide for the Sexually Oriented Business and activity also conducted on the premises.
§ 112.21 APPLICATION FOR SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) Any Person desiring to obtain a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy for a Sexually Oriented Business must apply on form(s)
provided by the city's Building Official. The Applicant must also furnish any and all necessary supporting documents as required by
the application.
(B) The following information must be provided on the application form:
(1) The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the Applicant(s);
(2) The name of the Applicant's spouse and of all individuals with whom the Applicant resides;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/422
(3) Two copies each of recent photographs of the Applicant showing full face and each side face profile;
(4) A complete set of fingerprints on forms from the police department;
(5) A complete and current NCIC and TCIC criminal history of Applicant obtained by Applicant from the Texas
Department of Public Safety. The criminal history must be completed within 15 days of the date the application is
submitted to the Building Official;
(6) The Applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and, if applicable, his/her state or federally issued
tax identification number;
(7) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description of the services to be provided;
(8) If the Applicant intends to operate the Sexually Oriented Business under a name other than that of the Applicant, he
or she must state (a) the Sexually Oriented Business's assumed name and (b) submit the required registration documents;
(9) Whether the Applicant, or an individual residing with the Applicant, has ever been convicted, or is awaiting trial on
pending charges, of a crime specified in sections 112.24(A)(11) and (12) and, if so, the nature of the offense(s) and the
date, place, and jurisdiction of each offense;
(10) Whether the Applicant, or an individual residing with the Applicant, has had a previous license or specialized
certificate under this chapter or other similar Sexually Oriented Business ordinance from another city or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the Sexually Oriented Business for which the license or
specialized certificate was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and
whether the Applicant, or an individual residing with the Applicant, is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a Sexually Oriented Business ordinance
whose license or specialized certificate has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the Sexually Oriented Business for which the license or specialized certificate was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation;
(11) Whether the Applicant, or an individual residing with the Applicant, holds any other license or specialized
certificate under this chapter or other similar Sexually Oriented Business ordinance from another city or county and, if so,
the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
(12) The address and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be located;
(13) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the establishment for which the
license or specialized certificate is sought, and the date on which the establishment began operations as a Sexually
Oriented Business at the location for which the specialized certificate is sought; and
(14) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which must be expressed in number of days
from the date of issuance of the specialized certificate). If the expected startup date is to be more than ten days following
the date of issuance of the specialized certificate, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling
work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule and plan for accomplishing the
construction, repair or remodeling work.
(C) All applications for a specialized certificate must include the following:
(1) If the establishment is a State of Texas corporation, a certified copy of the articles of incorporation, together with all
amendments thereto.
(2) If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of authority to transact business in
this state, together with all amendments thereto.
(3) If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the State of Texas, a certified copy of the
certificate of limited partnership, together with all amendments thereto.
(4) If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership and the
qualification documents, together with all amendments thereto.
(5) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is to be situated in the form of a
copy of the recorded deed along with the current address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner(s).
(6) If the Person(s) identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land is not also the owner(s) of the establishment, then
the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract, lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally
enforceable right of the owner(s) or proposed owner(s) of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/422
the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the purpose of the operation of the establishment together with the correct
address and telephone number of each person with an ownership interest in the property.
(7) If the property is owned by other than a natural Person the complete name, address and telephone of each Person
with an interest in the entity must be included in the application.
(8) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application by a registered land
surveyor depicting the property lines of any established use listed in section 112.10 within 1,500 feet of the property to be
certified. For purposes of this section, a use is considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an
application is submitted.
(9) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including
a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but
must be drawn to a designated scale no smaller than 1/4 inch equals one foot and with marked dimensions of the
placement of the building on the tract of land, and the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
All locational requirements must be approved by the Building Official within 60 days from the time the application is
filed.
(10) Any of items (1) through (9) above will not be required for a renewal application under section 112.29 of this
chapter if they were previously presented and the Applicant states that the documents previously furnished to the Building
Official with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain correct and current.
(D) Every application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy must contain a statement made under oath that:
The Applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information
contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and,
The Applicant has read the provisions of this chapter.
(E) The Applicant for a Sexually Oriented Business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy must be qualified according to the
provisions of this chapter.
(F) If the Applicant who wishes to operate a Sexually Oriented Business is an individual, that individual must sign the application
for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy as Applicant. If the Applicant who wishes to operate a Sexually Oriented Business is
other than an individual, each individual who has an interest in the business must sign and provide all the information required by the
application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy as an Applicant and will be considered an Operator if a Specialized Certificate
of Occupancy is granted.
(G) The fact that a Person possesses any other valid license, certificate or permit required by law does not exempt him from the
requirement of obtaining a Sexually Oriented Business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy. A Person who operates a Sexually
Oriented Business and possesses another business license, certificate or permit must comply with the requirements and provisions of
this chapter as well as the requirements and provisions of the laws concerning the other license, certificate or permit.
(H) All applications must include a non-refundable application fee of $2,500.00 to cover the city's costs to process an application.
An application will not be considered to have been filed until all applicable fees are paid and all information required by the
application form has been submitted.
(I) The Applicant must supplement an application with new information received after the date the application was deemed
completed.
(J) All Sexually Oriented Businesses located within the city and in operation as a lawful use conforming to the Zoning Code
before the effective date of this chapter are granted a one-time waiver of the application fee. Upon satisfactory completion of the
application and surrender of the existing business' current Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, a new Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy will be issued.
(K) A copy of all applications and supporting documentation for Specialized Certificates of Occupancy will be maintained by the
Building Official.
(L) Upon receipt of an application or supplemental information, the Building Official will review the application to determine if
all required and necessary information has been submitted. The Building Official will issue a letter within 10 days of receipt of the
application or supplemental information and advise the Applicant whether supplemental information must be submitted. The
Applicant must provide any supplemental information within 30 days or the application will be returned and the filing fee forfeited.
§ 112.22 PUBLIC NOTICE OF PENDING APPLICATION.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/422
(A) After the Building Official has issued a letter advising the Applicant that the application is complete, the Building Official will
cause signs (at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size) to be placed on the property subject to the proposed Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy that provide notification by specifically stating, with letters at least three inches wide and six inches tall, “SEXUALLY
ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION PENDING”. The sign shall conform to the requirements of this section and
section 243.0075 of the Local Government Code. All lettering on the signs other than above described, will be at least 1 and ½
inches x 2 inches in size for each letter on the sign. The sign will also include the name, city and state of residence of each Applicant,
the date on which the application was filed, and the time and place of the hearings. The signs will be placed on the property in
sufficient quantities and locations to identify the property as being subject to a proposed Sexually Oriented Business Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy. One sign will be erected on each lot corner to identify the boundaries of the property in addition to one
sign for each 300 foot increment of each public road or highway frontage on the property existing or any part thereof. The signs will
be erected within seven days after the Building Official has issued a letter advising the Applicant that the application is complete and
will remain erected until the application has been approved or denied by the City Council
(B) The city will give notice of the application and scheduled public hearings by publication in two consecutive issues of the city's
official newspaper. The notices will be printed in 10-point boldface type and will:
(1) Include the fact that a Sexually Oriented Business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been applied for;
(2) Include the exact location, including the street address, of the place of business for which the certificate is sought;
(3) Include the name of each owner of the business and, if the business is operated under an assumed name, the trade
name together with the names of all owners;
(4) Include, if the Applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers, directors and shareholders of 10% or
more of the corporation;
(5) Include the dates and times of the public hearings; and
(6) Be published at least 15 days before each public hearing.
(C) Pursuant to Section 243.0075 of the Local Government Code, there shall be at least 60 days between the time that an
application for a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is deemed complete by the Building Official and the public hearing to
determine whether to grant or deny the application.
(D) Once the application is determined by the Building Official to be complete, the city will send written notice of the application
for a Sexually Oriented Business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to all owners of real property lying within 1,500 feet of each
property line of the tract of land on which the certificate is requested. The notice will be sent at least 15 days before the public
hearings begin. The notice will be deemed to have been properly served if sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, and first class mail postage prepaid to each property owner as the ownership appears on the last approved county tax roll.
The notice will include:
(1) The fact that a Sexually Oriented Business Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been applied for;
(2) The exact location including the street address of the place of business for which the certificate is sought;
(3) The names of each owner of the business and, if the business is operated under an assumed name, the trade name,
together with the names of all owners;
(4) If the Applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers, directors and shareholders of 10% or more of
the corporation; and
(5) The dates and times of the scheduled public hearings.
§ 112.23 PUBLIC HEARING ON HEALTH AND SAFETY.
(A) After the Building Official has determined that an application is complete pursuant to section 112.21 of this chapter and has
provided public notice as required by section 122.22 of this chapter, the Building Official will then initiate the public hearing
procedure as follows:
(1) The Commission will be contacted by the Building Official and a date set for the public hearing;
(2) The hearing will be held within 90 days of the date the Building Official advises the Applicant that the application
is complete at the city's offices;
(3) The hearing will be scheduled on a weekday no earlier than 6:30 p.m.; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/422
(4) The Building Official will send the Applicant a written notice of the hearing at least 15 days in advance of the
hearing, stating the date, time and place of the hearing and will make a copy of the notice available to the public. The
Building Official will post the notice at all places where City Council meeting notices are posted.
(B) The hearing will be conducted by the Commission under the guidelines below. The Commission may liberally construe these
guidelines to allow public input to protect the health and safety of the community affected by the location of a Sexually Oriented
Business and to allow the Applicant to address the public's concerns.
(1) Interested Parties are entitled to the assistance of counsel;
(2) Interested Parties may expressly waive the right to counsel;
(3) The Commission may limit testimony to exclude evidence that is irrelevant, immaterial, or unduly repetitious.
Relevance and materiality should be evaluated according to the relation of the evidence to the requirements of this chapter
and health and safety concerns directly related to the certificate at issue; and
(4) Any person may record, videotape or transcribe the hearing provided there is no interference with the proceedings
as determined by the Commission. The Commission will have the power to limit any interference with the proceeding.
One copy of the tape and transcript, if made, must be promptly delivered to the Building Official.
(C) The Commission may continue the hearing to a date not later than ten days after the initial hearing if:
(1) The hearing has lasted at least two and one half hours and it appears to the Commission that a significant amount of
time is still required to fully present the public concerns and potential solutions to those concerns; or
(2) Issues have been raised at the hearing requiring additional research in order to develop appropriate conditions to be
attached to the certificate or that the parties need additional time to develop a solution to issues identified a the hearing;
(3) A continuance may not be granted for the purpose of delay or for developing new evidence, except as provided
above.
(D) Within 10 days after the public hearing, the Commission will produce a written statement containing the findings of public
health and safety concerns and recommendations for conditions, if any, to be attached to the certificate. The recommendations will be
forwarded to the Building Official, the Applicant, and any Interested Party who requests a copy. The Building Official will forward
the application and report to the City Council. If no official record of the hearing has been requested, the Commission's statement
will be the official record of the public hearing. The Commission may consult with the City Attorney for the purpose of developing
appropriate conditions to address the health and safety concerns shown at the hearing. These recommendations will then be
forwarded to the City Council for final disposition.
(E) If information is produced at the hearing that would support denial of the certificate, the Commission will provide that
information to the City Attorney, who will investigate whether the information warrants a recommendation to the City Council for
denial or revocation of the certificate under these regulations. The Commission shall also separately provide its recommendation for
denial or approval of the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to the City Council.
(F) After receipt of the written statement and recommendation from the Commission, the City Council may approve the
application, deny the application, or authorize a specialized certificate, which includes appropriate conditions and safeguards that
address pertinent health and safety issues. The City Council shall approve, deny or issue a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy with
safeguards or conditions within 35 days of receiving the report from the Commission or a decision made under chapter 157, the
Zoning Code of the City of Pflugerville, Texas, regarding a Sexually Oriented Business.
(G) The Applicant may appeal the City Council's decision to a court of competent jurisdiction by filing a complaint within 30 days
of the decision. An appeal does not stay or alter the City Council's decision while the appeal is pending.
§ 112.24 ISSUANCE OF ORIGINAL SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) The City Council may deny issuance of the certificate if one or more of the following are found to be true:
(1) The location of the establishment would be in violation of the Zoning Code;
(2) The location would be in violation of a 750-foot distance regulation as set forth in this chapter;
(3) The application fees have not been paid;
(4) An Applicant has failed to make full disclosure or supply all of the information requested on the application;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/422
(5) An Applicant has provided false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the application, or is attempting to acquire
the certificate under false pretenses;
(6) The configuration and layout of the proposed premises would be in violation of the applicable provisions regarding
accessibility, visibility and inspection as set forth in this chapter;
(7) The structure, configuration and layout of the premises would be in violation of, or are not in compliance with, all
other applicable city ordinances, fire code or building codes;
(8) An Applicant has not demonstrated lawful ownership of the premises, does not hold a binding lease for the premises
upon which the business would be Operated, or has not demonstrated a legally enforceable right to acquire the same;
(9) An Applicant is under 18 years of age;
(10) An Applicant is under 21 years of age and the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages would be an aspect of the
business; or
(11) An Applicant or an Applicant's spouse has been convicted of a criminal offense within the last 10 years involving
any of the following offenses set forth in the Texas Penal Code:
(a) Chapter 21, Texas Penal Code: Public Lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child;
(b) Chapter 22, Texas Penal Code: Sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
(c) Chapter 25, Texas Penal Code: Incest, solicitation of a child or harboring a runaway child;
(d) Chapter 43, Texas Penal Code: Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution,
compelling prostitution, obscenity, display or distribution, sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a
minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to minors, possession or promotion of child
pornography; or
(e) Criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses.
(12) An Applicant or an Applicant's spouse has been convicted of a criminal offense which is equivalent to the offenses
described in section 112.24(A) (11) above within the last 10 years in any jurisdiction.
(B) An Applicant who has been convicted or whose spouse has been convicted of a criminal offense listed in section 112.24(A)
(11) and (12) may obtain a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy only after the time period required for satisfactory completion has
elapsed and full release has been received from all conditions imposed regarding confinement, parole, or probation, whichever is the
later date and no special particular circumstances exists that indicate a pattern or propensity to repeat the criminal offense.
(C) Before issuance of a license, the premises must be inspected by the health department providing services for the city, the fire
department and the building department.
(D) When issued, the certificate will state on its face:
(1) The full name, address and telephone number of the Person(s) (the Operator) to whom it is granted;
(2) The name, address and telephone number of the establishment;
(3) A description of specifically what type of Sexually Oriented Business operation has been approved to be conducted
on the premises; and
(4) The expiration date.
(E) When issued, the certificate will remain the sole property of the city and is valid only as to the Operator and location for which
it was originally issued and may not be sold, loaned or otherwise transferred to any other Person, subsequent Operator of the
business or to another location.
(F) The Specialized Certificate of Occupancy must be continually displayed in a conspicuous place within the establishment.
(G) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy automatically expires one year from the date of original issuance unless timely
renewed under section 112.29 of this chapter.
§ 112.25 ISSUANCE OF AMENDED OR MODIFIED CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/422
(A) If a lawfully operating Sexually Oriented Business subsequently desires to modify its operations by varying the type of
entertainment or activity provided to another type that is not authorized in the Operator's current Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy, the Operator must notify the Building Official in writing 30 days in advance, apply for and acquire prior written
approval for the modification, up to and including an amended or modified Specialized Certificate of Occupancy, if necessary. The
Building Official's approval or denial will be made within 30 days of receipt of the written request from the Operator.
(B) A non-refundable processing fee of $250.00 is required for obtaining an amended or modified certificate. The amended or
modified certificate expires on the same date as the original certificate.
(C) If the Operator asserts that request has been wrongfully or erroneously denied, the Operator may appeal the denial to Board of
Adjustment according to Section 14 of the city's Zoning Code.
§ 112.26 SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY NONTRANSFERABLE.
(A) A Person commits a violation if that Person operates a Sexually Oriented Business under a Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy in any name or at any location other than the original name and address originally designated on the face of the
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy.
(B) A Person commits a violation if that Person wrongfully counterfeits, forges, changes, defaces or alters a Specialized Certificate
of Occupancy. Any certificate wrongfully altered will automatically and immediately be deemed void and invalid.
(C) If corporations that have “substantially similar ownership” merge or consolidate, a fee of $100.00 must be paid for each
Sexually Oriented Business holding a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy that is merged or consolidated into the surviving
corporation. The surviving corporation succeeds to all privileges of the prior corporation that held the Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy if the owners of the surviving corporation meet the qualifications for an Applicant to acquire the Specialized Certificate
of Occupancy under this chapter. For the purposes of this section, corporations have “substantially similar ownership” if 90 percent
or more of the corporations involved are owned by the same Person or Persons, or by the same corporation or corporations, or if the
surviving corporation has maintained an ownership interest in the merged or consolidated corporations since the date the original
Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was issued.
(D) The city's Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is not property to be inherited or otherwise transferred in cases of incapacity
or death. If an Operator becomes legally incapacitated or dies, the executor or guardian of the estate must, as soon as reasonably
possible but no event later than 30 days of the death or incapacity, notify the Building Official in writing of the status of business
operations, the Persons controlling the estate, and those heirs or other Persons involved in settling the estate. Any Person desiring to
continue the Sexually Oriented Business must meet all requirements of new Applicants and receive a new Specialized Certificate of
Occupancy in their own name before continuing the business operations. Otherwise, the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy will
automatically be deemed revoked as of the date of the death or incapacity of the Operator in whose name the certificate was issued.
(E) The city's Specialized Certificate of Occupancy is not property to be listed as an “asset” or otherwise transferred for purposes
of resolution in bankruptcy. If an Operator files a petition in bankruptcy seeking protection as a failing business, the Operator must
also immediately deliver true and correct copies of documentation of same to the Building Official.
§ 112.27 SUSPENSION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) The Building Official, upon receipt of a written report from the police department, may also temporarily suspend a Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy if it is determined that the Operator committed, condoned or knowingly or recklessly allowed an act(s) or
omission(s) to occur on the premises of the establishment that:
(1) Is a material violation of the regulations set forth in this chapter; or
(2) Is a material violation of other applicable laws and ordinances so as to cause or allow the premises to constitute a
“nuisance” to the immediate neighborhood, including but not limited to a common or a public nuisance as defined by
Section 125.001, et seq., Texas Civil Practice and Remedies Code, or chapter 54 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of
Pflugerville; or
(3) Constitutes grounds for revocation as set forth in section 112.28;
(4) Forms the basis for the Operator's conviction of one or more offense(s) under sections 112.24(A) (11) and (12);
(5) Knowingly permits gambling by any person on the premises of the Sexually Oriented Business; or
(6) Allows the Operator or any Employee that works at the Sexually Oriented Business owned by the Operator to
operate or work in a Sexually Oriented Business while intoxicated due to alcoholic beverages or controlled substances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/422
(B) The period of suspension may be continued day-to-day until the matter forming the basis of the suspension is corrected or
abated to the satisfaction of the police department, but in no event for more than 60 days. If not satisfactorily corrected or abated
within 60 days, the Building Official will initiate appropriate action to revoke the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy per
section 112.28 below.
(C) After paying a $1,000.00 non-refundable fee, a suspension may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment as provided in section
14 of the city's Zoning Code.
§ 112.28 REVOCATION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) The Building Official, upon receipt of a written report from the police department, may indefinitely revoke a Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy if it is determined that:
(1) Cause for suspension as provided in section 112.27 has occurred, and the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has
been previously suspended for any reason at least twice in the preceding 24-month period;
(2) A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy has been suspended under section 112.27 and the basis for the suspension
has not been satisfactorily corrected or abated within 60 days;
(3) The Operator gave false or fraudulent information in the application or otherwise acquired the Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy under false pretenses;
(4) The Operator knowingly Operated, provided or permitted Sexually Oriented Business activity or entertainment to
occur on the premises during a period of time when the Specialized Certificate of Occupancy was suspended;
(5) The Operator has been convicted of a criminal offense under Chapter 21, Chapter 22, Chapter 25, or Chapter 43 of
the Texas Penal Code and for which the time period or other action required for satisfactory completion and full release
has not been received from all conditions imposed regarding confinement, parole, or probation; or
(6) The Operator knowingly allowed or participated in the unlawful possession, use or sale of controlled substances on
the premises; or
(7) The Operator knowingly allowed or participated in prostitution, or its solicitation, or unlawful offenses of a similar
nature to take place on the premises.
(B) Before imposing any particular form of suspension or revocation, the police department may attempt lesser forms of corrective
action to correct or abate violations. However, nothing herein prohibits the police department from proceeding to the appropriate
level of suspension or revocation if the Operator's misconduct or violation(s) warrants the degree of suspension or revocation
imposed.
(C) After paying a $1,000 non-refundable fee, a revocation may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment as provided in chapter
157, the Zoning Code of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Pflugerville.
§ 112.29 EXPIRATION OF SPECIALIZED CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY.
(A) Each Specialized Certificate of Occupancy expires one year from the date of issuance. A Specialized Certificate of Occupancy
may be renewed only by making application as provided in section 112.21. Application for renewal must be made at least 60 days
before expiration. When application for renewal is made at least 60 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the Specialized
Certificate of Occupancy will not be affected by the pendency of the application. A non-refundable application fee of $1,000 is
required for the renewal of a Specialized Certificate of Occupancy to cover the city's costs of processing a renewal application.
EMPLOYEE LICENSES
§ 112.40 EMPLOYEE LICENSES REQUIRED.
(A) It is unlawful:
(1) For any Person to obtain employment with a Sexually Oriented Business in the City of Pflugerville, Texas if such
Person is not in possession of a valid Sexually Oriented Business Employee license issued to such Person by the Building
Official pursuant to this chapter.
(2) For any Person to work for any Sexually Oriented Business without having on his or her person at all times while at
work an appropriate identification card issued by the city. Such identification must be available at all times for inspection
and must be worn on the left breast of the Employee during working periods.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/422
(B) It is a defense to this section if the employment is of a limited duration and for the sole purpose of repair or maintenance of
machinery, equipment, or the premises.
(C) Violation of any provision within this subsection constitutes a Class A misdemeanor.
§ 112.41 APPLICATION FOR EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
(A) Potential Employees of Sexually Oriented Businesses must comply with this section before being issued a license to work at
the business.
(B) Each application for an Employee license must be accompanied by a non-refundable application fee of $300.
(C) Applications for an Employee license to provide services in a Sexually Oriented Business, whether original or renewal, must
be on forms provided by the Building Official and presented to the Building Official by the Candidate.
(D) The Candidate for an Employee license must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter each year. Each
subsequent license application must be submitted prior to the expiration of the current license.
(E) Applications must be submitted to the office of the Building Official or the Building Official's designee during regular working
hours.
(F) Each Candidate must provide the following information on the application form:
(1) The Candidate's given name, and any other names by which the Candidate is or has ever been known, including
“stage” names or aliases;
(2) Age, and date and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair color and eye color;
(4) Present mailing address and telephone number;
(5) Spouse's name, if applicable, and name of each person with whom Candidate or Candidate's spouse reside;
(6) Present business address and telephone number;
(7) Date, issuing state, and driver's license number, or other state issued identification card information;
(8) Social Security number;
(9) Proof that the Candidate is at least 18 years old; and
(10) Name and address of the Sexually Oriented Business where the Employee will work.
(G) Candidate must attach the following information to the application form:
(1) Color photographs of the Candidate clearly showing the Candidate's face and profile view of both sides of the face.
(2) Candidate's full set of fingerprints on a form provided by the police department.
(3) Candidate's current and complete NCIC and TCIC criminal history reports obtained from the Texas Department of
Public Safety and completed within 15 days of the date the application is filed with the Building Official.
(4) Current and complete NCIC and TCIC criminal history reports for Candidate's spouse and each person with whom
Candidate resides obtained from the Texas Department of Public Safety and completed within 15 days of date application
is filed with Building Official.
(5) A statement from Candidate detailing the license history of the Candidate for the ten years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application, including whether such Candidate, in this or any other city, county, state, or
country, has ever had any license, certificate, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation, or suspension, state the name(s) under which the license was sought or issued, the name(s) of the issuing or
denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason(s) for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of
denial, revocation, or suspension must be attached to the application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/422
(6) A statement from Candidate detailing the criminal history of the Candidate, including whether the Candidate,
Candidate's spouse, or a person residing with the Candidate, has ever been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending
charges, of a criminal offense as defined in sections 112.24(A(11) and (12) and, if so, the nature of the criminal offense(s)
involved and the date, place, and jurisdiction of each offense.
(7) A statement from Candidate detailing the license history of the Candidate, including:
(a) Whether the Candidate, or a person residing with the Candidate, has had a previous license under this chapter
or other similar Sexually Oriented Business ordinance from another city or county denied, suspended or revoked,
including the name and location of the Sexually Oriented Business for which the business license was denied,
suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the Candidate or a
person residing with the Candidate is or has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal
stockholder of a corporation that is or was licensed under a Sexually Oriented Business ordinance whose business
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the Sexually Oriented
Business for which the business license was denied, suspended or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension
or revocation; and
(b) Whether the Candidate or a Person residing with the Candidate holds any other licenses or certificates under
this chapter or other similar Sexually Oriented Business ordinance from another city or county and, if so, the names
and locations of such other licensed businesses.
(H) The application for the license must contain a statement made under oath that:
(1) The Candidate has personal knowledge of the information contained in the application, and that the information
contained therein and furnished therewith is true and correct; and
(2) The Candidate has read the provisions of this chapter.
(I) Separate applications and licenses are required for each Sexually Oriented Business the Candidate seeks to provide services for.
(J) The fact that a Candidate possesses any other valid license required by law does not exempt him or her from the requirement of
obtaining a Sexually Oriented Business license from the city. A Person who operates a Sexually Oriented Business and possesses
another business license must comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter as well as the requirements and provisions
of the laws concerning the other license.
(K) The Candidate has an affirmative duty to supplement an application with new information received subsequent to the date the
application was deemed completed.
(L) All expenses associated with Candidate's application including, but not limited to, fees for photographs and fingerprints must
be paid by the Candidate.
§ 112.42 ISSUANCE OF EMPLOYEE LICENSE.
(A) The Building Official will review the Employee license application to determine if all required and necessary information has
been submitted. The Building Official will issue a letter within 10 days of receipt of the application or supplemental application and
advise the Candidate whether the application is complete or whether supplemental information must be submitted. The Candidate
must provide any supplemental information within 10 days or the application will be returned and the filing fee forfeited.
(B) The application approval process will not be commenced until the completed application and all required attachments and fees
are received by the Building Official.
(C) The Building Official must approve the issuance of the annual license to a Candidate within 60 days after receipt of a complete
application and all required attachments unless he or she finds one or more of the following to be true:
(1) A Candidate is under 18 years of age.
(2) A Candidate has failed to provide all information required by this chapter for issuance of the license or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
(3) A Candidate or a Candidate's spouse has been convicted of a violation of a provision of this chapter, other than the
offense of operating a Sexually Oriented Business without a license, within two years immediately preceding the
application. The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect.
(4) A Candidate or a Candidate's spouse or person with whom the Candidate is residing has been convicted of a crime
specified in sections 112.24(A)(11) and (12) for which:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/422
(a) Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed
for the conviction, whichever is the later date, for a misdemeanor offense; or
(b) Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement
for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, for two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of
misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month period.
(5) A Candidate or a Candidate's spouse or Person with whom Candidate is residing has been convicted of a felony.
(6) The fact that a conviction is being appealed will have no effect on the disqualification of the Candidate or the
Candidate's spouse.
(7) For purposes of this section, a sentence of deferred adjudication for any period of time or amount of fine is
considered a conviction.
(D) The Building Official may deny issuance of the license if one or more provisions in section 112.41(C) are found to be true.
(E) The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the Candidate to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address
of the Sexually Oriented Business Candidate is licensed to provide services for and include a current photo of licensee.
§ 112.43 APPEAL.
If the building official denies the issuance or renewal of a license, the candidate may appeal to the board of adjustment as provided in
the Unified Development Code.
EMPLOYEE CONDUCT
§ 112.50 EMPLOYEE CONDUCT.
(A) Employees may not touch a Customer or the clothing of a Customer while exposing any Specified Anatomical Areas or
engaging in any Specified Sexual Activities.
(B) Employees may not solicit pay or gratuity from any Customer on the premises of a Sexually Oriented Business while in a State
of Nudity.
(C) Employees must be on a stage at least 18 inches in height and may not approach closer than six feet to any Customer while
exposing any Specified Anatomical Areas or engaging in any Specified Sexual Activities.
(D) Employees may not expose any Specified Anatomical Areas or engage in any Specified Sexual Activities in the presence of a
Customer in any separate area within a Sexually Oriented Business that is blocked off or obscured by any door, curtain, or other
barrier that separates the area from the remainder of the Sexually Oriented Business.
(Ord. 540-99-04-27; passed 4-27-99; Am. Ord. 834-06-06-27, passed 6-27-06; Ord. 1148-13-06-25, passed 6-25-13)
CHAPTER 113: IRRIGATORS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined shall be construed in accordance with customary language.
AIR GAP. A complete physical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a potable water supply pipeline and an open or
nonpressure receiving vessel.
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an air inlet valve, a check seat, and an air inlet port. The flow of
water into the body causes the air inlet valve to close the air inlet port. When the flow of water stops the air inlet valve falls and
forms a check against backsiphonage. At the same time it opens the air inlet port allowing air to enter and satisfy the vacuum. Also
known as an Atmospheric Vacuum Breaker Backsiphonage Prevention Assembly.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION. The mechanical prevention of reverse flow, or backsiphonage, of nonpotable water from an Irrigation
System into the potable water source.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/422
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. Any assembly used to prevent backflow into a potable water system. The type of assembly
used is based on the existing or potential degree of health hazard and backflow condition.
BACK PRESSURE. Any pressure, regardless of its source, against the outlet side of the Backflow Prevention device that exceeds the
supply pressure against the inlet side of the device.
COMPLETION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEM INSTALLATION. When the landscape irrigation system has been installed, all minimum
standards met, all tests performed, and the irrigator is satisfied that the system is operating correctly.
COMMISSION. The Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
CONSULTING. The act of providing advice, guidance, review or recommendation related to landscape irrigation systems.
CROSS-CONNECTION. An actual or potential connection between a potable water source and an irrigation system that may contain
contaminates or pollutants or any source of water that has been treated to a lesser degree in the treatment process.
DIRECT SUPERVISION. The on-the-job oversight and direction of a Person performing irrigation work by a licensed Irrigator or
licensed Installer who is fulfilling his or her responsibility to the client and employer by ensuring that the irrigation materials for the
job are properly prepared prior to assembly according to the material manufacturer's recommendations and the requirements of the
Texas Commission on Environmental Quality and that the plumbing work for the job is properly installed to protect health and safety
by meeting the requirements of the adopted plumbing code and all requirements of local ordinances and state regulations and laws.
DESIGN. The act of determining the various elements of a landscape irrigation system that will include, but not be limited to,
elements such as collecting site specific information, defining the scope of the project, defining plant watering needs, selecting and
laying out emission devices, locating system components, conducting hydraulics calculations, identifying any local regulatory
requirements, or scheduling irrigation work at a site. Completion of the various components will result in an irrigation plan.
DESIGN PRESSURE. The pressure that is required for an emission device to operate properly. Design pressure is calculated by
adding the operating pressure necessary at an emission device to the total of all pressure losses accumulated from an emission device
to the water source.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE. An assembly that is composed of two independently acting, approved check valves, including tightly
closed resilient seated shutoff valves attached at each end of the assembly and fitted with properly located resilient seated test cocks.
Also known as a Double Check Valve Backflow Prevention Assembly.
EMISSION DEVICE. Any device that is contained within an irrigation system and that is used to apply water. Common emission
devices in an irrigation system include, but are not limited to, spray and rotary sprinkler heads, and drip irrigation emitters.
EMPLOYED. Engaged or hired to provide consulting services or perform any activity related to the sale, design, installation,
maintenance, alteration, repair, or service to irrigation systems. A person is employed if that person is in an employer-employee
relationship as defined by Internal Revenue Code, 26 United States Code Service, §3212(d) based on the behavioral control,
financial control, and the type of relationship involved in performing employment related tasks.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. The Executive Director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality.
HEAD-TO-HEAD SPACING. The spacing of spray or rotary heads equal to the manufacturer's published radius of the head.
HEALTH HAZARD. A cross-connection or potential cross-connection with an irrigation system that involves any substance that may,
if introduced into the potable water supply, cause death or illness, spread disease, or have a high probability of causing such effects.
HYDRAULICS. The science of dynamic and static water; the mathematical computation of determining pressure losses and pressure
requirements of an irrigation system.
INSPECTOR. A licensed plumbing inspector, water district operator, other governmental entity, or irrigation inspector who inspects
irrigation systems and performs other enforcement duties for a municipality or water district as an employee or as a contractor.
INSTALLER. A person who actually connects an Irrigation System to a private or public raw or potable water supply system or any
water supply, who is licensed according to 30 Texas Administrative Code Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and
Registrations).
IRRIGATION INSPECTOR. A person who inspects irrigation systems and performs other enforcement for a municipality or water
district as an employee or as a contractor and is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30
(relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations).
IRRIGATION PLAN. A scaled drawing of a landscape irrigation system which lists required information, the scope of the project,
and represents the changes made in the installation of the irrigation system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/422
IRRIGATION SERVICES. Selling, designing, installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, servicing, permitting, providing consulting
services regarding, or connecting an irrigation system to a water supply.
IRRIGATION SYSTEM. An assembly of component parts permanently installed with and for the controlled distribution and
conservation of water for the purpose of irrigating any type of landscape vegetation in any location or for the purpose of dust
reduction or erosion control. The term does not include a system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Texas
Agriculture Code § 251.002.
IRRIGATION TECHNICIAN. A person who works under the direct supervision of a licensed irrigator to install, maintain, alter,
repair, service or supervise installation of an irrigation system, including the connection of such system in or to a private or public,
raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is required to be licensed under Title 30, Texas Administrative
Code, Chapter 30 (relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations).
IRRIGATION ZONE. A subdivision of an irrigation system with a matched precipitation rate based on plant material type (such as
turf, shrubs, or trees), microclimate factors (such as sun/shade ratio), topographic features (such as slope) and soil conditions (such as
sand, loam, clay, or combination) or for hydrological control.
IRRIGATOR. A person who sells, designs, consults, installs, maintains, alters, repairs, or services an Irrigation System including the
connection of such system in and to a private or public, raw or potable water supply system or any water supply, and who is licensed
according to 30 TEXAS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE CHAPTER 30.
IRRIGATOR-IN-CHARGE. The irrigator responsible for all irrigation work performed by an exempt business owner, including, but
not limited to obtaining permits, developing design plans, supervising the work of other irrigators or irrigation technicians, and
installing, maintaining, altering, repairing, or servicing a landscape irrigation system.
LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION. The science of applying the necessary amount of water to promote or sustain growth of plant material
or turf.
LICENSE. An occupational license that is issued by the Commission under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30 to an
individual that authorizes the individual to engage in an activity that is covered by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30.
MAINLINE. A pipe within an irrigation system that delivers water from the water source to the individual zone valves.
MAINTENANCE CHECKLIST. A document made available to the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative that contains
information regarding the operation and maintenance of the irrigation system, including, but not limited to: checking and repairing
the irrigation system, setting the automatic controller, checking the rain or moisture sensor, cleaning filters, pruning plants or grass
away from the irrigation emitters, using and operating the irrigation system, the precipitation rates of each irrigation zone within the
system, any water conservation measures currently in effect from the water purveyor, the name of the water purveyor, a suggested
seasonal or monthly watering schedule based on current evapotranspiration data for the geographic region, and the minimum water
requirements for the plant material in each zone based on the soil type and plant material where the system is installed.
MAJOR MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, REPAIR, OR SERVICE. Any activity that involves opening to the atmosphere the
irrigation mainline at any point prior to the discharge side of any irrigation zone control valve. This includes, but is not limited to,
repairing or connecting into a main supply pipe, replacing a zone control valve, or replacing a zone control valve, or repairing a zone
control valve in a manner that opens the system to the atmosphere.
MASTER VALVE. A remote control valve located after the backflow prevention device that controls the flow of water to the
irrigation system mainline.
MATCHED PRECIPATION RATE. The condition in which all sprinkler heads within an irrigation zone apply water at the same rate.
NEW INSTALLATION. An irrigation system installed at a location where one did not previously exist.
NONTOXIC SUBSTANCE. Any substance, solid, liquid, or gaseous, which may make the water aesthetically unacceptable but, if
ingested, will not cause illness or death and is not considered a health hazard.
PASS-THROUGH CONTRACT. A written contract between a contractor or builder and a licensed irrigator or exempt business owner
to perform part or all of the irrigation services relating to an irrigation system.
POTABLE WATER. Water that is suitable for human consumption.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER. An assembly containing an independently operating internally loaded check valve and an
independently operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check valve. Also known as a Pressure Vacuum
Breaker Backsiphonage Prevention Assembly.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/422
RECLAIMED WATER. Domestic or municipal wastewater which has treated to a quality suitable for beneficial use, such as
landscape irrigation.
RECORDS OF LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION ACTIVITIES. The irrigation plans, contracts, warranty information, invoices, copies of
permits, and other documents that relate to the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of a landscape irrigation
system.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY. An assembly containing two independently acting
approved check valves together with a hydraulically operating mechanically independent pressure differential relief valves located
between the two check valves and below the first check valve.
STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pressure of water when it is not moving.
SUPERVISION. The on-the-job oversight and direction by a licensed irrigator who is fulfilling his or her professional responsibility
to the client and/or employer in compliance with local or state requirements. Also a licensed installer working under the direction of
a licensed irrigator or beginning January 1, 2009, an irrigation technician who is working under the direction of a licensed irrigator to
install, maintain, alter, repair, or service an irrigation system.
TOXIC SUBTANCE. Any substance, solid, liquid, or gaseous, which when introduced into the water supply system creates, or may
create, a danger to the health and well-being of the consumer.
WATER CONSERVATION. The design and installation of an Irrigation System which prevents the waste of water, promotes the most
efficient use of water and applies the least amount of water required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf.
§ 113.02 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the installation and
continued operation of Irrigation Systems.
(B) The city intends to ensure that irrigation and Irrigation Systems will not contribute to the decline of residential and business
neighborhoods.
§ 113.03 APPLICABILITY.
Unless otherwise indicated, this chapter applies to the area within the limits of the City of Pflugerville and in the city's extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING AND REGISTRATION
§ 113.20 VALID LICENSE REQUIRED.
Any person who connects an irrigation system to the water supply within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction must hold a
valid license, as defined by Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30, and required by Chapter 1903 of the Texas Occupations
Code, or as defined by Chapter 365, Title 22 of the Texas Administrative Code and required by Chapter 1301 of the Texas
Occupations Code.
§ 113.21 EXEMPTIONS.
(A) In this section, “property owners' association” has the meaning assigned by Texas Property Code § 202.001.
(B) The licensing requirements of this chapter do not apply to a Person who is:
(1) Licensed by the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners; or
(2) Licensed engineer, registered architect, or registered landscape architect to the extent the Person's acts are incidental
to the pursuit of the Person's profession.
(C) The licensing requirements of this chapter for this chapter do not apply to:
(1) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed by a property owner in a building or on premises owned or occupied by
the Person at the Person's home. A home or property owner who installs an irrigation system must meet the standards
contained in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 regarding spacing, water pressure, spraying water over
impervious materials, rain or moisture shut-off devices or other technology, backflow prevention and isolation valves;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/422
(2) Irrigation or yard sprinkler repair work, other than extension of an existing irrigation or yard sprinkler or
installation of a replacement system, that is:
(a) Performed by a maintenance Person who does not act as an Irrigator or engage in yard sprinkler construction
or maintenance for the public; and
(b) Incidental to and on premises owned by the business in which the Person is regularly employed or engaged;
(3) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed:
(a) By a regular employee of a railroad who does not act as an Irrigator or engage in yard sprinkler construction
or maintenance for the public; and
(b) On the premises or equipment of the railroad;
(4) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed on public property by a Person who is regularly employed by a political
subdivision of this state;
(5) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed on land owned by an agriculturist, agronomists, horticulturist, forester,
gardener, contract gardener, professional garden or lawn caretaker, nurseryman, or professional grader or cultivator of
land, and performed by such Person in accordance with accepted irrigation standards.
(6) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed by a member of a property owners' association on real property owned
by the association or in common by the association's members if the irrigation or yard sprinkler system waters real
property that:
(a) Is less than one-half acre in size; and
(b) Is used for aesthetic or recreational purposes;
(7) Irrigation or yard sprinkler work performed by a Person using a garden hose, hose sprinkler, hose-end product, or
agriculture Irrigation System;
(8) Activities involving a commercial agricultural Irrigation System;
(9) A Person who assists in the installation, maintenance, alteration, repair or service of an Irrigation System under the
Direct Supervision of an individual described by § 113.01 of this chapter who is licensed under Texas Water Code
Chapter 37; or
(10) An owner of a business that employs an individual described by § 113.01 of this chapter who is licensed under
Texas Water Code Chapter 37, to supervise the business's sale, design, consultation, installation, maintenance, alteration,
repair, and service of Irrigation Systems.
(D) A Person who is exempt from the licensing requirements of this chapter shall comply with the standards established by this
chapter and the rules adopted under this chapter.
§ 113.22 DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
Every Person holding a License must display it at the Person's place of business or employment and be prepared to substantiate the
annual renewal for the current year. When a Person is engaging in any of the activities identified in § 113.20, he or she must carry his
or her pocket card License on their person and be prepared to present it.
STANDARDS FOR LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION
§ 113.30 LOCAL REGULATION.
(A) All licensed Irrigators and licensed Installers, or any Person(s) engaging in irrigation activities must comply with this chapter.
(B) Any provision not covered by this chapter shall be governed by the Texas Occupations Code, the Texas Water Code, Title 30
of the Texas Administrative Code, and any other applicable state statue of Texas Commission on Environmental Quality rule.
§ 113.31 PERMIT REQUIRED.
Any person installing an irrigation system within the territorial limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city is required to obtain a
permit from the city. Any plan approved for a permit must be in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/422
(A) Exemptions.
(1) An irrigation system that is an on-site sewage disposal system, as defined by Section 355.002, Health and
Safety Code;
(2) An irrigation system used on or by an agricultural operation as defined by Section 251.002, Agriculture Code;
or
(3) An irrigation system connected to a groundwater well used by the property owner for domestic use.
§ 113.32 WATER CONSERVATION.
All Irrigation Systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that will promote Water
Conservation as defined in the Definitions section of this chapter.
§ 113.33 BACKFLOW PREVENTION METHODS AND DEVICES.
All Irrigation Systems connected to a public or private potable water supply must be properly connected through a backflow
prevention method approved by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). The backflow prevention device must be
approved by the American Society of Sanitary Engineers; the Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research,
University of Southern California; or any other laboratory that has equivalent capabilities for both laboratory and field evaluation of
backflow prevention assemblies. The backflow prevention device must be installed in accordance with the laboratory approval
standards or if the approval does not include specific installation information, the manufacturer's current published
recommendations.
(A) Atmospheric Vacuum Breakers. Atmospheric vacuum breakers are designed to prevent only siphonage. Therefore,
atmospheric vacuum breakers must not be used in any Irrigation Systems where back-pressure may occur. There cannot
be any shutoff valves downstream from an atmospheric vacuum breaker. Where atmospheric vacuum breakers may be
used, they must be installed at least six inches above any downstream piping and the highest downstream opening. In
addition, continuous pressure on the supply of an atmospheric vacuum breaker is prohibited. Where atmospheric vacuum
breakers are used in an Irrigation System, a separate atmospheric vacuum breaker must be installed in the discharge side
of each water control valve, between the valve and all of the sprinkler heads that the valve controls.
(B) Pressure-type Vacuum Breakers. Pressure-type vacuum breakers are designed to prevent backsiphonage and can
operate under continuous pressure. Pressure vacuum breakers must be installed at least 12 inches above any downstream
piping and the highest downstream opening. Pop-up sprinklers are measured from the retracted position from the top of
the sprinkler.
(C) Double Check Valve Assembly Backflow Preventers. Double check valve assembly backflow preventers are
designed to prevent Back Pressure and backsiphonage of water not containing any Toxic Substance. They may be used
where water supply pressure and Back Pressure on the Backflow Prevention device may continuously exist. If a double
check valve assembly is installed below grade, there must remain adequate space for testing and repair for the device. Test
cock plugs must be of non-ferrous material. Test cocks shall not be used as supply connections and must be plugged
except when being tested. A y-type strainer must be installed on the inlet side of the double check valve.
(D) Reduced Pressure Principal Backflow Prevention Assemblies. Reduced pressure principal assemblies are designed
for water containing Toxic or Nontoxic Substances and for Back Pressure and backsiphonage. They must be installed 12
inches above grade in a location so as to insure that the device will not be submerged. In addition, adequate provisions
must be made for any water which may be discharged through the assembly relief valve.
(E) Air Gap. An air gap, when used must be installed with an unobstructed physical separation and the distance from
the lowest point of the water supply outlet to the flood rim of the fixture or assembly into which the outlet discharges is at
least one inch or twice the diameter of the water supply outlet, whichever is greater.
§ 113.34 SPECIFIC CONDITIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES.
(A) An Irrigation System that does not have associated with it any type of injection devices and that is connected or capable of
being connected only to a single source of water prevents a low potential for contamination of the water supply and is, therefore,
considered to be a “low hazard” installation. Such an Irrigation System must be connected to the water supply through an industryapproved
Backflow Prevention device, such as a double check valve assembly, air gap separation, reduced pressure principle
assembly, pressure type vacuum breaker, or atmospheric vacuum breaker.
(B) An Irrigation System which adds any chemical is considered to be a “high health hazard.” Such an Irrigation System must not
be connected to any potable water supply except through a reduced pressure principle Backflow Prevention assembly. The Backflow
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/422
Prevention assembly must be tested upon installation and at least annually, thereafter, in accordance with 30 TEXAS
ADMINISTRATIVE CODE § 290.44(h)(4).
(C) If an Irrigation System had more than one water supply source, with one or more supplies being potable water and the other
supply or supplies being nonpotable water, the Irrigation System must be connected to each water supply only through an industryapproved
“high health hazard” Backflow Prevention device. The device must be tested upon installation and, at least annually
thereafter, in accordance with 30 TEXAS ADMINISTRATIVE CODE § 290.44(h)(4).
(D) If an existing irrigation system without a backflow-prevention assembly requires major maintenance, alteration, repair, or
service, the system must be connected to the potable water supply through an approved, properly installed backflow prevention
method before any major maintenance, alteration, repair, or service is performed.
(E) If an irrigation system is connected to the potable water supply through a double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, or
reduced pressure principle backflow assembly and includes an automatic master valve on the system, the automatic master valve
must be installed on the discharge side of the backflow prevention assembly.
(F) The irrigator shall ensure the backflow prevention device is tested by a licensed Backflow Prevention Assembly Tester prior to
being placed in service and the test results provided to the city and the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative within 10
business days of testing of the backflow prevention device.
§ 113.35 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR IRRIGATION PLAN DESIGN.
An irrigator shall prepare an irrigation plan for each site where a new irrigation system will be installed. A paper or electronic copy
of the irrigation plan must be submitted to the City for approval and kept on the job site at all times during the installation of the
irrigation system. If changes are made during installation, an as-built drawing of the system must be provided to each irrigation
system owner and submitted to the City after all new irrigation system installations.
(A) Deviations from approved plans. During installation of the irrigation system, variances from the original plan may
be authorized by the licensed irrigator if the variance from the plan does not:
(1) Diminish the operational integrity of the irrigation system;
(2) Violate any requirement of this chapter; or
(3) Go unnoted in red on the irrigation plan.
(B) Coverage. The irrigation plan must include complete coverage of the area to be irrigated. If a system does not
provide complete coverage of the area to be irrigated, it must be noted on the irrigation plan.
(C) Plan information requirements. All irrigation plans used for construction must be drawn to scale. The plans must
include, at a minimum, the following information:
(1) The irrigator's seal, signature, and date of signing;
(2) All major physical features and the boundaries of the areas to be watered;
(3) A North arrow;
(4) A legend;
(5) The zone flow measurement for each zone;
(6) The location and type of each controller and sensor;
(7) The location, type, and size of each:
(a) Water source, such as, but not limited to a water meter and point(s) of connection;
(b) Backflow prevention device;
(c) Water emission device, including, but not limited to, spray heads, rotary sprinkler heads, quick couplers,
bubblers, drip, or micro-sprays;
(d) Valves, including, but not limited to, zone valves, master valves, and isolation valves;
(e) Pressure regulation component; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/422
(f) Main line and lateral piping.
(8) The scale used; and
(9) The design pressure.
§ 113.36 MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR INSTALLATION OF IRRIGATION SYSTEMS.
No irrigation design or installation shall require the use of any component, including the water meter, in a way which exceeds the
manufacturer's published performance limitations for the component.
(A) Spacing.
(1) The maximum spacing between emission devices must not exceed the manufacturer's published radius or
spacing of the device(s).
(2) New irrigation systems shall not utilize above-ground spray emission devices in landscapes that are less than
48 inches not including the impervious cover in either length or width and which contain impervious pedestrian or
vehicular traffic surfaces along two or more perimeters. If pop-up sprays or rotary sprinkler heads are used in a new
irrigation system, the sprinkler heads must direct flow away from any such adjacent surface and shall not be
installed closer than four inches from a hardscape, such as, but not limited to, a building foundation, fence, concrete,
asphalt, pavers, or stones set with mortar.
(3) Narrow paved walkways, jogging paths, golf cart paths or other small areas may be exempted from this
requirement if the runoff drains into a landscaped area.
(B) Water Pressure. Emission devices must be installed to operate at the minimum and not above the maximum
sprinkler head pressure as published by the manufacturer for the nozzle and spacing that is used. Methods to achieve the
water pressure requirements include, but are not limited to, flow control valves, a pressure regulator, or pressure
compensating spray heads.
(C) Piping.
(1) Piping in irrigation systems must be designed and installed so that the flow of water in the pipe will not
exceed a velocity of five feet per second for polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe.
(2) All new irrigation systems that are installed using PVC pipe and fittings shall be primed with a colored primer
prior to applying the PVC cement in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (section 605).
(D) Irrigation Zones. Irrigation systems shall have separate zones based on plant material type, microclimate factors,
topographic features, soil conditions, and hydrological requirements.
(E) Matched Precipitation Rate. Zones must be designed and installed so that all of the emission devices in that zone
irrigate at the same precipitation rate.
(F) Depth Coverage of Piping. Irrigation Systems using spray or rotary heads must be designed and/or installed
according to the manufacturer recommended specifications for depth coverage of piping, unless one of the following
circumstances is encountered.
(1) If the manufacturer has not published specifications for depth coverage of piping, the Irrigation System must
be designed and/or installed to provide a minimum of six inches of coverage over piping. All portions of the
irrigation system that fail to meet this standard must be noted on the irrigation plan. If the area being irrigated has
rock at a depth of six inches or less, select backfill may be mounded over the pipe. Mounding must be noted on the
irrigation plan and discussed with the irrigation system owner or owner's representative to address any safety issues.
(2) If utilities, structures, or tree roots are encountered, the Irrigation System must be designed and/or installed to
provide a minimum of two inches of coverage over piping.
(3) All trenches and holes created during installation of an irrigation system must be backfilled and compacted to
the original grade.
(G) Wiring Irrigation Systems.
(1) The wiring used in an Irrigation System that connects section valves to controllers must be Underwriters
Laboratories listed for direct underground burial.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/422
(2) The wiring used in an Irrigation System that connects section valves to controllers must be sized according to
the manufacturer's recommendation.
(3) Direct burial wire splices used in an Irrigation System must be waterproof as per manufacturer
recommendation.
(4) Underground electrical wiring that connects an automatic controller to any electrical component of the
irrigation system must be buried with a minimum of six inches of select backfill.
(H) Rain or Moisture Shut-Off Devices or Other Technology. All new automatically controlled irrigation systems must
include sensors or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of
moisture or rainfall. Rain or moisture shut-off technology must be installed according to the manufacturer's published
recommendations. Repairs to existing automatic irrigation systems that require replacement of an existing controller must
include a sensor or other technology designed to inhibit or interrupt operation of the irrigation system during periods of
moisture or rainfall.
(I) Master Valve. When provided, a master valve shall be provided on the discharge side of the backflow prevention
device on all new installations.
(J) Isolation Valve. All new irrigation systems must include an isolation valve between the water meter and the tee off
from the water service line.
(K) Prohibited Connections to Irrigation System. Water contained within the piping of an irrigation system is deemed
to be nonpotable. No drinking or domestic water usage, such as, but not limited to, filling swimming pools or decorative
fountains, shall be connected to an irrigation system. If a hose bibb (an outdoor water faucet that has hose threads on the
spout) is connected to an irrigation system for the purpose of providing supplemental water to an area, the hose bibb must
be installed using a quick coupler key on a quick coupler installed in a covered purple valve box and the hose bibb and
any hoses connected to the bibb must be labeled “nonpotable, not safe for drinking.” An isolation valve must be installed
upstream of a quick coupler connecting a hose bibb to an irrigation system.
(L) Direct Supervision.
(1) An individual who performs the functions of an Installer by connecting an Irrigation System to any water
supply, or represents that they can perform this function, must hold an installer license issued according to Title 30,
Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30. An Installer must work under the Direct Supervision of a licensed Irrigator
and comply with the applicable provision of Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 344 when performing
this function.
(2) Beginning January 1, 2010, either a licensed irrigator or a licensed irrigation technician shall be on site at all
times while the landscape irrigation system is being installed. When an irrigator is not on site, the irrigator shall be
responsible for ensuring that a licensed irrigation technician is on site to supervise the installation of the irrigation
system.
§ 113.37 INSTALLATION FINAL REQUIREMENTS.
Upon completion of the irrigation system, the irrigator or irrigation technician who provided supervision for the on-site installation
shall be required to complete the following:
(A) A final “walk through” with the irrigation system's owner or the owner's representative to explain the operation of
the system;
(B) The Maintenance Checklist on which the irrigator or irrigator technician shall obtain the signature of the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative and shall sign, seal, and date the checklist. A copy of this checklist shall be
submitted to the City along with the backflow device test report within ten days of the installation. If the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative is unwilling or unable to sign the maintenance checklist, the irrigator shall note
the time and date of the refusal on the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative's signature line. The irrigation
system owner or owner's representative will be given the original maintenance checklist and a duplicate copy of the
maintenance checklist shall be maintained by the irrigator. The items on the maintenance checklist shall include, but are
not limited to:
(1) The manufacturer's manual for the automatic controller, if the system is automatic;
(2) A seasonal (spring, summer, fall, winter) watering schedule based on either current/real time
evapotranspiration or monthly historical reference evapotranspiration (historical ET) data, monthly effective rainfall
estimates, plant landscape coefficient factors, and site factors;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/422
(3) A list of components, such as the nozzle, or pump filters, and other such components that require maintenance
and the recommended frequency for the service; and
(4) The statement: “This irrigation system has been installed in accordance with all applicable state and local
laws, ordinances, rules, regulations or orders. I have tested the system and determined that it has been installed
according to the Irrigation Plan and is properly adjusted for the most efficient application of water at this time.”
(C) A permanent sticker which contains the irrigator's name, license number, company name, telephone number and the
dates of the warranty period shall be affixed to each automatic controller installed by the irrigator or irrigator technician.
If the irrigation system is manual, the sticker shall be affixed to the original maintenance checklist. The information
contained on the sticker must be printed in waterproof ink.
(D) The irrigation plan indicating the actual installation of the system must be provided to the irrigation system's owner
or owner's representative.
§ 113.38 MAINTENANCE, ALTERATION, REPAIR, OR SERVICE.
(A) The licensed irrigator is responsible for all work that the irrigator performed during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or
service of an irrigation system during the warranty period. The irrigator or business owner is not responsible for the professional
negligence of any other irrigator who subsequently conducts any irrigation service on the same irrigation system.
(B) All trenches and holes created during the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system must be returned to
the original grade with compacted select backfill.
(C) Colored PVC pipe primer solvent must be used on all pipes and fittings used in the maintenance, alteration, repair, or service
of an irrigation system in accordance with the International Plumbing Code (Section 605).
(D) When maintenance, alteration, repair, or service of an irrigation system involves excavation work at the water meter or
backflow prevention device, an isolation valve shall be installed, if an isolation valve is not present.
STANDARDS OF CONDUCT FOR LICENSED IRRIGATORS AND INSTALLERS
§ 113.40 ADVERTISEMENT.
(A) All vehicles used in the performance of irrigation installation, maintenance, alteration, repair, or service must display the
irrigator's license number in the form of “LI_____” in a contrasting color of block letters at least two inches high, on both sides of
the vehicle.
(B) All forms of written and electronic advertisements for irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number in the
form of “LI_____________.” Any form of advertisement, including business cards, and estimates which display an entity's or
individual's name other than that of the licensed irrigator must also display the name of the licensed irrigator and the licensed
irrigator's license number. Trailers that advertise irrigation services must display the irrigator's license number.
(C) The name, mailing address, and telephone number of the commission must be prominently displayed on a legible sign and
displayed in plain view for the purpose of addressing complaints at the permanent structure where irrigation business is primarily
conducted and irrigation records are kept.
§ 113.41 CONTRACTS.
(A) All contracts to install an irrigation system must be in writing and signed by each party and must specify the irrigator's name,
license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), the date that each party signed the agreement, the total
agreed price, and must contain the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas, 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.” All contracts must
include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date.
(B) All written estimates, proposals, bids, and invoices relating to the installation or repair of an irrigation system(s) must include
the irrigator's name, license number, business address, current business telephone number(s), and the statement: “Irrigation in Texas
is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-178, P.O. Box 13087, Austin, Texas, 78711-3087.
TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(C) An individual who agrees by contract to provide irrigation services as defined in Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Section
344.30 (relating to License Required) shall hold an irrigator license issued under Title 30, Texas Administrative Code, Chapter 30
(relating to Occupational Licenses and Registrations) unless the contract is a pass-through contract as defined in Title 30, Texas
Administrative Code, Section 344.1(36) (relating to Definitions). If a pass-through contract includes irrigation services, then the
irrigation portion of the contract can only be performed by a licensed irrigator. If an irrigator installs a system pursuant to a pass7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/422
through contract, the irrigator shall be responsible for providing the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative a copy of the
warranty and all other documents required under this chapter. A pass-through contract must identify by name and license number the
irrigator that will perform the work and must provide a mechanism for contacting the irrigator for irrigation system warranty work.
§ 113.42 WARRANTIES.
(A) On all installations of new Irrigation Systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative
with a written warranty covering materials and labor furnished in the new installation of the irrigation system. The irrigator shall be
responsible for adhering to terms of the warranty. If the irrigator's warranty is less than the manufacturer's warranty for the system
components, then the irrigator shall provide the irrigation system's owner or owner's representative with applicable information
regarding the manufacturer's warranty period. The warranty must include the irrigator's seal, signature, and date. If the warranty is
part of the irrigator's contract, a separate warranty document is not required.
(B) An irrigator's written warranty on new irrigation systems must specify the irrigator's name, business address, and business
telephone number(s), must contain the signature of the system's owner or owner's representative confirming receipt of the warranty
and must include the statement: “Irrigation in Texas is regulated by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), MC-
178, P.O. Box 130897, Austin, Texas 78711-3087. TCEQ's website is: www.tceq.state.tx.us.”
(C) On all maintenance, alterations, repairs, or service to existing irrigation systems, an irrigator shall present the irrigation
system's owner or owner's representative a written document that identifies the materials furnished in the maintenance, alteration,
repair, or service. If a warranty is provided, the irrigator shall provide by the terms. The warranty document must include the
irrigator's name and business contact information.
§ 113.43 VIOLATIONS.
(A) Any person who violates a provision of this chapter or does not comply with the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000.00 for violation of a city ordinance, as set forth in
§ 10.99. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any
other rights or remedies the city may have.
(B) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city or its duly authorized designees from taking other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation or this chapter.
(Ord. 819-06-02-28, passed 2-28-06; Ord. 985-08-12-16, passed 12-16-08)
CHAPTER 114: GAME ROOMS AND AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINES
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
AMUSEMENT REDEMPTION MACHINE. A recreational machine that provides the user with an opportunity to receive something
of value other than the right of replay.
CITY OFFICIAL. A police officer, code enforcement officer or building official of the City of Pflugerville.
GAME ROOM. A building, facility or other place that is open to the public and that contains one or more operational amusement
redemption machines.
GAME ROOM OWNER. A person who has an ownership interest in a game room.
OPERATIONAL MACHINE. A machine that is ready to be played and accessible to the public.
§ 114.02 UNRESTRICTED ACCESS BY CITY OFFICIAL.
An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person exercising control over a game room, a portion of a game room or
an operational amusement redemption machine, shall provide a city official with immediate unrestricted access during business hours
to all areas of the game room and to all operational amusement redemption machines located in the game room.
§ 114.03 INSPECTION BY CITY OFFICIAL.
(A) A city official may inspect a game room or an operational amusement redemption machine located within the City of
Pflugerville, Texas' incorporated city limits to determine whether the game room or the operational amusement redemption machine
complies with the City of Pflugerville Code of Ordinances and state law.
(B) An owner, manager or employee of a game room or other person who does not allow a city official to inspect a game room or
operational amusement redemption machine commits an offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/422
§ 114.04 SIGNAGE REQUIRED.
A game room owner shall mark each entrance to a game room with a conspicuous sign that:
(1) Bears the words “GAME ROOM” in six-inch or larger block letters; and
(2) Is legible from a distance of twenty-five (25) feet.
§ 114.05 TRANSPARENT, UNCOVERED WINDOWS REQUIRED.
(A) Every game room shall have transparent unobstructed windows or open space on at least one (1) side so that the area is open
to view by the general public passing by on a public street or using a corridor, lobby or other room to which the public has access and
is admitted without charge. The owner, manager or employee of a game room shall not permit any obstruction of such public view by
the use of drawn shades, blinds, partitions, tinting or other structures or obstructions.
(B) The requirements of subsection (A) above may be waived or modified by the Building Official if the game room owner can
demonstrate:
(1) The game room is located in a structure deemed a historic landmark, or the structure is within a historic district, and
deemed to have architectural or historic significance; and
(2) Compliance with the unobstructed view requirement shall require alterations to the structure that will have a
substantially detrimental effect on its historic or architectural features; or
(3) The game room is at least three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet in floor space and the business derives at
least fifty-one percent (51%) of its net revenue from sources other than amusement redemption machines.
§ 114.06 HOURS OF OPERATION, INGRESS AND EGRESS.
(A) All game rooms shall have their hours of operation clearly marked on every entrance.
(B) All game room shall have all doors providing ingress and egress from the game room unlocked during the hours of operation.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, conduct or operate any game room for profit or to allow or permit any game room
to remain open for business or open to the public before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 2:00 a.m.
§ 114.07 OFFENSE; PENALTY.
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby declared to be a
strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby specifically negated
and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 871-07-04-10, passed 4-10-07)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
CHAPTER 130: OFFENSES AGAINST CITY REGULATIONS
§ 130.01 BREACH OF PEACE; DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
(A) A person commits an offense if he or she intentionally or knowingly:
(1) Uses abusive, indecent, profane, or vulgar language in a public place, and the language by its very utterance tends
to incite an immediate breach of the peace;
(2) Makes an offensive gesture or display in a public place, and the gesture or display tends to incite an immediate
breach of the peace;
(3) Creates, by chemical means, a noxious and unreasonable odor in a public place;
(4) Abuses or threatens a person in a public place in an obviously offensive manner;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/422
(5) Makes unreasonable noise in a public place other than a sport shooting range, as defined by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, §
250.001, or in or near a private residence that he or she has no right to occupy;
(6) Fights with another in a public place;
(7) Enters on the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose looks into a dwelling on the property through
any window or other opening in the dwelling;
(8) While on the premises of a hotel or comparable establishment, for a lewd or unlawful purpose looks into a guest
room not his or her own through a window or other opening in the room;
(9) Discharges a firearm in a public place other than a public road or a sport shooting range, as defined by Tex. Loc.
Gov't Code, § 250.001;
(10) Displays a firearm or other deadly weapon in a public place in a manner calculated to alarm;
(11) Discharges a firearm on or across a public road; or
(12) Exposes his or her anus or genitals in a public place and is reckless about whether another may be present who
will be offended or alarmed by his or her act.
(B) It is a defense to prosecution under division (A)(4) that the actor had significant provocation for his or her abusive or
threatening conduct.
(C) For purposes of this section, an act is deemed to occur in a public place or near a private residence if it produces offensive or
proscribed consequences in the public place or near a private residence.
(D) An offense under this section is a Class C misdemeanor unless committed under divisions (A)(9) or (A)(10), in which event it
is a Class B misdemeanor.
Statutory reference–V.T.C.A., Texas Penal Code, sec. 42.01. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.02 LITTERING.
(A) A person commits an offense if the person disposes or allows or permits the disposal of litter or other solid waste at a place
that is not an approved solid waste site, including a place on or within 300 feet of a public highway, on a right-of-way, on other
public or private property, or into inland or coastal water of the state.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person receives litter or other solid waste for disposal at a place that is not an approved
solid waste site, regardless of whether the litter or other solid waste or the land on which the litter or other solid waste is disposed is
owned or controlled by the person.
(C) A person commits an offense if the person transports litter or other solid waste to a place that is not an approved solid waste
site for disposal at the site.
(D) If it is shown on the trial of the defendant for an offense under this section that the defendant has previously been convicted of
an offense under this section, the punishment for the offense is increased to the punishment for the next highest category, if
applicable, under Tex. Health & Safety Code, § 365.012.
(E) On conviction for an offense under this section, the court shall provide to the defendant written notice that a subsequent
conviction for an offense under this section may result in the forfeiture under Tex. Code of Criminal Procedure, Chapter 59, of the
vehicle used by the defendant in committing the offense.
(F) The offenses prescribed by this section include the unauthorized disposal of litter or other solid waste in a dumpster or similar
receptacle.
(G) This section does not apply to the disposal of, or temporary storage for future disposal of, litter or other solid waste by a
person on land owned by that person, or by that person's agent.
Statutory reference–V.T.C.A., Texas Health & Safety Code, sec. 365.012. Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.03 DISCHARGING FIREARMS.
(A) Prohibition. Except as allowed in subsection (D), it is illegal and hereby declared a public nuisance to discharge or allow the
discharge of a firearm within the city limits or within 1,000 feet of the city limits in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/422
(B) Definitions
BB GUN. A type of firearm, properly marked with a 1/4" long orange tip, designed to shoot spherical projectiles called
BBs. The maximum allowed diameter of plastic spherical BB projectile is 6 mm (such as Airsoft guns), the maximum
allowed diameter of spherical non-plastic BBs is 4.3 to 4.4 mm (such as traditional BB guns).
FIREARM. Any device, by whatever name known, designed to expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an
explosion, expansion of gas or escape of gas. The term firearm includes but is not limited to rim fire, center fire, black
powder, pellet, BB, air gun, and paintball guns regardless of the use of compressed air or CO2.
(C) Authorization. The police chief or his designee is authorized to enter any premises when probable cause exists to believe the
unlawful discharge of firearms is occurring and may seize any firearms and ammunition in order to abate the nuisance.
(D) Exclusions. The following actions are not prohibited by this section:
(1) Discharge of a BB gun in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract:
(a) In the rear yard of private property; or
(b) At a practice or event sponsored by a governmental entity.
(2) Discharge of a shotgun, air rifle, air pistol, pellet or BB gun on a tract of land of 10 acres and:
(a) More than 1,000 feet from:
(i) The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for
organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and
(ii) The property line of a school, hospital or commercial day-care facility;
(b) More than 600 feet from:
(i) The property line of a residential subdivision; and
(ii) The property line of a multifamily residential complex; and
(c) More than 150 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property and in a manner not
reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract;
(3) Discharge of a center fire or rim fire rifle or pistol of any caliber on a tract of land of 50 acres or more and:
(a) More than 1,000 feet from:
(i) The property line of a public tract of land, generally accessible by the public, that is routinely used for
organized sporting or recreational activities or that has permanent recreational facilities or equipment; and
(ii) The property line of a school, hospital or commercial day-care facility;
(b) More than 600 feet from:
(i) The property line of a residential subdivision; and
(ii) The property line of a multifamily residential complex; and
(c) More than 300 feet from a residence or occupied building located on another property; and
(i) In a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract; or
(ii) Discharged at a sport shooting range, as defined by section 250.001, Texas Local Government Code, in a
manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary of the tract.
(4) Using any device designed exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges, explosives rivets, or similar industrial
ammunition for construction purposes;
(5) Peace officers using a firearm while discharging their official duties;
(6) Using a firearm to lawfully defend their life, the life of a third person or property;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/422
(7) Using a firearm within a commercial shooting range or commercial paintball course constructed in compliance with
city ordinances and building codes.
(E) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be deemed guilty
of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense is hereby
declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby
specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 52-5-20-74, passed 5-20-74; Am. Ord. 430-95-12-06, passed 12-6-95; Am. Ord. 470-97-10-14, passed 10-14-97; Am. Ord.
599-00-08-29, passed 8-29-00; Am. Ord. 906-07-09-11, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 1012-09-08-25, passed 8-25-09; Am. Ord. 1207-
15-03-10, passed 3-10-15)
§ 130.04 INTOXICATING GLUES OR CEMENTS.
(A) Prohibited Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person within the incorporated limits of the city to sell or transfer possession of
any modeling glue, modeling cement or copper, silver, gold, bronze, brass, or aluminum aerosol paint containing toluol or toluene to
any person under the age of 18 years.
(B) Record of Sales Required. A person making a sale of modeling glue, modeling cement, or copper, silver, gold, bronze, brass,
or aluminum aerosol paint containing toluol or toluene to a person shall record the name, address, sex and age of the purchaser. All
data required by this subsection shall be kept in a permanent type register available for inspection by any employee or officer of the
city or county or any duly authorized law enforcement officer for a period of at least one year.
(Ord. 90-77-12-19, passed 12-19-77) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.05 FALSE REPORTING OF NAME OR RESIDENCE ADDRESS TO OFFICIALS.
It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally refuse to report or to give a false report of his name or residence address:
(A) To any peace officer who has requested such information after having lawfully stopped him or after having placed
him under arrest or in custody; or
(B) To any personnel of the Pflugerville Municipal Court in connection with an official court proceeding.
(Ord. 231-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86) Penalty, see § 10.99
Statutory reference–False report to a police officer, V.T.C.A., Tex. Penal Code, sec. 37.02.
§ 130.06 SLEEPING IN CERTAIN PLACES PROHIBITED.
(A) Prohibited Acts. It shall be unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for a person to sleep:
(1) Upon or along any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, or other public place or right-of-way;
(2) In an abandoned or parked vehicle; or
(3) In an abandoned or unoccupied building or structure.
(B) Defense. It is a defense to a violation of the conduct proscribed in division (A) above, that the person has written permission of
the owner or of the person entitled to possession of the vehicle or of the building or structure, to use the vehicle or building or
structure to sleep therein.
(Ord. 232-86-5-27, passed 5-27-86) Penalty, see § 10.99
§ 130.07 CARRYING OF FIREARMS.
(A) Definitions.
BUILDING. Has the same meaning as it has in Chapter 30 of the Penal Code.
CITY PREMISES. A building or real property owned, leased, occupied or controlled by the city. CITY PREMISES does not include
streets or sidewalks owned or operated by the city or the city-owned firing range.
ENTER or ENTRY. The intrusion of the entire body.
FIREARM. Means:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/422
(1) A gun, pistol, rifle, or any other device designed, made or adapted to expel a projectile through a barrel by using
energy generated by an explosion or burning substance or any device readily convertible to that use; or
(2) An airgun, air pistol, air rifle, or any other device using air pressure to propel a projectile through a barrel.
NOTICE. The same meaning as it has in Section 30.05 of the Penal Code.
(B) Carrying Firearms.
(1) Except as provided in this section, a person carrying a firearm, whether it is concealed or unconcealed, may not
enter or remain on city premises. The city staff is directed to:
(a) Provide notice at all city premises that entry is forbidden to anyone carrying a firearm not permitted by this
section; and
(b) Provide notice to depart to anyone found carrying a firearm not permitted by this section on city premises.
(2) A sign posted as notice under subsection (1)(a) of this division will include a statement, in English and Spanish,
reading substantially as follows:
Entry onto these premises while carrying a firearm, whether it is concealed or unconcealed, is prohibited. Entry
onto these premises while carrying a firearm may subject you to prosecution for Criminal Trespass under
Section 30.05 of the Texas Penal Code.
(3) This section does not apply to a peace officer or a commissioned security officer hired by or under contract with the
city and acting within the scope of that employment, or to a peace officer of another unit of government lawfully acting
within the scope of his or her duties.
(4) A person may transport, demonstrate and display a firearm for purposes of show or sale on city premises in
connection with an event approved by the City Council, and subject to such restrictions as the City Council may require.
(C) Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this chapter will be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, will be
subject to a fine not to exceed $2,000. Each day of violation will constitute a separate offense. This penalty will be cumulative and
not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(Ord. 447-96-10-08, passed 10-8-96)
§ 130.08 GRAFFITI.
(A) Definitions.
DIRECTOR. The head of the department designated by the City Manager to enforce and administer this section.
GRAFFITI. A mark, including, but not limited to, an inscription, slogan, drawing, painting, symbol, logo, name, character, or figure,
made in any manner on public or private property and visible to the public, excluding commercial advertising or a mark placed in
compliance with an ordinance, or state or federal law.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT. Includes, but is not limited to, an aerosol paint container, regardless of the material from which it is made,
a paint stick, graffiti stick, or indelible marker capable of making a mark greater than one-eighth (1/8) inch, an etching tool, or other
implement made or adapted for the purpose of spraying or otherwise applying paint, ink or other pigmented substance that is not
water soluble, or for the purpose of etching or otherwise marking glass, metal, concrete, wood or other surface.
MINOR. A person under 17 years of age.
PARENT. A person who is the natural or adoptive parent or court-appointed guardian of a Minor, or any other person 21 years of age
or older authorized by a parent, a court-appointed guardian, or a court order to undertake the care and custody of a Minor.
PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of record or the person contractually responsible for a particular property.
(B) Prohibited Acts.
(1) Possession of Graffiti Implements.
(a) By Minors at or Near School Facilities. It shall be unlawful for any Minor to possess a Graffiti Implement
while on school property, grounds, facilities, buildings, or structures, or while on public property immediately
adjacent thereto, or while upon private property without the consent of the Property Owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/422
(b) In Designated Public Places. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any Graffiti Implement while in or
upon any public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, recreational facility, or other public building or structure
owned or operated by the city, or while in or upon, or within fifty (50) feet of, an underpass, bridge abutment, storm
drain, or similar type of infrastructure, unless authorized by the city.
(2) Furnishing Implements to or Permitting Graffiti by Minors.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, exchange, give, loan or cause or permit to be exchanged, given,
loaned, or otherwise furnish or cause to be furnished a Graffiti Implement to a Minor.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a Parent to permit, or by insufficient control allow, a Minor to apply Graffiti.
(3) Failure by Offender to Remove Graffiti. Failure by a person who has applied Graffiti to cover or remove the Graffiti
and to restore the defaced property to its condition immediately prior to the offense within twenty-four (24) hours after
delivery of notice by the city shall constitute a violation of this section.
(4) Failure by Property Owner to Remove Graffiti. Failure by a property owner to cover or remove graffiti on the
property owner's property visible from public property or right-of-way shall constitute a violation of this section, subject
to the following:
(a) Notice of Graffiti Removal by City. Prior to any enforcement efforts by the city, the director shall inform the
property owner that the city will remove the graffiti from the owner's property free of charge if the owner provides
written consent for the removal and releases the city, its contractors, and/or volunteer personnel from liability in the
performance of the graffiti abatement by completing a permission and waiver form. Notice of graffiti removal shall
be delivered by regular and certified mail addressed to the property owner. If the United States Postal Service
returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” or the property owner fails to respond to the city's request for written
permission to remove the graffiti within ten (10) days of the date such request is mailed, the property owner will be
deemed to have refused the offer.
(b) Notice to Abate Graffiti. After notice of graffiti removal by city and prior to prosecution for an offense under
section (B)(4), the director shall deliver written notice of the offense to the property owner providing the property
owner with thirty (30) days from delivery of the notice to comply. Such notice may be served by personal delivery
or certified mail, return receipt requested, addressed to the property owner at the property owner's address shown on
the tax rolls. Alternatively, if the property owner's address is unavailable or the notice is returned as undeliverable,
the director may issue notice by publication two times within ten consecutive days in a newspaper of general
publication in the city, by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property, or by posting
the notice on a sign staked to the ground on the property if there is no building on the property.
(c) The 30-day period begins the day the notice is personally served on the property owner, or the day after the
notice is mailed by certified mail, or the day after completion of an alternative method of notice under subsection
(b) above, as applicable.
(C) Defenses. It is a defense to prosecution under section (B)(4)(b) that:
(1) The Director failed to serve the required notice;
(2) During the twelve (12) months prior to a citation, the Property Owner received notice and removed Graffiti from
the property not less than three times;
(3) Prior to the filing of the complaint, the Property Owner provided the Director written authorization to enter the
property to cover or remove the Graffiti at no cost to the Property Owner under a program approved by the Director;
(4) The Property Owner has made a good faith effort to remove the Graffiti, including obtaining an insurance policy; or
(5) The Director has approved the Property Owner's request for authorization to apply the Graffiti.
(D) Exclusions. The provisions of section (B) shall not apply to the possession of felt-tip pens or other similar items by a minor
attending or traveling to or from a school at which the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at the school that
formally requires the possession of the felt-tip pens or other similar items, and shall not apply to a minor who is accompanied by a
parent, or who is in school or on school grounds during school hours or otherwise in the course and scope of supervised schoolrelated
activities.
(E) Exceptions. This section shall not apply to graffiti located on transportation infrastructure or in cases in which the removal of
the graffiti would create a hazard for the person performing the removal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/422
(F) Miscellaneous. If the director denies a property owner's request for authorization to apply graffiti on property, the property
owner may appeal to the city manager.
(G) Offense, Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. This offense
is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the culpable mental state required by chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is
hereby specifically negated and clearly dispensed with. Each day that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate
offense.
(Ord. 780-05-04-12, passed 4-12-05; Ord. 886-07-06-12, passed 6-12-07; Ord. 1240-16-01-12, passed 1-12-16)
§ 130.09 SEX OFFENDERS' RESIDENCY.
(A) Finding and Intent.
(1) The city council finds that repeat sexual offenders, sexual offenders who use physical violence and sexual offenders
who prey on children are sexual predators who present an extreme threat to the health, safety and welfare of children.
Sexual offenders are extremely likely to use physical violence and to repeat their offense and most sexual offenders
commit many offenses, have many more victims than are ever reported, and are prosecuted for only a fraction of their
crimes. This makes the cost of sexual offender victimization to society at large, while incalculable, clearly exorbitant.
(2) It is the intent of this section to serve the city's compelling interest to promote, protect and improve the health,
safety and welfare of the citizens of the city by creating areas around locations where children regularly congregate in
concentrated numbers wherein certain sexual offenders and sexual predators are prohibited from establishing temporary
or permanent residences.
(B) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
PERMANENT RESIDENCE shall mean a place where a person abodes, lodges or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
RECURRING VISITOR shall mean a person who on at least three (3) occasions during any month spends more than 48 consecutive
hours in the city.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE shall mean a place where the person abodes, lodges or resides for a period of 14 or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address or a place where the person routinely abodes,
resides or lodges for a period of 4 or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the person's permanent
residence.
(C) Sex Offender Residency Prohibition, Penalty, and Exceptions.
(1) If a person is required by Chapter 62 of the Texas Code of Criminal Procedure to register with a local law
enforcement agency because of a violation involving a victim who was less than seventeen (17) years of age, it is
unlawful for that person to establish a permanent residence, establish a temporary residence, or to be a recurring visitor at
a residence, located within 2,000 feet of any premises where children commonly gather including but not limited to, a
school, day-care center, playground, public or private youth center, public swimming pool or video arcade facility, as
those terms are defined in Sections 341.064 and 481.134 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of Texas and Section
42.002 of the Human Resources Code of the State of Texas. For the purposes of this section the city's hike and bike trail
shall not constitute a place where children commonly gather.
(2) For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by following a
straight line from the outer property line of the permanent or temporary residence to the nearest property line of the
premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or in the case of multiple residences on one property,
measuring from the nearest wall of the building or structure occupied or the parking/driveway, whichever is closer to the
nearest property line of the premises where children commonly gather as described herein.
(3) In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the
measurement to prove otherwise.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to modify or reduce the state's child safety ban. A person, as described in
subsection (1), residing within 2,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather, as specified herein, does not
commit a violation of this section if any of the following apply:
(a) The person established the permanent or temporary residence and has complied with all the sex offender
registration laws of the state prior to the date of the adoption of this section;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/422
(b) The person was a minor when he/she committed the offense and was not convicted as an adult;
(c) The person is a minor;
(d) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 2,000 feet of the person's
permanent or temporary residence was opened after the person established the permanent or temporary residence
and complied with all sex offender registration laws of the state; or
(e) The person proves that the information on the database is incorrect and that, if corrected, this section would
not apply to the person.
(D) Injunctive Relief. Any violation of this section may be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction; and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this section or in this Code of Ordinances.
(E) Penalty. Any person who shall intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence violate any provision contained
in this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $2,000.00.
Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 900-07-08-14, passed 8-14-07)
§ 130.10 BOWS AND CROSSBOWS.
(A) Prohibition. Except as allowed in subsection (C), it is illegal and hereby declared a public nuisance to use or allow the use of a
bow or crossbow within the city limits of the City of Pflugerville or within 1,000 feet of the city limits in the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.
(B) Authorization. The Police Chief or his designee is authorized to enter any premises when probable cause exist to believe the
unlawful use of a bow or crossbow is occurring and may seize any related contraband in order to abate the nuisance.
(C) Exclusions. The following actions are not prohibited by this section:
(1) Use of a bow or crossbow on a tract of land of 5 acres or more and more than 300 feet from a residence or occupied
building located on another property and in a manner not reasonably expected to cause a projectile to cross the boundary
of the tract;
(2) Use of a bow or crossbow that discharges a projectile that is incapable of penetrating the skin of a human being;
(3) Use of a bow or crossbow to lawfully defend their life, the life of a third person or property;
(4) Using a bow or crossbow within a commercial or public archery range constructed in compliance with city
ordinances and building codes;
(5) Using a bow or crossbow with written permission of the City Manager or designee when such use is for organized
youth activities, educational purposes, amateur or professional sporting events.
(D) Penalty. Any person who shall recklessly violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be
deemed guilty of a Class C Misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00.
(Ord. 1018-09-09-22, passed 9/22/09)
§ 130.11 DONATION CONTAINERS.
(A) Definitions.
BUILDING. A commercial building lawfully occupied by a business or charitable organization pursuant to a valid certificate of
occupancy.
DONATION CONTAINER. Any box, container, trailer or other receptacle that is intended for use as a collection point for donated
clothing, other household materials or other salvageable personal property; the term does not include recycle bins or any donation
container located within a building.
PERSON. Includes an individual, sole proprietorship, corporation, association, nonprofit corporation, partnership, joint venture,
limited liability company, estate, trust, public or private organization that is not a state agency, business trust, public corporation, or
any other legal or commercial entity.
RECYCLE BIN. A receptacle used for the collection of recyclable materials governed or regulated by the city's zoning code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/422
(B) Donation Containers Prohibited.
(1) Donation Containers Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain, or allow to be placed or
maintained, any donation container within the city's corporate limits or in the extraterritorial jurisdiction within 5,000 feet
outside the limits.
(2) Abatement. Any donation container located within the jurisdiction of the city shall be subject to impoundment by
the city. Any donation container impounded by the city shall be released to the owner the payment of an impound fee of
$200.00, and a daily storage fee of $20.00 for each day in city possession after impound.
(3) Abandoned Donation Container. Any impounded donation container not claimed within 30 days after impoundment
may be destroyed without notice from the city.
(C) Offense, Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or fail to comply therewith shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $1.00 nor more than $500.00. Each day
that the violation occurs shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
(Ord. 1113-12-06-12, passed 6/12/12)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be sited, as the Building Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.02 CITY CONSTRUCTION CODE.
The following codes, copies of which are on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby adopted as the city construction code,
which is adopted by reference and made a part of this code as if set forth in full herein. The city construction code will apply to all
construction within the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this code.
(A) The following codes published by the International Code Council:
(1) International Building Code, with appendices G, H, and I, 2015 edition.
(2) International Residential Code, with amendments, with appendices H and J, 2015 edition.
(3) International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition.
(4) International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition.
(5) International Code Council Electrical Code, 2015 edition.
(6) International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition.
(7) International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition.
(8) International Fire Code, 2015 edition, with appendices.
(9) International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition.
(10) International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition.
(B) National Electrical Code, 2014 edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/422
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am Ord. 320-90-07-10, passed 7-10-90; Ord. 386-93-10-12, passed 10-12-93; Ord. 453-97-02-
25, passed 2-25-97; Ord. 531-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99; Ord. 571-99-12-14, passed 12-14-99; Ord. 659-02-01-08, passed 1-8-02;
Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Ord. 876-07-04-24, § 1, passed 4-27-07; Ord. 936-8-02-26, passed 2-26-08; Ord. 964-08-09-09,
passed 9-9-08; Am. Ord. 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 1093-11-11-08, § 1, passed 11-8-11; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 1,
passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 2, passed 7-12-16)
Cross-reference--Fire Marshal, see § 30.01.
§ 150.03 APPLICABILITY.
The regulations of this chapter and the City Construction Code shall be applicable to the erection, construction, enlargement,
alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, and maintenance of all buildings or structures
within the corporate limits of the city, except to the extent a provision hereof is specifically made applicable to the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.04 DEFINITION.
For the purpose of this chapter, the term NEW CONSTRUCTION means the construction of a new primary use building on the lot.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.05 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER ORDINANCES.
(A) Unless otherwise specifically provided, the city construction code shall be construed to supplement this chapter and all other
ordinances of the city and shall not be construed to rescind or repeal any part or portion of said ordinances. In the event of
irreconcilable conflict between the codes adopted in § 150.02 above, the most restrictive of the conflicting provisions will prevail.
(B) The building official shall coordinate the requirements of the city construction code and the ordinances set out in subsection
(A), above, toward preventing duplication of efforts where the city construction code and such other ordinances call for substantially
the same procedures or standards.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ord. 571-99-12-14, passed 12-14-99; Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ordinance
1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 2, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 3, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.06 POSTING OF CITY'S CONTACT INFORMATION BY BUILDERS.
(A) Posting Notice. All builders who sell homes on lots and who receive some type of permit from the city (“builders”) shall post
notice of the city planning department's contact information in an area of the builder's sales office that is readily accessible by the
public, in the form designated by the city planning department. A copy of the required notice shall be provided by the city planning
department at 201-B E. Pecan Street, Pflugerville, Texas 78660.
(B) Distributing Notice. All builders shall provide the city planning department's contact information to all prospective purchasers
at the same time the builder provides any other written information to the purchaser. This written information includes but is not
limited to any promotional materials distributed to the purchaser at the builder's sales offices within the city.
(C) Fines for Failure to Comply. Failure to comply with this section may result in a fine as authorized by title 1, chapter 10, §
10.99 of the city code.
(Ord. 712-03-07-22, passed 7-22-03; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 3, passed 11-13-12;
Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 4, passed 7-12-16)
AMENDMENTS
§ 150.10 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE AMENDMENT.
(A) Section 230.41 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
230.41 Insulation of service-entrance conductors. Service-entrance conductors entering or on the exterior of buildings
or other structures shall be insulated.
Delete exceptions.
(B) Section 230.43 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/422
230.43 Wiring methods for 600 volts, nominal, or less.
Service-entrance conductors shall be installed in accordance with the applicable requirements of this code covering the
type of wiring method used and shall be limited to the following methods:
1. Rigid Metallic Conduit (RMC)
2. Intermediate Metal Conduit (IMC)
3. Electrical Metallic Tubing (EMT), or
4. Rigid Nonmetallic Conduit (RNC) will be approved.
5. A service mast supporting the service drop must be a minimum of 2" diameter and shall be either rigid metallic
conduit (RMC) or intermediate metal conduit (IMC). No couplings are to be installed above the roofline. The mast must
penetrate a minimum of 18" above the high side of the roof deck. Any mast over 3' in length, measured from the high side
of the roof deck, must be properly guyed so as to relieve the strain of the service drop.
(C) Section 230.70(A)(1) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
230.70(A)(1) Readily accessible location. The service disconnecting means shall be installed at a readily accessible
location outside of a building or structure.
Exception: Services disconnecting means over 1200 amps shall be located a maximum of 25 ft. travel distance from the
exterior entrance inside a commercial building. Disconnecting means shall be accessible to the exterior of the building at
all times and shall not be located above the first floor of a multi-level building.
(D) Section 310.106 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
310.106 Minimum size of conductors.
Solid and stranded conductors may not be smaller than No. 12 copper or No. 6 aluminum or copper-clad aluminum.
Exception No. 1: Small conductor sizes 18 and 16 AWG as permitted by section 240.4(D)(1) and (2).
Exception No. 2: For flexible cords, as permitted by table 400.4.
Exception No. 3: For fixture wire as permitted by section 402.6.
Exception No. 4: For motors rated 1 hp or less, as permitted by section 430.22(F).
Exception No. 5: For cranes and hoists, as permitted by section 610.14.
Exception No. 6: For elevator control and signaling circuits, as permitted by section 620.12.
Exception No. 7: For class 1, class 2, and class 3 circuits, as permitted by article 725.49(A) and 725.127, exception.
Exception No. 8: For fire alarm circuits as permitted by section 760.49(A); 760.127, exception; and 760.179(B).
Exception No. 9: For motor-control circuits, as permitted by section 430.72.
Exception No. 10: For control and instrumentation circuits, as permitted by section 727.6.
Exception No. 11: For electrical signs and outline lighting as permitted in section 600.31(B) and 600.32(B).
(E) Section 320.108 of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
320.108 Equipment grounding conductor. Type AC cable shall provide an adequate path for fault current as required by
250.4(A)(5) or (B)(4) to act as an equipment grounding conductor. In addition only type AC cable containing an insulated
grounding conductor will be approved.
(F) Section 408.36, exception 1, of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
408.36 Overcurrent protection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/422
Exception No. 1: A main circuit breaker shall be required in all panelboards used as service equipment. This overcurrent
protective device shall be located within or adjacent to the panelboard.
(G) Section 410.36(B) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
410.36(B) Suspended ceilings. Framing members of suspended ceilings shall not be used to support luminaries
(fixtures). A fixture shall have a minimum of two support wires on opposite corners from each other. Support wires shall
be the same gage as the ceiling support wire. Support wire shall be secured at both ends and shall be identified from any
other support wires in ceilings. All electrical equipment installed to the suspended ceiling shall require additional support
wires. Luminaries in fire rated ceilings shall be supported on all four corners.
(H) Section 422.16(B) of the National Electrical Code, 2014 edition adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
422.16(B)(1) Electrically operated in-sink waste disposers. Electrically operated in-sink waste disposers shall be cordand-
plug connected with a flexible cord identified as suitable for the purpose in the installation instructions of the
appliance manufacturer, where all of the following conditions are met:
1. The flexible cord shall be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
Exception: A listed kitchen waste disposer distinctly marked to identify it as protected by a system of double
insulation, or its equivalent, shall not be required to be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
2. The length of the cord shall not be less than 18" and not over 36".
3. Receptacles shall be located to avoid physical damage to the flexible cord.
4. The receptacle shall be accessible.
422.16(B)(2) Built-in dishwashers and trash compactors. Built-in dishwashers and trash compactors shall be cord-andplug
connected with a flexible cord identified as suitable for the purpose in the installation instructions of the appliance
manufacturer, where all of the following conditions are met:
1. The flexible cord shall be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
Exception: A listed kitchen dishwasher or trash compactor distinctly marked to identify it as protected by a system
of double insulation, or its equivalent, shall not be required to be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
1. The length of the cord shall be 36" minimum and 48" maximum measured from the face of the attachment plug to
the plane of the rear of the appliance.
2. Receptacles shall be located to avoid physical damage to the flexible cord.
3. The receptacle shall be accessible without having to remove the appliance served.
422.16(B)(4) Range hoods. Range hoods shall be cord-and-plug connected with a flexible cord identified as suitable for
use on range hoods in the installation instructions of the appliance manufacturer, where all of the following conditions are
met:
1. The flexible cord shall be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
Exception: A listed kitchen waste disposer distinctly marked to identify it as protected by a system of double
insulation, or its equivalent, shall not be required to be terminated with a grounding-type attachment plug.
2. The length of the cord shall not be less than 18" nor over 36".
3. Receptacles shall be located to avoid physical damage to the flexible cord.
4. The receptacle shall be accessible without removal of the range hood.
5. The receptacle is supplied by an individual branch circuit.
(Ord. 1000-09-05-12, § 1, passed 5-12-09; Am. Ord. 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Am. Ord. 1093-11-11-08, § 2–3, passed
11/8/11; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 3, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 5, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.11 PLUMBING CODE AMENDMENT.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/422
(A) Section 101.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the plumbing code of the City of Pflugerville hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
(B) Section 106.6.2 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work are as indicated in the resolution adopted under § 150.41 of the
city's Code of Ordinances.
(C) Section 106.6.3 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official may authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.
2. Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in
accordance with this code.
3. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or
cancelled before any plan review effort has been expended.
(D) Section 108.4 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs plumbing work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, is subject
to the penalties as set forth in § 150.99 of the City's Code of Ordinances.
(E) Section 108.5 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, the last sentence, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Any person who continues any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is subject to the penalties set
forth in § 150.99 of the city's Code of Ordinances.
(F) Section 109 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals
shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(G) Section 305.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, the last sentence, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Minimum wall thickness of material must be 0.025 to 0.0059 inches.
(H) Section 305.4.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
305.4.1 Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems must be a minimum of eighteen
inches (18") below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a minimum of twelve
inches (12") below grade.
(I) Section 410 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
410.1 Approval. Drinking fountains shall conform to ASME A112.19.1/CSA B45.2, ASME A112.19.2/CSA B45.1 and
water coolers shall conform to ARI 1010. Drinking fountains and water coolers shall conform to NSF 61, section 9.
Where water is served in restaurants, drinking fountains shall not be required. In other occupancies, where drinking
fountains are required, water coolers or bottled water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted for not more than 50
percent of the required drinking fountains. In occupancies with an occupant load of 15 or less, water coolers or bottled
water dispensers shall be permitted to be substituted for the required drinking fountain.
(J) Section 418 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended by adding the following
section:
418.4 Minimum service sink requirements. In occupancies with an occupant load of 15 or less, service sinks shall not
be required.
(K) Section 903.1 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/422
903.1 Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through the roof must be terminated at least six inches (6") above
the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the vent extensions must be
run at least seven feet (7') above the roof.
(L) Section 1002.4 of the International Plumbing Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
1002.4 Trap seals. Each fixture trap shall have a liquid seal of not less than 2 inches and not more than 4 inches, or
deeper for special designs relating to accessible fixtures. Where a trap seal is subject to loss by evaporation, a trap seal
primer valve shall be installed. A trap seal primer valve shall conform to ASSE 1018 or ASSE 1044 and are subject to
building official approval.
(Ord. 572-99-12-14, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Ord. 778-05-03-22, passed 3-22-05; Ord. 876-07-04-
24, § 2, passed 4-24-07; Ord. 936-8-02-26, § 2, passed 2-26-08; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-
13, § 3, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 6, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.12 INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE AMENDMENT.
(A) Section 101.1 of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the building code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
(B) Section 107.1 of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
107.1 General. Submittal documents consisting of construction documents, statement of special inspections, geotechnical
report and other data shall be submitted in five sets with each permit application. For all nonresidential new construction
and remodel projects, the construction documents shall be prepared by a design professional registered with the State of
Texas.
(C) Section 111.1 of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, the first sentence, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
111.1 Use and occupancy. No building or structure shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy of
a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy
therefor as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval of a violation of
the provisions of this code or other ordinance of the jurisdiction.
(D) Section 113 of the International Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals
shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(Ord. 572-99-12-14, passed 12-14-99; Am. Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Ord. 876-07-04-24, § 3, passed 4-24-07; Am.
Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 4, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 7, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.13 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE AMENDMENT.
(A) Section R101.1 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These provisions shall be known as the residential code for one- and two-family dwellings of the City of
Pflugerville, and shall be cited as such and will be referred to herein as “this code.”
(B) Section R112 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals
shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(C) Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
Table R301.2 (1)
CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA
GROUND
SNOW
LOAD
WIND DESIGN
SEISMIC
DESIGN
CATEGORY
SUBJECT TO DAMAGE
FROM
WINTER
DESIGN
TEMP
ICE SHIELD
UNDERLAYMENT
REQ'D
FLOOD
HAZARDS
AIR
FREEZING
INDEX
MEAN
ANNUAL
TEMP
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/422
Speed (mph) Topographic
effects
Special
wind
region
Windborne
debris zone
Weathering Frost
line
depth
Termite
5 lb/sq.ft 115 No No No A Negligible 12 Mod. to
heavy
28 No FIRM
c. 2014
30 68.1
(D) Section P2903.10 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
(E) Section P3008.1 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
P3008.1 General. Fixtures on the first floor of a foundation where the foundation is located at or below the flood level
rim of the next upstream manhole cover of the public sewer shall be protected from backflow of sewage by installing an
approved backwater valve. Fixtures located on elevated floors of a building above the flood level rim of the next upstream
manhole shall not discharge through the backwater valve. Backwater valves shall be provided with access.
(F) Section P3104.1 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
P3104.1 Connection. All individual branch and circuit vents shall connect to a vent stack, stack vent or extend to the
open air.
Exception: Individual, branch and circuit vents shall be permitted to terminate to an air admittance valve upon approval
by the building official.
(G) Section P3201.6 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
P3201.6 Number of fixtures per trap. Each plumbing fixture shall be separately trapped by a water seal trap placed as
close as possible to the fixture outlet. The vertical distance from the fixture outlet to the trap weir shall not exceed 24
inches. The height of a clothes washer standpipe above a trap shall conform to section P2706.1.2. Fixtures shall not be
double trapped.
(H) Section P2503.5.1 of the international Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as
follows:
P2503.5.1 Rough plumbing. DWV systems shall be tested on completion of the rough piping installation by water or air
with no evidence of leakage. Either test shall be applied to the drainage system in its entirety or in sections after rough
piping has been installed, as follows:
1. Water test. Each section shall be filled with water to a point not less than 5 feet above the highest fitting connection
in that section, or to the highest point in the completed system. Water shall be held in the section under test for a period of
15 minutes. The system shall prove leak free by visual inspection.
2. Air test. The portion under test shall be maintained at a gauge pressure of 3 pounds per square inch (psi) using a 0–
15 psi air test gauge assembly with 1/10th lb. increments. This pressure shall be held without introduction of additional
air for a period of 15 minutes.
(I) Section R1004 of the International Residential Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to add the following
section:
R1004.6 Factory built fireplace air spaces and chases. No electrical, mechanical, or plumbing, except for the
combustion air vent and gas line feed associated with the firebox, shall intrude into the airspace enclosing the firebox or
any chase for chimney components associated with the fireplace.
(Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ord. 778-05-03-22, passed 3-22-05; Ord. 876-07-04-24, § 4, passed 4-24-07; Ord. 936-8-
02-26, § 3, passed 2-26-08; Ord. 1000-09-05-12, § 2, passed 5-12-09; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-
12-11-13, § 5, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1187-14-09-09, passed 9-9-14; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 8, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.14 FIRE CODE AMENDMENT.
(A) Section 101.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/422
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fire code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter referred to as “this
code.”
(B) Section 104.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
104.1 General. The fire code official is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code and shall have the
authority to render interpretations of this code, and to adopt policies, procedures, rules and regulations in order to clarify
the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, policies, procedures, rules and regulations shall be in compliance
with the intent and purpose of this code and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in
this code. The fire code official is authorized to develop design standards to supplement the requirements of this code and
adopted standards referenced by this code. Should a conflict occur between this code, or a referenced standard, and a
design standard approved by the fire code official, the requirements of the design standard shall govern.
(C) Section 105.3.3 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
105.3.3. Occupancy prohibited before approval. The building or structure shall not be occupied prior to the code
official issuing a permit that indicates that applicable provisions of this code have been met for any new structure or a
change in an existing occupancy.
(D) Section 108 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals shall be
governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(E) Section 307.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
307.2.1 Authorization. All outdoor burning shall be conducted in accordance with this code, the Texas Outdoor Burning
Rules, and supplemental rules adopted by the fire code official. If a conflict should arise between this code, the
supplemental rules adopted by the fire code official and the Texas Outdoor Burning Rules, then the more stringent rule
shall apply. Where required by state or local law or regulations, open burning shall only be permitted with prior approval
from the state or local air and water quality management authority, provided that all conditions specified in the
authorization are followed.
(F) Section 307.4 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
307.4 Location. The location for open burning shall be not less than 50 feet from any structure, and provisions shall be
made to prevent the fire from spreading to within 50 feet of any structure.
Exceptions:
1. Fires in approved containers that are not less than 25 feet from a structure.
(G) Section 308.1.4 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices. Charcoal burners and other flame cooking devices shall not be operated on
combustible balconies or within 10 ft. of combustible construction. Propane cooking devices shall not be stored on
combustible balconies.
Exceptions:
1. One- and two-family dwellings.
(H) Section 311.2.2 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
311.2.2 Fire protection. Fire alarm, sprinkler and standpipe systems shall be maintained in an operable condition at all
times. Any impairment to or malfunction of the fire alarm, sprinkler or standpipe system must be reported to the fire
department.
(I) Section 503.1.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
503.1.1 Buildings and facilities. Approved fire apparatus access roads shall be provided for every facility, building or
portion of a building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the jurisdiction. The fire apparatus access road shall
comply with the requirements of this section, appendix D of this code and design standards approved by the fire code
official. Access roads shall extend to within 150 feet of all portions of the facility and all portions of the exterior walls of
the first story of the building as measured by an approved route around the exterior of the building or facility.
(J) Section 503.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/422
503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width in accordance with appendix D and an
unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 14 feet.
(K) Section 503.3 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
503.3 Marking. Where required by the fire code official, approved signs or other approved notices shall be provided for
fire apparatus roads to identify such roads or prohibit the obstruction thereof. Signs or notices shall be maintained in a
clean and legible condition at all times and be replaced or repaired when necessary to provide adequate visibility. All
required fire lanes shall be provided and maintained with fire lane striping that consists of six-inch (6") wide red
background stripe with four-inch (4") high white letters stating “NO PARKING FIRE LANE TOW AWAY” painted upon
the red stripe every 25-feet along the entire length of the fire lane, showing the exact boundary of the fire lane. Fire lane
markings shall be on the vertical surface of the curb unless otherwise approved by the fire code official.
(L) Section 503.6 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
503.6 Security gates. The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus road shall be approved by the fire chief.
Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation, including a means of
operation without power and a means of operation with a Knox Box. The security gate and emergency operation shall be
maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators, where provided, shall be listed in accordance with UL 325.
Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of
ASTM F 2200. When required by the fire code official, defective gates shall be secured in the open position until
repaired.
(M) Section 505.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
505.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers or
approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the
property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Where required by the fire code official, address numbers,
building numbers and building identification signs shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate
emergency response. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of 6
inches (101.6 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm). When required by the fire code official,
address numbers shall be posted at the street entrance. Address numbers, building numbers and building identification
signs shall be maintained.
(N) Section 507.5.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
507.5.1 Where required. Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or moved into or within the
jurisdiction is more than 300 feet (91.5 m) from a hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved
route around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and mains shall be provided where required by
the code official.
Exceptions:
1. For group R-3 and group U occupancies, the distance requirement shall be 600 feet (183 m).
(O) Section 509.3 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
509.3 Main electrical disconnect. The main electrical disconnect for each building shall be installed on the exterior of
the building in an approved location. In lieu of the main disconnect, a remote shunt trip may be installed to disconnect
electrical service when approved by the fire code official.
(P) Section 605.5.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
605.5.1 Power supply. Extension cords shall be plugged directly into an approved receptacle, power tap or multiplug
adapter with surge protection and, except for approved multiplug extension cords, shall serve only one portable appliance.
(Q) Section 807.5.2.3 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
807.5.2.3 Artwork in classrooms. Artwork and teaching materials shall be limited on walls of classrooms to not more
than 20 percent of the specific wall area to which they are attached. The amount of wall area covered can be increased to
50 percent in buildings protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system.
(R) Section 901.4.6 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
901.4.6 Pump and riser room. A dedicated room shall be provided for fire pumps and automatic sprinkler system risers.
Pump and riser rooms shall be provided with exterior access and the exterior access door shall face an access drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/422
marked as a fire lane. Pump rooms shall comply with the construction requirements specified in NFPA standard 20.
Where provided, fire pump rooms and automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be designed with adequate space for
all equipment necessary for the installation, as defined by the manufacturer, with sufficient working space around the
stationary equipment. Clearances around equipment to elements of permanent construction, including other installed
equipment and appliances, shall be sufficient to allow inspection, service, repair or replacement without removing such
elements of permanent construction or disabling the function of a required fire-resistance-rated assembly. Fire pump and
automatic sprinkler system riser rooms shall be provided with a door(s) and an unobstructed passageway large enough to
allow removal of the largest piece of equipment.
(S) Section 903.3.1.2.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
903.3.1.2.1 Balconies and decks. Sprinkler protection shall be provided for all exterior balconies and ground floor patios,
including closets or storage areas accessed from balconies and patios, of dwelling units where the building is of type V
construction. Sidewall sprinklers that are used to protect such areas shall be permitted to be located such that their
deflectors are within 1 inch (25 mm) to 6 inches (152 mm) below the structural members, and a maximum distance of 14
inches (356 mm) below the deck of the exterior balconies that are constructed of open wood joist construction.
(T) Section 1009.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
1009.1 Accessible means of egress required. Accessible means of egress shall comply with both this section and the
Architectural Barriers Act of the Texas Civil Statutes (Texas Accessibility Standards or TAS). The fire code official is
authorized to require the owner, applicant or agent to provide a technical report from a qualified person certifying TAS
compliance. Accessible spaces shall be provided with not less than one accessible means of egress. Where more than one
means of egress is required by section 1006.2 or 1006.3 from an accessible space, each accessible portion of the space
shall be served by not less than two accessible means of egress.
(U) Appendix B, section 105.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
B105.1 One- and two-family dwellings, group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. The minimum fire-flow and
flow duration requirements for one- and two-family dwellings, group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses shall be
1,000 gallons per minute for 1 hour. Fire-flow and flow duration for dwellings having a fire-flow calculation area in
excess of 3,600 square feet shall not be less than the flow specified in table B105.1(2).
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to approve a reduction in required fire-flow when the building is equipped
with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. The amount of fire-flow reduction permitted will be determined by the
fire code official.
(V) Appendix B, section 105.2 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
B105.2 Buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, group R-3 and R-4 buildings and townhouses. The
minimum fire-flow and flow duration for buildings other than one- and two-family dwellings, group R-3 and R-4
buildings and townhouses shall be as specified in table B105.1(2).
Exception: The fire code official is authorized to approve a reduction in required fire-flow when the building is equipped
with an approved automatic fire sprinkler system. The amount of fire flow reduction permitted will be determined by the
fire code official.
(W) Appendix D, section 103.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
D103.1 Access road width. The minimum road width of a fire apparatus access road shall be 26 feet, exclusive of
shoulders (see figure D103.1).
Exception: The minimum required width of a fire apparatus access road may be increased or reduced when required by
the fire code official.
(X) Appendix D, section 103.5 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
D103.5 Fire apparatus access road gates. Gates securing fire apparatus access roads shall be approved by the fire code
official prior to installation. Gates shall be maintained in an operative condition and repaired or replaced when defective.
When required by the fire code official, defective gates shall be secured in the open position until repaired.
(Y) Appendix D, section 107.1 of the International Fire Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
D107.1 One- or two-family dwelling residential developments. Developments of one- or two-family dwellings, with
lots more than one-half acre in size, where the number of dwelling units exceeds 30, shall be provided with two separate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/422
and approved fire apparatus access roads. Developments of one- or two-family dwellings, with lots less than one-half acre
in size, where the number of dwelling units exceeds 99, shall be provided with two separate and approved fire apparatus
access roads.
(Ord. 577-00-02-08, passed 2-8-00; Am. Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Ord. 936-8-02-26, § 4, passed 2-26-08; Am. Ordinance
1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 5, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 9, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.15 MECHANICAL CODE AMENDMENT.
(A) Section 101.1 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the mechanical code of the City of Pflugerville hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
(B) Section 106.6.2 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.6.2 Fee schedule. The fees for all plumbing work are as indicated in the resolution adopted under § 150.41 of the
city's Code of Ordinances.
(C) Section 106.6.3 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
106.6.3 Fee refunds. The code official may authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. The full amount of any fee paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.
2. Not more than eighty percent (80%) of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in
accordance with this code.
3. Not more than fifty percent (50%) of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or
cancelled before any plan review effort has been expended.
(D) Section 108.4 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby amended to read as follows:
108.4 Violation penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the
requirements thereof or who erects, installs, alters, or repairs plumbing work in violation of the approved construction
documents or directive of building official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, is subject
to the penalties as set forth in § 150.99 of the City's Code of Ordinances.
(E) Section 108.5 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, the last sentence, is hereby amended to
read as follows:
Any person who continues any work in or about the structure after having been served with a stop-work order, except
such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, is subject to the penalties set
forth in § 150.99 of the city's Code of Ordinances.
(F) Section 109 of the International Mechanical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals
shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 10, passed 7-12-16)
§ 150.16 MISCELLANEOUS CODE AMENDMENTS.
(A) Section 101.1 of the International Code Council Electrical Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the electrical code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
(B) Section 1101 of the International Code Council Electrical Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its
entirety. Appeals shall be governed by the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(C) Section 101.1 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the fuel gas code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter referred to as
“this code.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/422
(D) Section 109 of the International Fuel Gas Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety. Appeals
shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(E) Section 101.1 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the energy conservation code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
(F) Section C109 of the International Energy Conservation Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its
entirety. Appeals shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(G) Section 101.1 of the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the existing building code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter referred
to as “this code.”
(H) Section 112 of the International Existing Building Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Appeals shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(I) Section 101.1 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, is hereby amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the property maintenance code of the City of Pflugerville, hereinafter
referred to as “this code.”
(J) Section 111 of the International Property Maintenance Code, 2015 edition, adopted by the city, is hereby deleted in its entirety.
Appeals shall be governed by § 2.3 of the City of Pflugerville Unified Development Code, as amended.
(Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1120-12-11-13, § 5, passed 11-13-12; Ord. 1270-16-07-12, § 11, passed 7-12-16)
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 150.20 SWIMMING POOLS.
(A) Adoption of provisions of Texas Administrative Code. The city adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules
as amended by the department of state health services known as the standards for public swimming pools and spa rules found in 25
Texas Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subchapter L, Section 181 through 207 and the standards for public interactive
water features and fountains rules found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, Part 1, Chapter 265, Subsection L, Sections 301–308.
These provisions are herein adopted together with the additions and amendments hereinafter contained as part of this section. In the
event that there is a conflict between the department of state health services rules and this section, the more stringent shall prevail.
(B) Scope. This section shall apply to all public swimming pools, spas, and public interactive water features and fountains, except
as specifically otherwise stated in this section. Wherever in this section a reference is made to a statute, ordinance, rule, or regulation,
which has been amended or superseded, the reference shall be deemed to mean the amended or superseding provision to the extent
that such is a reasonable application.
(C) Definitions.
(1) POOL. Any manmade permanently installed or non-portable structure, basin, chamber, or tank containing an
artificial body of water that is used for swimming, diving, aquatic sports, or other aquatic activity other than a residential
pool and that is operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is charged
for use. The pool may be either publicly or privately owned. The term does not include a spa or a decorative fountain that
is not used as a pool. References within the standard to various types of pools are defined by the following categories.
(2) CITY MANAGER. The city manager of Pflugerville, Texas or the city manager's designee.
(3) CLASS A POOL. Any pool used, with or without a fee, for accredited competitive aquatic events such as the United
States Swimming, United States Diving, National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), National Federation of State
High School Associations (NFSHSA), events. A Class A pool may also be used for recreation.
(4) CLASS B POOL. Any pool used for public recreation and open to the general public with or without a fee.
(5) CLASS C POOL. Any pool operated for and in conjunction with:
(a) Lodging such as hotels, motels, apartments, condominiums, or mobile home parks;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/422
(b) Property owner associations, private organizations, or clubs; or
(c) A school, college or university while being operated for academic or continuing education classes. The use of
such a pool would be open to occupants, members or students, etc., and their guests but not open to the general
public.
(6) CLASS D POOL. A wading pool with a maximum water depth of 24 inches at any point.
(7) PUBLIC INTERACTIVE WATER FEATURE AND FOUNTAIN (PIWF). Any indoor or outdoor installation
maintained for public recreation that includes water sprays, dancing water jets, waterfalls, dumping buckets, or shooting
water cannons in various arrays for the purpose of wetting the persons playing in the spray streams. PIWFs:
(a) May be stand-alone PIWFs or may share a water supply, disinfection system, filtration system, circulation
system, or other treatment system that allows water to co-mingle with a pool;
(b) May be publicly or privately owned;
(c) May be operated by an owner, lessee, operator, licensee, or concessionaire, regardless of whether a fee is
charged for use;
(d) Include, but are not limited to, interactive water features or fountains that are open exclusively to members of
an organization and their guests, residents of a multi-unit apartment building or apartment complex, residential real
estate development, or other multifamily residential area, schools, daycare facilities, youth camp, or hotel or other
public accommodations facility;
(e) Do not include interactive water features or fountains located on private property under the control of the
property owner or the owner's tenant serving a single-family residence or duplex and that are intended for use by not
more than two resident families and their guests; and
(f) Are not fountains, installations, amusement rides, or other attractions, whether decorative or interactive, in
which only incidental water contact occurs.
(7) REGULATORY AUTHORITY. The City of Pflugerville.
(D) Enclosures.
(1) All swimming pools, public and private, shall be maintained completely within an enclosure of sufficient strength to
prevent access to the pool. All public pool yard enclosures, as defined by Texas Health and Safety Code, Chapter 757,
shall comply with the standards for that enclosure as are required or permitted by that chapter of the Health and Safety
Code and, for private pools, Appendix G, as adopted, of the International Residential Code, 2012 edition.
(2) The city may repair, replace, secure, or otherwise remedy an enclosure or fence that is damaged, deteriorated,
substandard, dilapidated, or otherwise in a state that poses a hazard to the public health, safety, and welfare. The city may
also require the owner of the property on which the swimming pool or enclosure or fence is situated, after notice and
hearing as provided in this section, to repair, replace, secure, or otherwise remedy an enclosure or fence of a swimming
pool that the city or an appropriate city official, agent, or employee determines violates the minimum standards adopted
under this section.
(3) If the city incurs expenses under this section, the city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against,
unless it is a homestead as protected by the state constitution, the property on which the swimming pool or the enclosure
or fence is situated. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or another person having an interest in the legal title to
the property reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the notice of the
lien is recorded in the office of the county clerk. The notice must contain the name and address of the owner if that
information can be determined with a reasonable effort, a legal description of the real property on which the swimming
pool or enclosure or fence is situated, the amount of expenses incurred by the city, and the balance due. The lien is a
privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide mortgage liens attached to the real
property to which the city's lien attaches.
(4) A city official, agent, or employee, acting under the authority granted by this section, may enter any unoccupied
premises at a reasonable time to inspect, investigate, or enforce the powers granted under this section. After providing a
minimum of 24 hours' notice to the occupant, a city official, agent or employee acting under the authority of this section
may enter any occupied premises to inspect, investigate, or enforce the powers granted under this section. The city and its
officials, agents, or employees shall be immune from liability for any acts or omissions not knowingly done that are
associated with actions taken in an effort to eliminate the dangerous conditions posed by an enclosure or fence that is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/422
damaged, deteriorated, substandard, dilapidated, or otherwise in a state that poses a hazard to the public health, safety, and
welfare, and for any previous or subsequent conditions on the property.
(E) Notice and hearing.
(1) This subsection provides the notice and hearing requirements for the application of any measures prescribed in
subsection (D).
(2) Notice.
(a) Notice of the hearing shall be provided to the owner of, or person who has right of possession to, the property,
on which the defective enclosure or fence is located, by personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested;
(b) The notice shall include a description of the violation of this section, and the place, date, and time of the
hearing.
(3) Hearing.
(a) The hearing shall be before the city manager;
(b) The hearing may be scheduled no earlier than 72 hours after the time notice was delivered;
(c) The city manager may order the owner to correct the defective enclosure, and prescribe the time period to
complete such correction or, after consultation with the city attorney, order the city to correct the defective enclosure
pursuant to subsection (D); and
(d) In exigent circumstances, as determined by the city manager, after consultation with the city attorney, the city
manager may order the correction to a defective enclosure that poses an immediate danger to public health or safety,
without adherence to the notice and hearing provisions of this subsection.
(F) Application for permit and fees.
(1) Application. Any owner, operator or person in control of a public swimming pool, spa or PIWF must make a
written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The application must contain the name and
address of each applicant, the location and type of the swimming pool, spa or PIWF, and the applicable fee. Renewals of
permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial permit.
(2) Inspection. Prior to the issuance of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority
shall inspect the public swimming pool, spa, or PIWF to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A public pool or
PIWF that does not comply with state laws and rules may be denied a permit or the renewal of a permit. The
establishment shall remain closed until the corrections are made to bring the establishment into compliance.
(3) Review of plans. Whenever a public swimming pool, spa or PIWF is constructed or remodeled, properly prepared
plans and specifications for such construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for
review before work is begun. All plans submitted shall bear the stamp of the designing professional engineer. The plans
and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of
materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The approved plans and
specifications must be followed in construction or remodeling.
(4) Inspections. Public swimming pools, spas, of PIWFs shall be inspected a minimum of once during a calendar year
or upon receipt of a complaint where additional inspections shall be performed as deemed necessary to protect against
public health hazards or nuisances.
(5) Fees. The city council shall establish by resolution a fee schedule to be paid in connection with this section. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the city secretary and may be amended only by action of the city council.
(H) Violations.
(1) Any person who intentionally, knowingly recklessly, or criminally negligently violates a provision of this section
and any person who is the holder of a permit or who otherwise operates a public swimming pool, spa, or PIWF that does
not comply with the requirements of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to
a fine not to exceed the maximum amount authorized by law for violation of a city ordinance, as set forth in Section 10.99
of this code. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(2) In addition to the criminal penalties prescribed by this subsection, the city, by direction of its city council or city
manager, may avail itself to any available remedy available administratively, or by law or equity, including but not limited
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/422
to civil monetary penalties and injunction of any violation of this section.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ord. 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord. 1137-13-03-26, passed 3-26-13) Penalty, see §
150.99
§ 150.21 RESERVED.
Editor's note--Former section 150.21, pertaining to trench safety and deriving from Ordinance 295-89-01-10, adopted January 10, 1989, was deleted in its
entirety by Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, adopted December 14, 2010.
§ 150.22 SIDEWALKS.
(A) The installation of sidewalks shall be required in connection with new construction on a:
(1) Residential lot in a subdivision approved after March 17, 1980; or
(2) Commercial lot.
(B) Construction of sidewalks shall conform to the standards set out in the city's Subdivision Ordinance.
(C) The Building Official is authorized to permit sidewalks that do not comply with the minimum required sidewalk width set out
in the Subdivision Ordinance in those areas where the width of the dedicated right-of-way will not allow compliance with such
requirements.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 150.99
Cross-reference--Streets and Sidewalks, see Chapter 96; Subdivisions, see Chapter 157.
§ 150.23 CONCRETE WORK.
Concrete work done in connection with new construction shall be in conformance with the following requirements:
(A) Concrete flatwork placed within a street right-of-way, including but not limited to sidewalks, driveways, curbs, and
gutters, shall be bedded with at least two inches of clean washed sand.
(B) Concrete curbs and gutters within a street right-or-way which are removed to allow access to a lot shall be saw-cut
at all construction joints or otherwise cut so as to produce a clean, even joint.
(C) Expansion joints shall be installed at the property line of concrete driveways and at all joints between new and
existing construction.
(D) Sidewalk ramps for handicap access shall be located at each intersection of a sidewalk and street.
(E) The area between the curb and sidewalk shall be excavated or filled to provide a uniform grade comparable to the
adjacent street grade and shall be located so that ground level at the right-of-way line is no more than two feet, nor less
than three inches, above or below the adjacent curb grade.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10) Penalty, see § 150.99
§ 150.24 CONSTRUCTION DEBRIS.
All construction sites must be kept clean. Trash and debris associated with any construction may not be allowed to migrate to other
lots, properties, or rights-of-way. Each new construction site or lot must have a solid-sided trash container of at least eight feet square
and four feet high. The trash in the container must be removed and properly disposed of without allowing the container to be
overfilled. All trash or debris that drifts or spills onto the site, other lots, properties, or rights-of-way must be picked up and securely
placed in the trash container or otherwise properly disposed of on a daily basis.
(Ord. 453-97-02-25, passed 2-25-97; Am Ord. 532-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.25 WATER CUTOFF VALVES.
A water cutoff valve must be installed adjacent to the water meter box on the customer's side of the meter. This valve must be in a
separate box that is at least six inches in diameter. The box must have a metal lid that is located level with or about the finished
grade. The valve must uncovered and accessible upon completion of the water service being connected. If the valve box is located in
a paved or other drive area, the box and lid must be of a type approved for such an area. The valve box in nondrive areas must be
equal to or exceed PVC SDR-35.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/422
(Ord. 453-97-02-25, passed 2-25-97; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.26 SEWER LINE CLEANOUTS.
A sewer line cleanout must be installed at the property line or at the point of connection to the public sewer system whichever is
closer to the building served by the line. This cleanout must be equal in size to the sewer line it is servicing; however, a six-inch
cleanout is the maximum required unless otherwise required by the plumbing code. This cleanout is in addition to the cleanouts
required by the plumbing code; but if this cleanout is within five feet of a cleanout required by the plumbing code, then only the
cleanout required by the plumbing code is needed. This cleanout must be level with or above the finished grade. If the cleanout is
located in a paved area or other driving area it must be constructed to withstand such use, otherwise it must be of the same material
as the sewer line or heavier. The lid must be a screw on type and approved for such use.
(Ord. 453-97-02-25, passed 2-25-97; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.27 WATER LINES UNDER SIDEWALKS.
Water lines must be continuous, without connections or joint and sleeved, under sidewalks for residential construction.
(Ord. 453-97-02-25, passed 2-25-97; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.28 SIDEWALKS.
Sidewalks may be continuous without joints; however, where joints are utilized, the sidewalk joint must be made with the use of #3
rebar dowels 12 inches in length spaced a minimum of 24 inches on center.
(Ord. 453-9 7-02-25, passed 2-25-97: Am. Ord. 742-04-03-09, passed 3-9-04; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.29 FILLING TRENCHES.
Whenever a trench is dug that will be under the sidewalk, driveway, or any other concrete, if the trench is made with anything other
than a trencher that digs a trench wider than six inches, the trench must be backfilled with wetted sand or the fill dirt must be
compacted by mechanical means. Fill dirt may not contain rocks or stones larger than 1/2 inch in diameter.
(Ord. 453-97-02-25, passed 2-25-97; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.30 PORTABLE TOILETS.
Each construction site or lot must have a properly maintained portable toilet. Two adjacent construction sites or lots under common
ownership and concurrent construction may share a portable toilet. All portable toilets must remain on the construction site
throughout the construction process and must not be placed in the street, on a utility easement or in a right-of-way. Portable toilets
must be periodically serviced to prevent unclean conditions and regularly monitored to ensure proper functioning and location. The
portable toilet must be removed within two working days after construction is complete.
(Ord. 532-99-02-23, passed 2-23-99; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§§ 150.35–150.39 RESERVED.
Editor's Note--Former section 150.35, pertaining to the application of the building code to the construction code and deriving from Ordinance 295-89-01-10,
adopted January 10, 1989, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 936-8-02-26, adopted February 26, 2008. Former section 150.36, pertaining to the building
official and deriving from Ordinance 295-89-01-10, adopted January 10, 1989, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 936-8-02-26, adopted February 26,
2008. Former section 150.37, pertaining to inspection and deriving from Ordinance 295-89-01-10, adopted January 10, 1989, was repealed in its entirety by
Ordinance 936-8-02-26, adopted February 26, 2008. Former section 150.38, pertaining to building permit periods and deriving from Ordinance 357-92-8-11,
adopted August 11, 1992, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 936-8-02-26, adopted February 26, 2008. Former section 150.39, pertaining to final
inspections and deriving from Ordinance 357-92-8-11, adopted August 11, 1992, was repealed in its entirety by Ordinance 936-8-02-26, adopted February 26,
2008.
§ 150.40 APPEALS.
(A) General. The Board of Adjustment created under the charter shall sit ex-officio as the Board of Appeals under the City
Construction Code or any element thereof. This section shall govern appeals taken from actions of an administrative official pursuant
to the City Construction Code, or any element thereof.
(B) Basis. Appeals may be made to the Board of Adjustment by an aggrieved person:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/422
(1) Where it is alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of this chapter; or
(2) To authorize in specific cases such variances from the terms of this chapter or the City Construction Code as will
not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter or the City Construction Code will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the spirit of this chapter and the
City Construction Code shall be observed and substantial justice done.
(C) Procedure.
(1) A written application for appeal to the Board of Adjustment must be taken within 15 days after the decision from
which an appeal is taken has been rendered. The application shall be filed with the City Secretary, specifying the grounds
therefor, and shall be accompanied by payment of fee as prescribed in § 150.41.
(2) The officer from whom the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(D) Hearing.
(1) The Board shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it. At the public hearing any interested party may
appear in person, by agent, or by attorney. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish the necessary facts to
warrant favorable action by the board on any appeal. Any interpretation or variance granted or authorized by the Board
under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the issuance of a building permit in accordance with the interpretation
or variance, provided that all other requirements of this chapter are met.
(2) Notice of such public hearing shall be given by publishing the same in the official newspaper of the city at least one
time, not less than 15 days prior to the date set for the hearing, stating the time and place of such hearing.
(E) Stay. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action that is appealed, unless the official from whom the appeal is
taken certifies in writing to the Board facts supporting the official's opinion that a stay would cause imminent peril to life or property.
In that case, the proceedings may be stayed only be restraining order granted by the Board or a court of record on application, after
notice to the official, if due cause is shown.
Statutory reference–V.T.C.A., Texas Local Gov't. Code, sec. 211.010(c).
(F) Decision of Board.
(1) The Board shall decide the appeal within 45 days from the date of its filing with the City Secretary.
(2) In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the State of Texas, as
existing or hereafter amended, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or modify the order, requirement, decision, or
determination appealed from, make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and have all
the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. The Board shall have the power to impose reasonable conditions
to be complied with by the applicant.
(3) The concurring vote of three-fourths of the members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any such administrative official, to decide in favor of the applicant on any
matter upon which it is required to pass under this chapter, or to effect any variance in the chapter.
(G) Rehearings.
(1) No appeal to the Board for the same or related matter shall be allowed to be brought by the same applicant prior to
the expiration of six months from a previous ruling by the Board on any appeal to such body.
(2) If other property in the immediate vicinity has, within the six-month period in subsection (1), above, been changed
or acted on by the board or City Council so as to alter the facts and conditions on which the previous Board action was
based, such change of circumstances shall permit the rehearing of an appeal by the Board prior to the expiration of the
six-month period.
(3) Any alterations in facts or conditions shall in no way have any force on law to compel the Board, after a rehearing,
to grant a subsequent appeal. Such subsequent appeal shall be considered entirely on its merits and on the peculiar and
specific conditions related to the property on which the appeal is brought.
(H) Appeal of Board's Decision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/422
(1) Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer or any officer or
board of the municipality may present to a court of jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or on part, specifying the grounds of illegality.
(2) The petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board
and not thereafter.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ord. 321-90-08-14, passed 8-14-90; Ord. 667-02-05-28, passed 5-28-02; Am. Ordinance
1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.41 FEES.
(A) Establishment. The City Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid in connection with applications
under this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be filed with this chapter in the office of the City Secretary and may be amended only
by action of the City Council.
(B) Administration.
(1) All applicable fees shall be paid at the time of submission of an application under this chapter and are
nonrefundable.
(2) No action shall be taken with respect to any application requiring payment of a fee under this chapter until such fee
has been paid in full.
(3) A receipt for all fees paid under this chapter shall be furnished to the person paying, and such fees shall be turned
over to the City Treasurer.
(C) Reinspection Fees. Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B)(1) above, reinspection fees shall be billed to the permit
holder by the Building Official and paid directly to the Building Official.
(D) Conflicting Fee Schedules. In event of conflict between the City Construction Code, or any part thereof, and the fee schedule
set forth in this chapter, this chapter shall be construed to prevail, and the City Construction Code, or such parts as are in conflict
with the permit schedule set forth in this chapter, to the extent of said conflict, shall be considered as not having been enacted.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10)
§ 150.99 PENALTY.
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction,
be fined in an amount not to exceed the following:
(A) $2,000.00 for violations of the International Plumbing Code and International Fire Code; or
(B) $500.00 for violations of all other codes in this chapter.
Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense.
(Ord. 295-89-01-10, passed 1-10-89; Ord, 778-05-03-22, passed 3-22-05; Am. Ordinance 1064-10-12-14, passed 12-14-10; Ord.
1270-16-07-12, § 12, passed 7-12-16)
Statutory reference–V.T.C.A., Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, sec. 214.01.
CHAPTER 151: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
§ 151.02 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/422
ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING. Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex
and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow
paths.
APEX. A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes
unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL. A request for a variance from the requirements of this chapter or for the review of an interpretation made by the Floodplain
Administrator of any provision of this chapter.
APPURTENANT STRUCTURE. A structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be insured and the
use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD. The land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-
year) flood based on future conditions hydrology.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING. A zone designated as AO, AH, or VO on a communitys flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and
having a 1% or greater chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet in any given year. An area of shallow flooding
does not have a clearly defined channel, does have an unpredictable path of flooding, may show evidence of a velocity flow, and may
have flooding characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. Any land situated in floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. Such area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been
completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, Al-99, VO, V1-30, VE,
or V.
BASE FLOOD. A flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION. The elevations shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones A, AE, AH, Al-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicated the water surface elevation resulting from
the flood that has a 1-percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year.
BASEMENT. Any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.
BREAKAWAY WALL. A wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and
construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or
supporting foundation system.
CRITICAL FEATURE. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection
provided by the entire system would be compromised.
DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other
structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment of materials.
ELEVATED BUILDING. For insurance purposes, a nonbasement building which has its lowest elevated floor raised above ground
level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
EXISTING CONSTRUCTION or EXISTING STRUCTURES. For the purposes of determining flood insurance rates, structures for
which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective
before that date.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before
the effective date of the floodplain management regulations of the city.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. The preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY. An examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion
hazards.
FLOOD or FLOODING. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the
overflow of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/422
FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP or FHBM. An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management
Agency has delineated the boundaries of flood or mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas having special hazards and
designated such areas as Zones A, M, and/or E.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP or FIRM. An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency
has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency containing flood
profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOOD-PRONE AREA. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of
flooding).
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT. The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood
damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS. Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications
of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the
purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM. Those physical structural works, such as hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees, or
dikes, for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed in conformance with
sound engineering standards specifically to modify flooding and to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to
“special flood hazard” and the depths of associated flooding.
FLOOD PROOFING. Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce
or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated
height.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE. A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close
proximity to water. The term includes docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or
passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls
of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually, or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing, in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior);
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of
a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic
district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places under any such program which has been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior;
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places under any such local program that has been certified:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior if the State of Texas has no such approved program.
LEVEE. A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering
standards, to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and
drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area of a building, including the basement. An unfurnished or floodresistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/422
considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of §60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes, the
term MANUFACTURED HOME also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater
than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes, the term MANUFACTURED HOME does not include park trailers, travel
trailers, and other similar vehicles.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A parcel (or continuous parcels) of land divided into two or more
manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MEAN SEA LEVEL. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929
or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's FIRM are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION. For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures, for which ”start of construction” commenced on
or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures; floodplain management, structures for which “start of construction” commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the city, and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations by the city.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projections; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use
as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
REPETITIVE LOSS. Flood related damage sustained by a structure on two separate occasions during a 10-year period for which the
cost of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on the average, equals or exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
RIVERINE. Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
START of CONSTRUCTION. (For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act
(Pub. L. 97-348)) includes substantial improvement and means the date of issuance of a building permit, provided the actual start of
construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means
either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of a slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a
foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; the installation of streets
and/or walkways; the excavation for basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erections of temporary forms; nor the
installation of on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure.
STRUCTURE. A walled and roofed building situated principally above ground and includes manufactured homes and gas or liquid
storage tanks.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before
damaged condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds
50% of the market value of the structure either: (1) before the improvement or repair is started, or (2) if the structure has been
damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purpose of this definition SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT is
considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either (1) any project for
improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or (2) any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a
State Inventory of Historic Places.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/422
VARIANCE. Relief from the requirements of this chapter when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship, thereby
permitting construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. (For full requirements see §60.6 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations).
VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully in compliance with the community's flood plain management
regulations. A structure or other development without an elevation certificate or other required certifications or evidence of
compliance, as required in §§60.3 (b) (5), (c) (4), (c) (10), (d) (3), (e) (2), (e) (4), or (e) (5) of the National Flood Insurance Program
regulations, are presumed to be in violation until such time as the required documentation is obtained.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum,
where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the flood plains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 379-93-05-25, passed 5-25-93; Ord. 970-08-10-14, passed 10-14-08; Ord. 1180-14-
06-24, § 1, passed 6-24-14)
§ 151.03 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
The regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the corporate limits of the city.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
§ 151.04 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering
report entitled “The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Travis County and Incorporated Areas,” dated August 18, 2014, with
accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated August 18, 2014, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 379-93-05-25, passed 5-25-93; Ord. 970-08-10-14, passed 10-14-08; Ord. 1180-14-
06-24, § 2, passed 6-24-14)
§ 151.05 COMPLIANCE.
No structure or tract of land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and other applicable regulations.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.06 INTERPRETATION.
(A) In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the provisions shall be deemed to be minimum requirements, shall
be liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and shall be deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes.
(B) It is not intended by this chapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between
parties, or any statute, local ordinance, or regulation, except that, if this chapter imposes a greater restriction or higher standards, this
chapter shall control.
(C) The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by
manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within
such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the community or any
official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully
made thereunder.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
DEVELOPMENT PERMITS
§ 151.20 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
A development permit shall be required for all development located within any flood-prone area of the city to ensure conformance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/422
§ 151.21 PERMIT APPLICATION.
(A) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by the City
Secretary to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency
Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(B) A development permit application shall be accompanied by:
(1) Payment of the fee set out in § 151.57;
(2) Two sets of site-plans drawn to scale including the following:
(a) Location, dimensions, and elevation of all proposed landscape alterations, and existing and proposed
structures, and their location in relation to areas of special flood hazard;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level: (i) of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new and
substantially improved strictures; and (ii) to which any nonresidential structure is proposed to be floodproofed;
(3) Certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that the structural design, specifications, and plans
for the construction of any nonresidential structure is in accordance with the floodproofing criteria set out in § 151.36(B)
of this chapter; and
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage is proposed to be altered or relocated as a
result of proposed development.
(C) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain detailed written records of each development permit application.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 970-08-10-14, passed 10-14-08)
§ 151.22 BASIS FOR GRANTING PERMIT.
The decisions of the Floodplain Administrator to either approve or deny an application for a development permit shall be based on
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and on the following additional factors:
(A) Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(B) Susceptibility of the proposed structure and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the
individual owner;
(C) Danger that material may be swept away from the site onto other property resulting in possible injury;
(D) Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(E) Accessibility to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(F) Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of
streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
(G) Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(H) Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(I) Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; and
(J) Relationship of the proposed use to the city's comprehensive plan for that area.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 151.35 GENERAL STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following general standards shall be required:
(A) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/422
(1) Designed or modified and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) Constructed:
(a) By methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
(b) With materials resistant to flood damage; and
(c) With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service
facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
(B) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system.
(C) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood
waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters.
(D) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during
flooding.
(E) In any area that has been removed from the floodplain via a Letter of Map Revision Based on Fill (LOMR-F), any
existing or new structure, addition, or substantial improvement must meet the required elevation freeboard requirements.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Ord. 1180-14-06-24, § 3, passed 6-24-14)
§ 151.36 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in: §§ 151.04, 151.55 (B)(8), and
151.37 (B), the following standards shall be required:
(A) New construction of substantial improvements of any residential structure (or manufactured home) shall have the
lowest floor, including basement, mechanical and utility equipment, and ductwork, elevated no lower than two (2) feet
above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit an elevation
certificate to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection is met.
(B) New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial, or other nonresidential structure
shall:
(1) Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to no lower than two (2) feet above the base flood
elevation; or
(2) Be floodproofed to a level no lower than two (2) feet above the level of the base flood elevation, provided that
all areas of the building (including mechanical and utility equipment) below the required elevation are watertight.
A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the designs and methods of construction are in accordance with
accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the
specific elevation in relation to mean sea level to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the
floodplain administrator.
(C) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be
installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured
homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may
include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to
applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(D) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zone AE on the community's
FIRM on sites: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or
subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood; be
elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to no lower than two
(2) feet above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/422
(E) Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured
home park or subdivision within zone AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of subsection
(D) of this section be elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is no lower than two (2) feet above the
base flood elevation.
(F) Enclosures for new construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor
that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are
subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for
the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(G) Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM
either (1) be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, or (2) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (3)
meet the permit requirements of § 151.21, and the elevation and anchoring requirements for “manufactured homes” in
subsections (C), (D), and (E) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently
attached additions.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 970-08-10-14, passed 10-14-08; Ord. 1180-14-06-24, §§ 4–7, passed 6-24-14)
§ 151.37 STANDARDS FOR PROPOSED SUBDIVISIONS.
(A) All proposed subdivisions, including manufactured home parks, shall:
(1) Be in conformance with the provisions of this chapter;
(2) Have adequate drainage measures in order to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and
(3) Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed so as to
minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(B) In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevation for all subdivision proposals, and other proposed
developments at least 5 acres or 5 lots in size, whichever is the lesser. These studies shall be submitted to FEMA with a request for
map revision.
(1) All preliminary plans for platted subdivisions shall identify the flood hazard area and elevation of the base flood.
(2) All final subdivision plats will provide the boundary of the special flood hazard area, the floodway boundary, base
flood elevations, and finished floor elevations for lots in or immediately adjacent to the SFHA.
(3) Approval shall not be given for streets within a subdivision which would be subject to flooding in the base flood.
All street surfaces must be located at or above the base flood elevation.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Ord. 1180-14-06-24, § 8, passed 6-24-14) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.38 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING.
(A) Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.04, are areas designated as areas of shallow flooding.
These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does
not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable, where velocity flow may be evident, and where flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow.
(B) The following provisions shall apply to areas of shallow flooding:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including
the basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade, at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the
community's FIRM or at least two feet if no depth number is specified on the FIRM.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/422
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM or at least two feet if no depth number is specified on the
FIRM; or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the
structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components
having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the
standards of this section are satisfied.
(4) Drainage paths around structures situated on slopes shall be required within Zones AH or AO to guide flood waters
around and away from such structures.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.39 FLOODWAYS.
Located within areas of special flood hazard established in § 151.04 are areas designated as floodways which have a high erosion
potential and are extremely hazardous due to the velocity of their flood waters which carry debris and potential projectiles. The
following provisions shall apply to floodways:
(A) Encroachments shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development unless certification by a professional registered engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that such
encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base
flood discharge.
(B) Subject to satisfaction of the requirements of division (A), above, all new construction and substantial
improvements situated within a floodway must comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87) Penalty, see § 151.99
§ 151.40 INSPECTION.
(A) Periodic inspection of the site being developed pursuant to this flood damage prevention chapter may be made by the
Floodplain Administrator to check for compliance with the development permit approved for the site. The procedure for inspection
shall conform with the procedures for building inspections insofar as such procedures are reasonably susceptible to such application.
(B) (1) The development permit holder shall request a final inspection of the site development. The Floodplain
Administrator shall perform the final inspection and shall determine whether the development conforms with the plans
and specifications approved for such site.
(2) If the site development does not conform with all the plans and specifications approved for the development site,
the Building Official shall submit to the permit holder a list of deficiencies. The permit holder shall thereafter request a
reinspection and the procedures set forth in division (B)(1) above, shall be repeated.
(C) Until all development for which a development permit was issued is complete and all such development has been approved by
the Floodplain Administrator, no certificate of occupancy nor utility service connection for permanent utility service will be issued or
approved by the city.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.55 FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
(A) The development engineering director is hereby designated as the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the
provisions of this chapter and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management.
(B) Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintenance and holding open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/422
(2) Review of permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites are reasonably safe from flooding;
(3) Review, approval, or denial of all applications for development permits required by this chapter;
(4) Review of all permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those
federal, state, or local governmental agencies (including §404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of
1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required;
(5) Interpretation of the exact location of the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard, when in question;
(6) Notification, in riverine situations, of adjacent communities and the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submission of evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency;
(7) Ascertainment that the flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated portion of a watercourse has been
maintained; and
(8) Obtainment, review, and utilization of any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from federal, state,
or other sources, in order to administer the provisions of this chapter, if such information is not identified by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency in its flood hazard boundary map of the city.
(9) Requiring, when a regulatory floodway has not been designated, that no new construction, substantial
improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones Al-30 and AE on the community's
FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at
any point within the community.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Ord. 1242-16-01-26, passed 1-26-16)
§ 151.56 APPEALS TO BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT.
(A) General. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide appeals under this chapter.
(B) Basis. Written appeals may be made to the Board of Adjustment on the following bases:
(1) Where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement of this chapter.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause that is not contrary to the public interest, a
determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and a determination
that by granting the variance, the spirit of this chapter is observed, substantial justice is done and the variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(C) Procedure.
(1) A written application for appeal to the Board of Adjustment must be taken within 15 days after the decision has
been rendered by the Floodplain Administrator. The application shall be filed with the City Secretary, specifying the
grounds therefor, and shall be accompanied by payment of a fee as prescribed in § 151.57.
(2) The Floodplain Administrator shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers constituting the
record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
(D) Hearing.
(1) The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing on all appeals made to it.
(2) Before a public hearing may be scheduled regarding an appeal, a complete application, which includes the
following items, must be submitted to the Administrator in accordance with the Zoning Code Supplemental Schedule:
(a) Complete application form included in the Zoning Code Supplemental Schedule;
(b) Filing fee; and
(c) Names and addresses of the owners of land within the proposed area and within 200 feet of the boundary of
the area which is the subject of the requested appeal in the form indicated in the Zoning Code Supplemental
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/422
Schedule.
(3) Not later than 15 days before the scheduled public hearing date, notice of the hearing must be published at least one
time in the city's official newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the City, which includes the date of the public
hearing, time of the public hearing, location, and a general description of the request before the Board.
(4) Notice must also include:
(a) Placing signs, in the amount determined by the Administrator on every street right-of-way adjacent to the land
under consideration.
(b) Mailing letters to all owners of land within the boundary and within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject
area that include the date of the public hearing, time of the public hearing, location, and a general description of the
request before the Board.
(E) Stay. An appeal, properly filed as herein provided, shall stay all development proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the Floodplain Administrator shall certify to the Board that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In the event of such exemption from a stay, development proceedings shall not
be stayed except by a restraining order by a court of record properly ordering same.
(F) Decision of the Board.
(1) The Board shall decide the appeal within 45 days from the date of its filing with the Administrator.
(2) The following factors should be considered by the Board in making its determination on any appeal:
(a) Variances for reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, may be granted without regard to the qualification set forth
in the remainder of this division;
(b) The provisions of § 151.22 shall be considered for variances requested for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level; provided, however, that as the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases;
(c) A variance shall not be granted within a designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge, or if any additional threats to public safety, would result;
(d) Only the minimum variance required to afford relief to the applicant shall be granted; and
(e) The granting of the variance shall not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, the creation of nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) The concurring vote of four members of the Board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or
determination of the Floodplain Administrator, to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter on which it is required to
pass under this chapter, or to effect any variance in the chapter.
(4) Any applicant to which a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be
built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be
commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
(G) Appeal of Boards Decision.
(1) Any person or persons, jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer or any officer or
board of the municipality may present to a court of jurisdiction a petition, duly verified, setting forth that such decision is
illegal, in whole or in part, specifying the grounds of illegality.
(2) The petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the office of the Board
and not thereafter.
(H) Report to Federal Emergency Management Agency. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions
involving an appeal and shall report any variance granted by the Board to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 970-08-10-14, passed 10-14-08)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/422
§ 151.57 FEES.
(A) Establishment. The City Council shall establish by resolution a fee structure for fees to be paid at the time of filing an
application for a development permit or an appeal under this chapter. The fees shall be posted in the office of the City Secretary and
may be amended by action of the City Council.
(B) Management.
(1) For each action requiring payment of a fee under this chapter, the City Secretary or a duly authorized designate,
shall:
(a) Maintain a record of all fees paid and of all costs incurred by the city for plan review and for inspection and
reinspection;
(b) Bill the development permit applicant or holder for any costs incurred by the city that exceed the amount of
the fee deposit; and
(c) Refund any unutilized fee deposit at the conclusion of the 45-day period following the termination of the
development process.
(2) The payment of the applicable fee is a prerequisite to any action under this chapter which entails payment of a fee.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
§ 151.58 VIOLATIONS.
In case any property is developed or used in violation of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator is authorized and directed to
institute any appropriate action to assure enforcement and compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87)
§ 151.99 PENALTY.
(A) Any person or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fails to comply herewith or with any
of the requirements hereof, or who shall develop any property in violation of any development plan submitted and permit approved
hereunder, shall be liable to a maximum fine of not more than $500 for each day any such violation shall continue. Each violation
may be considered a separate offense. The owner or owners of any property or premises, or part thereof, where anything in violation
of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder, contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed
in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense,
and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as herein provided.
(B) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 254-87-04-28, passed 4-28-87; Am. Ord. 260-87-08-11, passed 8-11-87)
CHAPTER 152: IMPACT FEES
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.01 TITLE.
This chapter will be known, and may be cited, as the Impact Fee Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
§ 152.02 DEFINITIONS.
(A) For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions will apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the city and ad hoc voting
members of the Commission appointed to advise and assist the city in the adoption, implementation, monitoring, and evaluation of
land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees.
CH. 395. Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, Ch. 395, and any amendment, codification, or recategorization of the statute.
CREDIT. The amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payment, or charges for, or construction of, the same type of facility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/422
DEVELOPER. A property owner or owners, or their duly appointed representative, who propose to develop a tract of land within the
corporate limits or extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city so as to increase the number of service units required for the tract of land.
PLATTED or PLATTING. Platted in accordance with Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, Ch. 212, or the subdivision or platting procedures of the
city.
ROADWAY FACILITIES. Arterial or collector streets or roads that have been designated on an officially adopted roadway plan of a
political subdivision, together with all necessary appurtenances. The term does not include any roadways or associated improvements
designated on the federal or state highway system.
SERVICE AREA. The land area served by capital improvements plan projects. This includes the entire area inside the city limits and
other areas surrounding the city limits, as shown on Exhibit A, attached to Ordinance 1179-14-06-10.
WASTEWATER FACILITY. An improvement for the provision of wastewater collection and treatment, including, but not limited to,
land or easements, treatment facilities, lift stations, or interceptor mains.
WATER FACILITY. An improvement for the provision of water supply, treatment and distribution service, including, but not limited
to, land or easements, water treatment facilities, water supply facilities or water distribution lines.
(B) The following terms used in this chapter will be as defined in:
(1) Ch. 395, § 395.001:
(a) “Capital Improvement”;
(b) “Capital Improvements Plan”;
(c) “Facility Expansion”;
(d) “Impact Fee”;
(e) “Land Use Assumptions”;
(f) “New Development”;
(g) “Political Subdivision”; and
(h) “Service Unit.”
(2) Ch. 395, § 395.016(f): “Assessment.”
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 891-07-
06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
§ 152.03 INCORPORATION OF STATE LAW.
Tex. Loc. Gov't Code, Ch. 395 supplements this chapter to the extent that its provisions may be applicable and, to such extent, its
provisions are incorporated in this chapter for all purposes. (Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-
12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01)
§ 152.04 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
(A) Capital Improvements Plan. The capital improvements plan identifying capital improvements or facility expansions for which
impact fees may be assessed, that was considered at the March 25, 2014, public hearing and is attached as Exhibit B to Ordinance
1179-14-06-10, is approved and adopted.
(B) Periodic Updates. The land use assumptions and the capital improvements plan upon which the impact fees are based will be
updated at least every five years. Alternatively, the city council may, pursuant to Texas Local Government Code, § 395.0575, make a
determination that no update is required.
(C) Establishment. Pursuant to TEX. LOC. GOV'T CODE, Ch. 395, an impact fee is established to be assessed and collected as set
forth in this chapter against each service unit of new development to generate revenues for funding or recouping the costs of capital
improvements or facility expansions for water and wastewater facilities necessitated by and attributable to the new development.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 891-07-
06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/422
IMPLEMENTATION OF IMPACT FEE
§ 152.15 TIME OF ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION OF IMPACT FEE.
(A) For new development that was platted before the adoption of Ordinance No. 1179-14-06-10, the city will assess and collect the
impact fee in effect at the time the building permit is issued or the application is made for an individual connection to the municipal
water or wastewater system.
(B) For development that is platted after the adoption of the initial impact fee ordinance, as described in § 152.15(A), the impact
fee is assessed against each service unit of land and shall be the fee in effect at the time the final platting is approved. Except as
provided for in § 395.019 of the Texas Local Government Code:
(1) For parties within the municipal corporate boundaries, the assessment is made and collected at the time of issuance
of building permit.
(2) For land platted outside the corporate boundaries, the assessment is made and collected at the time an application is
made for an individual connection to the municipal water or wastewater system.
(3) Where the City of Pflugerville lacks the authority to issue building permits in the area where the fee applies, the fee
shall be assessed and collected at the time an application is made for an individual connection to the municipal water or
wastewater system.
(C) The impact fee is assessed against each service unit of land on which any new development occurs or is proposed without
additional platting. Except as provided for in § 395.019 of the Texas Local Government Code, the assessment and collection is made
on the date a building permit is issued, or, if no building permit is required, on the first day a service application is made for
connection to the municipal water and/or wastewater system. At the latest, the impact fee must be collected at the time of connection
to the city's water or wastewater system.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 704-03-
05-13, passed 5-13-03; Ord. 891-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
§ 152.16 WHEN SERVICE NOT AVAILABLE.
The impact fee will be assessed but not collected in areas where service is not currently available unless the city and the developer
enter into a written agreement for earlier fee payment whereby:
(A) The city commits to commence construction of necessary water and wastewater facilities identified in the capital
improvements plan within two years and to have service available in a reasonable period of time, not exceeding five
years; or
(B) The city agrees to reserve capacity to serve future development; or
(C) The city agrees to permit the developer to construct or finance the required capital improvement or facility
expansion and that:
(1) The costs incurred or funds advanced will be credited against the impact fee otherwise due from the new
development; or
(2) The developer will be reimbursed for the costs from the impact fee paid from other new developments that
will use such capital improvements or facility expansions, in which case fees will be reimbursed to the developer at
the time collected.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01)
§ 152.17 PAYMENT.
(A) Payment of the impact fees assessed and collected pursuant to this chapter must be delivered to the City Finance Officer, or
his/her designee.
(B) Written agreements providing for the time and method of payment of the impact fee between the city and a developer of
property for which service is not currently available will prevail over any contrary provisions of this chapter.
(C) If the impact fee has not been paid within 30 days of the date required in §152.15, the Building Official may order any work
stopped by serving written notice on any persons engaged in, doing or causing the work to be done, and any those persons must
immediately cease the work until authorized by the Building Official to proceed with the work after payment of the impact fee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/422
(D) A certificate of occupancy may not be issued or approved before payment of the impact fee.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01)
§ 152.18 CALCULATION.
(A) In this section the term “calculated amount” means the number of service units multiplied by the amount of the impact fee to
be collected per service unit.
(B) The number of service units is determined at the time of:
(1) Assessment, by reference to the capital improvements plan attached as Exhibit B to Ordinance 1179-14-06-10.
(2) Collection, in accordance with the meter size required and the following table:
Meter Size Service Units
Apartment unit 0.5
5/8 inch 1
3/4 inch 1.5
1 inch 2.5
1-1/2 inches 5
2 inches 8
2 inches turbine meter 10
3 inches 16
3 inches turbine meter 24
4 inches compound meter 25
4 inches turbine meter 42
6 inches compound meter 50
6 inches turbine meter 92
8 inches compound meter 80
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/422
8 inches turbine meter 160
10 inches compound meter 115
10 inches turbine meter 250
12 inches turbine meter 330
(C) The calculated amount of an impact fee is reduced by any allowable credit as provided by § 152.22.
(D) Replatting does not require recalculation of the impact fee unless the number of service units is increased. If a new
development increases the number of service units, the impact fee is recalculated as provided by subsection (B), above.
(E) The calculated amount will be increased if the number of service units attributable to new development increases, in which
case the calculated amount is increased in an amount equal to the impact fee then in effect multiplied by the increased number of
service units.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 926-08-
01-22, passed 1-8-08; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
§ 152.19 IMPACT FEE AMOUNT.
(A) The amount of the impact fee for water and wastewater facilities are applied based on service area. (Exhibit A to Ordinance
1179-14-06-10.)
(B) Effective July 1, 2014, the impact fee for each service unit is:
Basin Water Impact Fee Wastewater Impact Fee Total
Central $4,241.00 $2,725.00 $6,966.00
Cottonwood N/A $3,537.00 $3,537.00
(C) An impact fee is assessed and collected only for the utility service(s) capacity reserved, be it water or wastewater.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 704-03-
05-13, passed 5-13-03; Ord. 891-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
§ 152.20 ACCOUNTING.
The impact fee will be deposited in an interest bearing account that clearly identifies the category of capital improvement or facility
expansion within the service area for which the fee is adopted. Interest earned is credited to the account and is subject to the same
restrictions on expenditures as the funds generating such interest. The impact fee and the interest earned thereon may be spent only
for the purposes for which the fee was imposed as shown in the capital improvements plan. (Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93;
Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01)
§ 152.21 USE OF FEE PROCEEDS.
Impact fee proceeds may only be used to pay the cost of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the
Capital Improvements Plan, including and limited to: the construction contract price; surveying and engineering fees; land
acquisition costs; fees paid to a qualified consultant preparing the capital improvements plan and impact fee study who is not an
employee of the city; and projected interest and finance charges, if the impact fees are used for the payment of principal and interest
on bonds, notes or other obligations to finance projects identified in the Capital Improvements Plan.
§ 152.22 CREDITS AND REIMBURSEMENTS.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/422
(A) Where, in order to serve new development, the developer is required to construct, contribute, contribute to, or dedicate, a
capital improvement or facility expansion identified in the capital improvements plan (Exhibit B to Ordinance 1179-14-06-10) the
developer may enter into an agreement with the city whereby the developer is:
(1) Credited for the capital improvement or facility expansion against the impact fee otherwise due from the new
development; or
(2) Reimbursed for all or a portion of the costs of the capital improvement or facility expansion from impact fees as
received from other new developments that use the capital improvement or facility expansion.
(B) A developer is entitled to a credit against any category of impact fee as may be provided in a written agreement between the
city and the developer.
(C) New development that is subject to this chapter and for which an impact fee was properly prepaid under a previous impact fee
ordinance will be credited with the principal amount of the impact fee paid under that ordinance.
(D) The credit for construction of a capital improvement or facility expansion under this section may not exceed the total amount
of the impact fees collectible from the development for the same category of improvements.
(Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01; Ord. 704-03-
05-13, passed 5-13-03; Ord. 891-07-06-26, passed 6-26-07; Ord. 1179-14-06-10, passed 6-10-14)
§ 152.23 OTHER FEES.
An impact fee is charged in addition to all other fees set out by city ordinance or regulation including, but not limited to, building
permit fees. (Ord. 38-93-10-26, passed 10-26-93; Am. Ord. 524A-99-01-12, passed 1-12-99; Ord. 651-01-10-09, passed 10-09-01)
CHAPTER 153: PLANNING
§ 153.01 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
It is the intent of Ordinance 1050-10-09-28 that the City Council for the City of Pflugerville (the “City”) publish and adopt the
comprehensive plan published as Exhibit “A” to this chapter for use in the daily planning decisions regarding growth, development,
and regulation of current and future development within the corporate city limits of the City and its extra-territorial jurisdiction.
Through its adoption of the comprehensive plan, the City intends to preserve, promote, protect, and improve the public health, safety
and welfare of the general community. The comprehensive plan, as approved and amended by the City Council, shall govern all
development regulations including, but not limited to, land use and related maps, subdivisions and site plans, roadway plans, public
improvements, public utility projects, public facilities, and all city regulatory actions relating to land use, subdivision and
development shall be consistent with the comprehensive plan. It is the intent of this section that all future development shall only be
permitted if prepared in accordance with the provisions of the comprehensive plan.
(A) Planning and Zoning Commission. The comprehensive plan for the City is intended to be a living document that is
periodically revised in accordance with changing socioeconomic conditions and development. In that regard, the Planning
and Zoning Commission shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) The Planning and Zoning Commission will recommend revisions, amendments, extensions, and additions to
the comprehensive plan for the physical development of the city and make recommendations regarding the
comprehensive plan to the City Council.
(2) After the comprehensive plan, or a portion thereof, has been adopted, in accordance with the terms and
provisions of this section, the Planning and Zoning Commission will:
(a) Receive, review, revise, and make recommendations to the City Council on all proposals to adopt or
amend city development regulations related to, among other things, zoning, subdivision, site plan, building
code, transportation, utilities, environmental concerns, and other police powers regarding use or development
of land within the city; and
(b) Conform to the goals and intent of the comprehensive plan.
(3) The Planning and Zoning Commissions will submit annual comments to the City Council, not less than 60
days prior to the beginning of the budget year containing a list of recommended capital improvements, or any other
such items desired or required to keep the comprehensive plan, or any individual element of the plan, current over
the course of time.
(4) The Planning and Zoning Commission will exercise control over platting, subdivision and site plan, as
applicable, in order to ensure consistency with the comprehensive plan, or any individual element of the plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/422
(5) Every 5 years after the date of its adoption, the Planning and Zoning Commission will prepare a thorough
review, analysis and evaluation of the comprehensive plan for the benefit of the City Council.
(6) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform its duties and obligations under this section as an
advisory body to the Council.
(B) Comprehensive Plan Elements. The comprehensive plan shall include the City's policies related to land use,
transportation, and public facilities, both within the corporate limits of the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction. The
comprehensive plan shall include City policies related to the following elements:
(1) Future land use;
(2) Economic development;
(3) Transportation;
(4) Water and wastewater;
(5) Environmental resources;
(6) Affordable housing;
(7) Capital improvement programs;
(8) Recreation and parklands;
(9) Public buildings and related facilities;
(10) Public safety;
(11) Citizen communication;
(12) Urban design;
(13) Annexation; and
(14) Health and human services.
(C) City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission will advise the City Council as to the comprehensive plan, or
any element of the plan. By ordinance, the City Council may then adopt all or a certain individual elements of the
comprehensive plan. The City Council may also adopt additional elements it deems necessary to fulfill the goals and
intent of the comprehensive plan. The City Council shall act on the comprehensive plan, or an element of the plan, within
60 days following its submission to the City Council by the Planning Commission. The City Council may: (1) adopt the
plan as submitted by the Planning Commission; (2) adopt the comprehensive plan with changes or amendments; or (3)
direct the Planning and Zoning Commission to review the comprehensive plan, or a portion thereof, for further study. Any
future proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan shall follow the same process as the original submittal of the
comprehensive plan.
(D) Comprehensive Plan Amendments.
(1) The document entitled “Master Transportation Plan dated April 2015” prepared by the consultants of Brown
and Gay Engineers is hereby incorporated as the transportation element of the comprehensive plan by Ordinance
No. 1217 adopted on May 15, 2015.
(2) The document entitled “Wastewater Master Plan dated September 2013” prepared by the consultants of LAN
is hereby incorporated as the [waste]water element of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance 1167-14-01-14
adopted on January 14, 2014.
(3) The document entitled “Reclaimed Water Master Plan dated January 2015” prepared by the consultants of
DCS is hereby incorporated as the reclaimed water element of the Comprehensive Plan by Ordinance No. 1198-15-
01-27 adopted on January 27, 2015.
(Res. passed 4-28-93; deleted in entirety by Ord. 509-98-10-27, passed 10-27-98; Am. Ord. 766-04-12-28, passed 12-28-04; Ord.
783-05-05-10, passed 5-10-05; Ord. 901-07-08-28, passed 8-28-07; Ord. No. 949-08-05-27, passed 5-27-08; Am. Ordinance 1050-
10-09-28, passed 9-28-10; Ord. 1167-14-01-14, passed 1-14-14; Ord. 1198-15-01-27, passed 1-27-15; Ord. 1217-15-05-12, passed 5-
12-15)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/422
§ 153.02 OLD TOWN PFLUGERVILLE VISION REPORT.
The Old Town Pflugerville Vision Report, as adopted by the city council, is maintained on file in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. 988-09-03-10, passed 3-10-09)
EXHIBIT A
COMPREHESIVE PLAN
Land Use Plan Element
CHAPTER 1 - INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Growth of Pflugerville
Pflugerville is a fast-growing, primarily residential community on the northeastern edge of Austin, Texas. The City's town site was
established in 1904, with sixteen blocks and the depot grounds for the coming Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad. Pflugerville was
incorporated in 1965 and largely remained a farming-centered community well into the 1980s. The rapid growth of the Austin area
during that decade began to change the image of Pflugerville to that of a place where, instead of crops, neighborhoods and families
grew. With a prime source of open land located near Interstate Highway 35, Pflugerville became attractive to housing developers
looking for a place to provide mid-level housing for the growing employment centers of Austin and Round Rock.
Between 1980 and 1990, Pflugerville grew from fewer than 800 people to more than 4,000. In 2000, Pflugerville's population was
16,335 according to the Census Bureau. The City's population estimate in January 2004 was 25,480. The area within Pflugerville's
city limits has grown considerably also–it currently contains 13.7 square miles. Including the city's current two-mile extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ), Pflugerville covers 39.2 square miles. In 1993, the City limits and ETJ combined covered 8 square miles. With the
selection of the final alignments for State Highways 130 (SH 130) and 45 (SH 45) and the beginning of their construction,
Pflugerville's growth is expected to continue, as these roadways are expected to open up additional growth and development
opportunities.
Comprehensive Planning and Pflugerville's Past Planning Efforts
A comprehensive plan, commonly referred to as a master plan or long range plan, typically refers to a map and/or a set of policies
intended to guide the physical development of a community for a 20 to 30 year period. Comprehensive plans usually cover a series
of interrelated subject areas, such as land use, transportation, utilities, public safety, and parks and recreation. The plan also serves as
a basis for future development recommendations and decisions. According to Texas law, a city's zoning regulations must be adopted
in accordance with a comprehensive plan. The comprehensive plan does not establish zoning district boundaries, however, nor does
it constitute zoning regulations. Exhibit 1-1 is a list of the proposed comprehensive plan elements for Pflugerville.
Pflugerville's earliest comprehensive planning effort addressed the transportation system and was adopted in 1986. In 1989, this was
supplemented with a plan that addressed additional aspects of Pflugerville's growth. In 1993, the plan was updated to include a future
land use map. This plan was in place until the Land Use and Intermodal Thoroughfare Plan was approved by the City Council on
March 2, 1998. This plan was the result of an opportunities and constraints analysis and a public input process. It contained a future
land use map and a document describing the planning process along with descriptions of Pflugerville's future land uses and
transportation system. A set of policy recommendations was also prepared, but were [was] not adopted.
Community Profile and Effects of Growth
Second only to Cedar Park for cities in the region for the rate of growth in the 1980s, Pflugerville grew primarily due to a huge influx
of families with children. As in Cedar Park and other cities in the Austin region, these families moved to Pflugerville to take
advantage of its mid-priced housing and its desirable school system. The 1990s saw a continuation of the trend for growth in the
1980s, as the number of school-age children grew by 288% during that decade. In order to pay for more schools and more teachers,
the Pflugerville Independent School District had to increase its budget substantially, requiring increases in their tax rate.
The dramatic population growth also placed an increasing demand for services on the City of Pflugerville. New residents placed a
high value on safe neighborhoods, parks and recreation, libraries, and well maintained streets, among other city services. In order to
pay for these services, the City was forced to raise property taxes steadily in the late 1990s to the point where Pflugerville residents
had one of the highest property tax rates in the Austin area by 2001. This is primarily due to the City's dependency on property taxes,
which account for about two-thirds of city tax revenue, or just over 40% of the general fund revenue. Sales taxes only account for
slightly more than 10% of City's general fund revenue. Research has shown that nonresidential commercial property returns more tax
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/422
revenue than is necessary to pay for the services it demands. By comparison, residential property demands more services than can be
paid for through the property taxes it provides.
Keeping pace with the demand for water to supply the new growth was another challenge faced by the City. On February 27, 2004,
the City ceremonially broke ground on the $45 million Colorado River Water Supply Project, which will include the construction of
a reservoir on the eastern edge of town, near the intersection of Pfluger Lane and Weiss Lane. This is the largest capital project ever
undertaken by the City. The bonds for this project will be repaid with the water service rates paid by City water customers, both
existing and new. This financing structure is predicated on the addition of many new water customers in order to keep rates
affordable.
Economic Development Emphasis
The trend of residential versus nonresidential growth was recognized by the City Council and they appointed an Economic
Development Review Committee in February of 2001. The committee consisted of key community stakeholders, Council members
and City staff. Given a general direction to determine ways to achieve a sustainable tax base and to positively manage Pflugerville's
growth, the committee began meeting, with the goal of providing a vision for the future. In August of 2001, the citizens of
Pflugerville voted to form a 4B corporation, an entity provided for under State law, to be funded by a one-half cent sales tax levy.
The proceeds of the sales tax are to be dedicated to economic development projects, intended to diversify the City's tax base. The 4B
corporation is known as the Pflugerville Community Land Development Corporation (PCDC).
In September of 2001, TIP Development Strategies, Inc. was hired by the City to clarify and document the vision begun by the
Economic Development Review Committee. Their work resulted in the Economic Development Strategic Plan adopted by the City
Council on October 8, 2002. The plan identifies four economic development challenges faced by Pflugerville and provides specific
strategies for meeting these challenges. Three of the four challenges are directly related to the land use planning and infrastructure:
(1) the use of land use and planning tools to encourage new business development, (2) the development of the city's transportation
and utility system in order to take advantage of emerging economic development opportunities, and (3) presenting an image of
Pflugerville as a great place to work and live. The Plan contains specific strategies and actions that are recommended in the four
challenge areas. This update of the Land Use and Transportation sections of the Comprehensive Plan is one of the strategies
identified.
Development Quest and the Beginning of the Plan Update
In the meantime, the Council did not wait for the completion of the Economic Development Strategic Plan to begin work on updating
the comprehensive plan. Recognizing that many otherwise well-intentioned citizens may be unwilling to participate due to their lack
of understanding of the issues involved, Mayor Scott Winton suggested that a series of educational sessions be hosted by the City to
improve understanding and awareness of these issues. With funding approved by the City Council, a series of five monthly sessions
were scheduled, utilizing expert speakers from Central Texas. Dubbed “Pflugerville Development Quest” (Development Quest), the
program provided opportunities for citizens to participate in learning about the factors that shape growth and development in cities.
The sessions were held monthly from January through May of 2002.
Utilizing seven expert speakers, citizens were provided with a “tool kit” for becoming more effective in participating in their
government's decision making process. The five sessions covered the main subject areas related to growth and development for a
Texas city: visioning and the planning process, the design of cities, transportation and economic development, the process of
building city infrastructure, and budgeting and programming city services. Speakers came from Central Texas universities, private
land development related businesses, and other local governments. The sessions were successful in large part due to the high quality
of the speakers and their level of knowledge. Since they were also from local sources, they were at least somewhat familiar with the
growth issues facing Pflugerville. All sessions were well attended, averaging about 25 people. In addition, four of the five sessions
were videotaped and replayed on the local cable TV public access channel. Copies of the tapes were also made available at the
Pflugerville community library for check out. Upon completion of the Development Quest project, the Council appointed a working
group on June 11, 2002 to begin the process of updating the comprehensive plan. The Working Group consisted of the members of
the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Pflugerville Community Development Corporation.
Exhibit 1-1: Comprehensive Plan Elements
* Economic Development (adopted on October 8, 2002)
* Land Use
* Transportation
* Utilities
* Urban Design
* Parks and Recreation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/422
* Public Safety
* Facilities and Services
* Citizen Participation
* Housing
* Historic Preservation / Environmental
* Annexation
CHAPTER 2 - LAND USE PLAN ELEMENT
Creation of the Draft Map
The Working Group's first task was to agree upon a set of assumptions for the plan. The subject areas included were those that
related most closely to land use and transportation and included utilities, parks and recreation, central business district and regional
planning. Exhibit 2-1 lists the assumptions adopted by the City Council. The next task was to create a future land use map for
Pflugerville. In three separate teams, the Working Group members created three versions of the land uses they envisioned for the
planning area, which included the current extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). The three versions of the map were later combined into a
single map by the Planning Department staff, maintaining the major features of each map. The Working Group then appointed a subcommittee
to review and analyze the map further.
Land Use Mix Analysis
In a series of meetings, this Land Use Plan sub-committee directed the creation of an extensive cost-benefit analysis model for the
proposed land uses. Using the generally understood assumption that it is more costly to serve residential property than nonresidential
property because of the greater demands placed by residents for city services, a model was created to measure the financial impact
placed on Pflugerville in order to provide services to both residential and nonresidential property. Estimates of revenue generated and
service costs were completed. The taxable values of a variety of residential and commercial properties in Pflugerville were collected
and the net operating cost for city services was calculated. Cost per acre and revenue per acre figures were generated for single
family, multi-family, commercial, and industrial uses. These were then used to estimate a total cost for each land use. These casts
were applied to different combinations of land uses to determine the “ideal mix” of single family, multi-family, commercial, and
industrial uses, based upon a desired tax rate. This analysis and the chosen “ideal mix” is contained in Exhibit 2-2 Ideal Mix.
Selection of the Map
The Land Use Plan subcommittee also developed a second future land use map. Referred to as a ‘schematic' map, it contained
idealized representations of how the various land uses should be arranged throughout the community. Arterial roadways were lined
with a mixture of uses including commercial, multi-family and greenways, buffering the single family areas. Creeks and floodways
were designated, along with buffer zones for each. Also included were four major emphasis areas: the Central Business District and
three areas along the SH 130 corridor - shopping, employment and tourism. This map was determined to closely meet the ideal land
use mix scenario desired by the committee. It was then recommended to, and approved by, the entire Working Group for use in the
comprehensive plan. Exhibit 2-3 was the land use map selected. This map was presented at two public meetings, along with some
early results and conceptual layouts from the transportation element being prepared for the City by Alliance-Texas Engineering,
Transportation Committee
Since the ‘schematic' map did not indicate the location and intensity of specific land uses precisely enough to accurately calculate
future traffic demand, Alliance-Texas recommended that a second subcommittee be formed to provide them with additional
information. This Transportation Committee consisted of members of the Working Group, along with the PCDC Director and one
additional community representative. Through use of the Delphi decision making process, the Committee's opinions provided the
necessary information in several meetings. The results of this process are detailed in the Transportation Element. Following the first
public hearing and presentation of the draft plan elements, the City Council directed the Transportation Committee to provide further
review of the Transportation Element of the draft plan. This constituted Phase II of the committee's work, which ended in September
2004. Exhibit 2-4 is a timeline of the City's comprehensive plan process.
Pfennig Lane Corridor Emphasis Area
Recognizing the need for a transition between future commercial development that will occur along the F.M. 685 corridor and the
low density residential uses that exist south of Pfennig Lane, the Comprehensive Plan has identified the land south of Pfennig Lane
as the “Pfennig Lane Corridor Emphasis Area”. The area is generally bounded on the north by Pfennig Lane; on the south and west
by the Katymead subdivision; and on the east by FM 685.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/422
On July 2007, a Planning Charrette was held with 32 residents in six work groups to define development scenarios for the area. The
participants included residents from the area and property owners along Pfennig Lane, or their representatives. Participants also
included members from the City Council and Planning and Zoning Commission. Each of the groups were responsible for defining a
future scenario for the land south of Pfennig Lane, taking into account the existing roadways, and existing and known proposed
surrounding land uses. Each of the groups presented their recommendations to the full group for the purpose of establishing a
dialogue and reaching a final consensus. The following consensus was reached by the participants and is hereby incorporated into the
Comprehensive Plan as a future guide to development within the Pfennig Lane Corridor Emphasis Area:
* The Pfennig Lane Corridor Emphasis Area should have an internal roadway for interior circulation that includes at
least two connections to Pfennig Lane.
* A connector road should be established north of the Pfennig Lane Corridor Emphasis Area between Pflugerville
Parkway and Pfennig Lane.
* The land uses should transition with any higher intensity retail uses along the Pfennig Lane frontage and low
intensive office/residential uses at the edge of the development adjacent to the Katymead Subdivision. The characteristics
of the residential uses are oriented toward single family or townhouse style development, as opposed to a higher density
multi-family development.
* A buffer area with vegetation, screening and a trail connection should be established along all of the edge of the
Katymead subdivision.
* Highway commercial uses similar to activities being developed for the F.M. 685 corridor are appropriate and
expected along, the F.M. 685 frontage.
* Institutional/civic uses are appropriate in the area surrounding the Justice Center. Retail uses would also be
appropriate in the event institutional/civic uses do not occur.
The resulting land use scenario described above, is represented pictorially below as a result of the charrette conducted.
Exhibit 2-1: Comprehensive Plan Assumptions - Adopted July 9, 2002
Land Use
* The economic market is the single most dominant factor in land use.
* The City will use its full ability to regulate development in the extraterritorial jurisdiction.
* Commercial land uses, including shopping opportunities, are desirable additions to Pflugerville.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/422
* High quality multi-family housing, when balanced with other housing options, is considered a desirable addition to
Pflugerville.
Utilities
* The City will use the provision of utilities to land owners/developers as a tool to control land development.
* The City will coordinate with other utility providers to influence land use decisions.
Central Business District
* City Hall will continue to be located in downtown Pflugerville.
* The development pattern of Downtown Pflugerville is an important factor in maintaining Pflugerville's sense of
community.
Transportation
* The City will continue to participate as a member of the Capital Area Metropolitan Planning Organization (CAMPO).
* The automobile will be the predominant form of transportation.
* Citizens shall be able to walk, drive or ride safely and conveniently in the City of Pflugerville.
* Connectivity between adjacent land uses is important.
* Control of traffic in residential neighborhoods will continue to be an important issue.
* The hike and bike trail system is considered a transportation alternative and is an important amenity of the City of
Pflugerville.
Parks and Recreation
* Neighborhood parks will be provided primarily by land development projects through application of the subdivision
regulations.
* Regional parks will be designed for recreational activities that provide revenue to the City.
* Recreational needs will continue to diversify and change with the population.
* Partnerships with the Pflugerville Independent School District for parks and recreational opportunities will be
necessary to meet the demand for these services.
Regional Planning
The City will participate in appropriate regional planning initiatives and efforts.
Exhibit 2-2: Ideal Mix
Ideal Land Use Mix
(as illustrated on Land Use Plan map)
Proposed Land Uses Acres
General Business 3,552 17%
Industrial 1,467 7%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/422
Single Family
Residential
7,571 36%
Other Residential 2,518 12%
Government & Church 1,142 5%
Park & Open Space 4,722 23%
Total 20,970 100%
Ideal Land Use Mix
(as selected by Land Use Plan Sub-Committee on
2/5/03)
Proposed Land Uses Acres
General Business 3,564.9 17%
Industrial 1,467.9 7%
Single Family
Residential
7,339.5 35%
Other Residential 2,516.4 12%
Government & Church 1,258.2 60/0
Park & Open Space 4,823.1 23%
Total 20,970 100%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/422
Exhibit 2-4: Comprehensive Plan Timeline 2002-2004
* Initial Working Group meeting June 21-22, 2002
* Assumptions adopted July 9, 2002
* Parks and Recreation Commission consulted September 4, 2002
* Downtown (Central Business District) Boundary
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/422
adopted September 10, 2002
amended December 10, 2002
* Economic Development Strategic Plan adopted October 8, 2002
* Draft Land Use Map reviewed by Working Group and
sub-committee formed to further review land uses
October 22, 2002
* Sub-committee analysis and review presented to
Working Group
March 18, 2003
* Transportation Element contract awarded March 25, 2003
* Working Group selects Draft Comprehensive Plan map April 15, 2003
* First public meeting to introduce Draft Land Use Map
and transportation planning work to date
June 17, 2003
* Second public meeting to present Draft Land Use Map
and transportation planning work to date
July 29, 2003
* Transportation Committee formed August 26, 2003
* Final Transportation Committee meeting, Phase I February 23, 2004
* Presentation on Land Use and Transportation Elements
to City Council
March 9, 2004
* Public Hearing on Transportation and Land Use
Elements to City Council
April 13, 2004
* Downtown Master Plan adopted April 13, 2004
* Final Transportation Committee meeting, Phase II September 27, 2004
* Planning and Zoning Commission Public Hearing November 15, 2004
* City Council Public Hearing November 23, 2004
* City Council adoption December 14, 2004
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/422
CHAPTER 3 - STRATEGIES AND ACTIONS
Mix of Land Uses
Determine what is appropriate within each land use classification and emphasis identified on the Comprehensive Plan Map.
* Employment Emphasis Area
* Tourism Emphasis Area
* Shopping Emphasis Area
* Central Business District Emphasis Area
* Commercial/employment/residential/open space mix
* Technology research zoning classification
* Compatibility design and zoning standards
* Performance based standards for zoning
Development Standards
Determine what is appropriate for the land uses and emphasis areas on the Comprehensive Plan Map.
* Central Business District Site Development Code completed and adopted
* General Site Development Code revisions completed and adopted
* Emphasis Area standards and incentives
* Connectivity standards/Streetscape/Trails/Pedestrian connections
* Park land, trails & open space standards
* Roadway requirements and standards
Infrastructure Expansion and Improvement
Water and wastewater coordination with other providers
* Water and wastewater system expansion
* Service to the SH 130 corridor
* Transportation system improvements (as outlined in Transportation Element)
Content and Design of Comprehensive Plan
* Coordinated set of elements
* Used to coordinate and guide the design and establishment of development regulations
* Define relationship between comprehensive plan and the development regulations and provide standards for
determining consistency between the plan and the regulations
Procedures for Preparing, Reviewing, Adopting and Amending Elements of the Comprehensive Plan
* Determine composition of plan element committee
* Set expectations and timeline
* Determine level of public review
* Review by Planning and Zoning or other City Commission(s)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/422
* Adoption by ordinance
* Annual review of completed elements
* Define expectations and level of review
Transportation Plan Element
CHAPTER 1 – INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Introduction
Transportation planning no longer focuses exclusively on the transportation infrastructure itself, addressing only the operational and
capacity issues presented by increasing traffic volumes. Current practice recognizes that the transportation system must facilitate
diverse community needs and goals.
For this reason, a transportation plan element is a strategic effort to design a multi-modal transportation system that functions as a
key component of a community's comprehensive plan. The transportation system must therefore be integrated with land use and
growth patterns, commercial activity, economic development, quality of life imperatives and the needs of special populations.
Creative handling of the transportation/land use connection can provide a balanced transportation system that makes it both pleasing
and efficient for people traveling within the community as well as through it.
Purpose of the Pflugerville Transportation Plan Element
The intent of the Transportation Plan Element (TPE) is to provide Pflugerville's leadership with the planning tools and resources to
help guide development of multi-modal transportation infrastructure that best serves the needs of the community. As Pflugerville
continues to transition from a small town in a predominantly rural setting to a growing and dynamic component of the Greater Austin
metropolitan area, its needs will change. The TPE will allow future growth and change to be safe and consistent.
The TPE for the City of Pflugerville will also make development decisions more predictable and quantifiable, and maximize the
opportunity for project cost sharing with both private and public sector partners.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/422
CHAPTER 2 – THOROUGHFARE PLAN ROADWAY IMPROVEMENT SUMMARY
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/422
CHAPTER 3 – POLICY INITIATIVES
Policy Initiative #1 – Bicycle Routes
Policy Statement
Pflugerville's hike and bike trail system is to be designed to provide for interconnectivity between neighborhoods and community
destinations, such as schools, parks and shopping areas. When necessary, this will include complimentary bicycle routes along
selected collector roadways for the purpose of providing connections that would otherwise not be possible by use of the off-road hike
and bike trail system.
Actions
1. Identify existing and future collector roadways that are suitable for use as bicycle routes for the purpose of providing
connectivity and neighborhood access to the hike and bike trail system.
2. Develop standards for bicycle route signing, striping and other design features.
Guidance
The bicycle routes anticipated in this section of the plan are intended to be low cost routes operating in the roadway of suitable
collector streets. Bicycle operation is intended to be either in mixed traffic with other vehicles or separated only by signing and paint
markers on the roadway.
Policy Initiative #2 – Traffic Calming
Policy Statement
Collector roadways are intended to serve neighborhoods and provide for traffic volumes and vehicle speeds appropriate to the
adjacent land uses. Because the city's arterial street system is not yet complete, some neighborhood collectors tend to carry volumes
and have vehicle speeds more appropriate for arterial streets, resulting in negative impacts on the adjacent neighborhoods. These
negative impacts on neighborhoods are to be reduced.
Actions
1. Identify collector roadways that, because of historical travel patterns or incomplete arterial connections, are used by
motorists at speeds or volumes inconsistent with roadway design or function.
2. Prioritize the list of identified roadways by severity of impact on safety and neighboring land use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/422
3. Develop a set of design standards that take into account the character of the surrounding area in the attempt to reduce
traffic speed.
Guidance
“Traffic Calming” is a technique for reducing speeds or limiting volumes on roadways on which vehicle speeds or volumes exceed
the roadway design specifications or intended function of the roadway in a way that degrades safety or is detrimental to the quality of
life of adjacent neighborhoods and other land uses. There are numerous innovative techniques for accomplishing this objective
without unduly restricting traffic. Of these techniques “speed bumps” are considered a poor choice and should be considered only
after other more creative alternatives have been eliminated.
The measures contemplated under this policy initiative are not intended to unduly disrupt traffic flow or unfairly deny any property
owner adequate access to their property.
Policy Initiative #3 – Bicycle and Pedestrian Crossing Safety and Visibility
Policy Statement
Intersections that are safe for cars, bicycles and pedestrians will enhance the livability of Pflugerville and improve mobility for all
citizens.
Actions
1. Intersections that attract bicycle and pedestrian traffic should be evaluated for their safety. In particular, sight
distances should be adequate to ensure visibility for cyclists and automobile drivers. Where necessary, design elements
such as striping, signage and other means of marking crosswalks should be used.
2. Design standards for future intersections to insure the continued safety of pedestrians and cyclists should be
implemented. These can be incorporated as part of Policy Initiative #4: Roadway Design Standards.
3. The implementation of safer intersections should be consistent with Policy Initiative #1: Bicycle Routes and Policy
Initiative #2: Traffic Calming.
Guidance
Pavement texture and coloring may be an attractive way to improve intersection safety in the community. In addition, there are other
innovative means for creating safe intersection designs that enhance pedestrian/cyclist visibility. For particularly dangerous or
heavily-traveled intersections, the City of Pflugerville may consider advanced solutions such as: medians or pedestrian islands for
roads wider than 75 feet; enlarged or flared sidewalks that decrease the distance pedestrians must travel across an intersection; and
increased length of crossing signals.
Policy Initiative #4 – Roadway Design Standards
Policy Statement
Standards and guidelines that provide the basic design criteria for each level of roadway in the transportation network shall ensure
the uniformity of roadways constructed.
Actions
1. Using the Functional Classification of Roadway Elements Table as initial guidance, establish a set of design
standards that can be used by the city and developers to have consistency in future development.
Guidance
Guidelines for design standards are described in the following table, which was established by the Transportation Committee. The
City of Pflugerville Transportation Plan Development Handbook and Resource Guide has more detailed information that can assist in
the standards development process.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/422
Policy Initiative #5 – Public Transportation
Policy Statement
Planning for future public transportation options is to be considered as a part of Pflugerville's land use decisions. The Capital Area
Rural Transportation System (CARTS) and Capital Metro's Special Transit Service (STS) currently provide adequate service to
qualifying citizens.
Actions
1. Pflugerville should continue its ongoing relationship with Capital Metro on the development of its commuter rail
plan as long as commuter rail will benefit the community as outlined in the guidance below.
2. The effectiveness of the existing system and the need for transit must be reevaluated on a regular cycle–at least once
every five years–so that changing regional developments and the needs of the city are accurately reflected in the plan.
Guidance
Any future transit development in Pflugerville should benefit the community by:
* Providing opportunity for economic development.
* Allowing for cost increment financing, or a similar financing model that would not burden the community.
* Not negatively impacting the neighborhoods adjacent to the transit route.
* Meeting the expected future travel demands of citizens.
CHAPTER 4 – CONCLUSION
This document, as adopted by the City Council, stands alone and complete as the Transportation Plan Element (TPE) of the City of
Pflugerville Comprehensive Plan. A companion document to this Transportation Plan Element entitled the City of Pflugerville
Transportation Plan Development Handbook and Resource Guide provides an unofficial overview of the plan development process.
It also provides a broad overview of the policy issues addressed during plan development and includes technical descriptions of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/422
many of the tools and techniques referred to in the TPE. The Transportation Plan Development Handbook and Resource Guide may
be regarded as a reference for the TPE.
CHAPTER 154: SIGNS
§ 154.000 GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.001 PURPOSE.
The purposes of these sign regulations are: to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication in the city; to
maintain and enhance the aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth; to
improve pedestrian and traffic safety; to minimize the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property; and to
enable the fair and consistent enforcement of these sign regulations.
§ 154.002 APPLICABILITY; EFFECT.
(A) A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, created, or maintained in the city only in compliance with the standards,
procedures, exemptions, and other requirements of this chapter.
(B) For sign regulations in the central business district, refer to §155.1305 of this code. All applicable fees for signs related to this
chapter shall apply for signs in the central business district, currently known as the downtown district overlay (DD).
(C) The effect of this chapter as more specifically set forth herein, is:
(1) To establish a permit system to allow a variety of types of signs in commercial and industrial zones, and a limited
variety of signs in other zones, subject to the standards and the permit procedures of this chapter;
(2) To allow certain signs that are small, unobtrusive, and incidental to the principal use of the respective lots on which
they are located, subject to the substantive requirements of this chapter, but without requirements for permits;
(3) To provide for temporary signs in limited circumstances;
(4) To prohibit all signs not expressly permitted by this chapter; and
(5) To provide for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 154.003 DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION.
Words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings set forth in this section. Words and phrases not defined in this section
but defined in the zoning ordinance shall be given the meanings set forth in the zoning ordinance. Principles for computing sign area
and sign height are contained in §154.004. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise. Section headings or captions are for reference purposes only and shall not be used in the
interpretation of this chapter.
ABANDONED SIGN. A sign for which no legal owner can be found.
BANNER. Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a building, poles, railings, or other structural parts of
the building with or without frames. National flags, state or municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not
be considered banners.
BEACON. Any light with one or more beams directed into the atmosphere or directed at one or more points not on the same zone lot
as the light source; also, any light with one or more beams that rotate or move.
BUILDING MARKER. Any sign cut into a masonry surface of a building or made of bronze or other permanent material.
BUILDING SIGN. Any sign attached to any part of a building, as contrasted to a freestanding sign.
CANOPY SIGN. Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover
over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN. A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged
without altering the face or the surface of the sign. A sign designed or operated in such a way to allow the display to change
electronically is an electronic message sign or a CEVMS and not a changeable copy sign for the purposes of this chapter. A sign
designed to display by electronic or mechanical means, only the time or temperature is a “time and temperature” sign and not a
changeable copy sign for purposes of this chapter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/422
CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGN (CEVMS). Any sign which permits light to be turned on or off
intermittently or which operate in a way whereby light is turned on or off intermittently, including any illuminated sign on which
such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, including an electronic
message sign, a light emitting diode (LED) or digital sign and which varies in intensity or color. A CEVMS sign does not include a
sign located within the right-of-way that functions as a traffic device and that is described and identified in the Manual on Uniform
Traffic-Control Devices approved by the Federal Highway Administrator as the National Standard.
COMMERCIAL MESSAGE. Any sign wording, logo, or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls
attention to a business, product, service, or other commercial activity.
DILAPIDATED SIGN. Any sign that has become or has been caused to become partially ruined and in need of repairs, as through
neglect.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE SIGN. A sign that includes provisions for programmable electronic message changes.
FLAG. Any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political
subdivision, or other entity.
FREESTANDING SIGN. Any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in the ground and that are
independent from any building or other structure.
FREEWAY. A street with a right-of-way width of more than 120 feet.
ILLUMINATED SIGN. Sign illuminated with lights which glare into or upon the surrounding area or any residential area or distract
operators of vehicles or pedestrians on the public right-of-way.
INCIDENTAL SIGN. A directional or way-finding sign, secondary to the use of the zone lot on which it is located, such as “no
parking,” “entrance,” “loading only,” “telephone,” and other similar directives without a commercial message.
INSTITUTIONAL PURPOSE. Institutional purpose shall mean primary and secondary schools, churches, hospitals, institutions of
higher education and any governmental purpose.
MARQUEE. A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of rigid materials on a supporting
framework. A marquee is distinguished from a canopy in that a marquee is cantilevered, whereas a canopy is supported by posts or
other devices beyond the building wall.
MARQUEE SIGN. Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made a part of a marquee. A marquee sign is not a suspended sign.
MOVING SIGN. A sign having visible moving, revolving, or rotating parts, or visible mechanical movement of any kind, except for
the movable hands on street clocks, or other apparent visible movement achieved by electrical, electronic, or mechanical means,
except for time/temperature/date signs.
MULTITENANT CENTER. A commercial, office or industrial development where there are located several separate business
activities having appurtenant shared facilities, such as driveways, parking and pedestrian walkways, and that is designed to provide a
single area in which the public can obtain varied products and services. Distinguishing characteristics of a multitenant center may,
but need not, include common ownership of the real property upon which the development is located, common wall construction,
and multiple occupant use of a single structure.
NONCONFORMING SIGN. Any sign that was erected or permitted prior to the adoption date of this chapter, and that does not
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
NONPROFIT. A corporation, no part of the income of which is distributable to a member, director, or officer of the corporation as
defined in §22.001 of the Texas Business Organization Code.
OBSCENE SIGN. A sign displaying any matter in which the dominant theme of the material taken as a whole appeals to the prurient
interest in sex, or is patently offensive because it affronts contemporary community standards relating to the description or
representation of sexual matters, and is utterly without redeeming social value, which the erection or display violates Texas Penal
Code chapter 42.01 Disorderly Conduct.
OFF-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that advertises a commercial message regarding a commercial activity not located on the premises
where the sign is installed and maintained, or that directs persons to a location other than the premises where the sign is installed and
maintained.
ON-PREMISES SIGN. Any sign that advertises a commercial message on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained
when such premises is used for business purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/422
PORTABLE SIGN. Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be
transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T-frames;
menu and sandwich board signs; balloons used as signs; and umbrellas used as advertising.
PRINCIPAL STRUCTURE. The structure in which is conducted the principal use of the zone lot on which it is located. Zone lots with
multiple principal uses may have multiple principal structures, but storage structures, garages, and other clearly accessory uses shall
not be considered principal structures.
PROJECTING SIGN. Any sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six inches
beyond the surface of such building or wall.
RESIDENTIAL SIGN. Any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message.
ROOF SIGN. Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and
extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
ROOF SIGN, INTEGRAL. Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any
design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.
SETBACK. The distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure, or sign, measured
perpendicularly to the property line.
SIGN CODE APPLICATION AREA. The corporate limits of the city and the area of its extraterritorial jurisdiction as defined by
section 42.021 of the Texas Local Government Code.
STREET. As defined in chapter 156 of the city's Code of Ordinances [sic].
STREET FRONTAGE. The distance for which a lot line of a zone lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting said street
to the farthest distant lot line intersecting the same street.
SUSPENDED SIGN. A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface. A
suspended sign is not a marquee sign.
TEMPORARY SIGN. Any sign that is used only temporarily and is not permanently mounted.
VACANT. A condition in which all uses have been discontinued for a period of six months or longer, whether with the intent to
abandon said use or not. The six-month period does not include the period of time necessary to conclude any litigation related to the
condition or to the repair thereof.
WALL SIGN. Any sign attached parallel to, but within six inches of, a wall, painted on the wall surface of, or erected and confined
within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, that is supported by such wall or building, and that displays only one
sign surface.
WINDOW SIGN. Any sign, pictures, symbol, or combination thereof, designed to communicate a commercial message that is placed
inside a window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of the window.
ZONE LOT. A parcel of land in a single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet minimum zoning requirements for area,
coverage, and use, and that can provide such yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning ordinance.
ZONING ORDINANCE. The City of Pflugerville zoning ordinance and site development code set forth in chapters 157 and 155,
respectively.
§ 154.004 COMPUTATION.
(A) Computation of Area of Individual Signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with
only one face) shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof, that will
encompass the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or other display, together with any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets
zoning ordinance regulations and is clearly incidental to the display itself.
(B) Computation of Area of Multifaced Signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding
together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both
faces cannot be viewed from any point at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not
more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/422
(C) Computation of Height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the
top of the highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of (1) existing grade prior to
construction; or (2) the newly established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, bounding, or excavating solely
for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be
computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point
of the top of a curb of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal structure on the zone lot, whichever is lower.
(D) Computation of Maximum Total Permitted Sign Area for a Zone Lot. The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on
a zone lot shall be computed by applying the formula contained in Table B, maximum total sign area, to the lot frontage, building
frontage, or wall area, as appropriate, for the zoning district in which the lot is located. Lots fronting on two or more streets are
allowed the permitted sign area for each street frontage, with signs facing a maximum of two streets. However, the total sign area
that is oriented toward a particular street may not exceed the portion of the lot's total sign allocation that is derived from the lot,
building, or wall area frontage on that street.
§ 154.100 PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED SIGNS.
§ 154.101 SIGN PERMITS.
(A) Signs shall be allowed on private property in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction in accordance with, and only in
accordance with, Table A. If the letter “A” appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed without prior permit approval in
the zoning districts represented by that column. If the letter “P” appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is allowed only with
prior permit approval in the zoning districts represented by that column. Special conditions may apply in some cases. If no letter
appears for a sign type in a column, such sign is not allowed in the zoning districts represented by that column under any
circumstances.
(B) Although permitted under the previous paragraph, a sign designation by an “A” or “P” in Table A shall be allowed only if:
(1) The sum of the area of all building and lots on the zone lot conforms with the maximum permitted sign area as
determined by the formula for the zoning district in which the lot is located as specified in Table B.
(2) The size, location, and number of signs on the lot conform with the requirements of Tables B, C and D, which
establish permitted sign dimensions by sign type, and with any additional limitations listed in Table A.
(3) The characteristics of the sign conform with the limitations of Table E, permitted sign characteristics, and with any
additional limitations on characteristics listed in Table A.
§ 154.102 PERMITS REQUIRED.
(A) If a sign requiring a permit under the provision of this chapter is to be placed, constructed, erected, or modified on a zone lot
either within the city limits or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the owner of the lot shall secure a sign permit prior to the
construction, placement, erection, or modification of such a sign in accordance with the requirements of §154.105.
(B) No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with §154.108.
(C) No sign permit of any kind shall be issued for an existing or proposed sign unless such sign is consistent with the requirements
of this chapter (including those protecting existing signs) in every respect and with the master or common signage plan in effect for
the property, if applicable.
§ 154.103 SIGNS EXEMPT FROM REGULATION UNDER THIS CHAPTER.
The following signs, if located on private real property with the consent of the property owner (unless otherwise stated) are exempt
from regulation under this chapter:
(A) Any public notice, warning or traffic-control device required by federal, state, or local law, regulation, or
ordinance, including those on public property;
(B) Signs located on “private real property” as defined and limited by Texas Local Government Code §216.903(a)
containing primarily a political message not exceeding an effective area greater than 36 square feet, nor more than eight
(8) feet high, which are not illuminated and have no moving parts or elements, but specifically excluding a sign, including
a billboard, that contains primarily a political message on a temporary basis and that is generally available for rent or
purchase to carry commercial advertising or other messages that are not primarily political.
(C) Up to two (2) temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area and three feet in height when posted in
residential zoning districts, or temporary signs not exceeding 64 square feet in area and 12 feet in height when posted in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/422
other zoning districts, when posted during time periods when the property on which the signs are located is for sale or
lease and such signs do not remain more than 7 days after the property is sold or leased;
(D) Up to three (3) temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area and three feet in height when posted at least
100 ft or more apart, within the public right-of-way (outside any travel lanes) between the hours of 4:00 p.m. on Fridays
and do not remain after 8:00 p.m. on Sundays, and, when posted at the nearest intersection with a collector or arterial
street during time periods when residential property located nearest that intersection is being used for a commercial
purpose, such as, but not limited to open house signs;
(E) Up to three (3) temporary signs not exceeding six square feet in area and three feet in height in residential areas
containing a commercial message that are erected for less than five consecutive days, such as, but not limited to a garage
or yard sale signs;
(F) Up to two (2) signs placed on construction sites not exceeding 64 square feet in area after approval of a site plan,
and/or which do not remain erected for more than seven days after the completion of the construction project;
(G) Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
(H) Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message;
(I) Traffic-control signs on private property, such as stop, yield, and similar signs, the face of which meet Texas Manual
on Uniform Traffic-Control Devices standards and that contain no commercial message of any sort;
(J) Temporary signs not exceeding 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height may be erected within 1,000 feet of
any residential home during a time period the home is being used as a model for the construction of new residential
homes.
§ 154.104 GENERAL PERMIT PROCEDURES.
The following procedures shall govern the application for, and issuance of, all sign permits under this chapter, and the submission
and review of common signage plans and master signage plans:
(A) Applications. All applications for sign permits of any kind and for approval of master or common signage plan
shall be submitted to the Building Official on an application form or in accordance with application specifications
published by the Building Official.
(B) Fees. Each application for a sign permit or for approval of a master or common signage plan shall be accompanied
by the applicable fees, which shall be established by the City Council from time to time by resolution.
(C) Completeness. Within five days of receiving an application for a sign permit or for a master or common signage
plan, the Building Official shall review it for completeness. If the Building Official finds that it is complete, the
application shall then be processed. If the Building Official finds that it is incomplete, the Building Official shall, within
such five-day period, send to the applicant a notice of the specific ways in which the application is deficient, with
appropriate references to the applicable sections of this chapter.
(D) Action. Within seven days of the submission of a complete application for a sign permit, the Building Official shall
either:
(1) Issue the sign permit, if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application conforms in every respect with the
requirements of this chapter and of the applicable master or common signage plan; or
(2) Reject the sign permit if the sign(s) that is the subject of the application fails in any way to conform with the
requirements of this chapter and of the applicable master or common signage plan. In case of a rejection, the
Building Official shall specify in the rejection the sections of this chapter or applicable plan with which the sign(s)
is inconsistent.
(E) Action on plan. On any application for approval of a Master or Common Signage Plan, the Building Official shall
either approve the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan and the plan itself conforms in every respect with the
requirements of this chapter, or reject the proposed plan if the sign(s) as shown on the plan or the plan itself fails in any
way to conform with the requirements of this chapter. In case of a rejection, the Building Official shall specify in the
rejection the sections of this chapter with which the plan is inconsistent. The Building Official shall take action on or
before the applicable one of the following dates:
(1) Fourteen days after the submission of a complete application if the application is for existing buildings; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/422
(2) On the date of final action on any related application for building permit, site plan, or development plan for
signs involving new construction.
§ 154.105 PERMITS TO CONSTRUCT OR MODIFY SIGNS.
Signs identified as “P” on Table A shall be erected, installed, or created only in accordance with a duly issued and valid sign
construction permit from the Building Official. Such permits shall be issued only in accordance with the following requirements and
procedures:
(A) Permit for New Sign or Sign Modification. An application for construction, creation, or installation of a new sign
or for modification of an existing sign shall be accompanied by detailed drawings to show the dimensions, design,
structure, and location of each particular sign, to the extent that such details are not contained on a Master or Common
Signage Plan then in effect for the Zone Lot. One application and permit may include multiple signs on the same Zone
Lot.
(B) Inspection. The Building Official shall cause an inspection of the Zone Lot for which each permit for a new sign or
for modification of an existing sign is issued during the sixth month after the issuance of such permit or as such earlier
date as the owner may request. If the construction is not substantially complete at the time of inspection, the permit shall
lapse and become void. If the construction is complete and in full compliance with this chapter and with the building,
sign, and electrical codes, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Sign Inspection. If the construction is
substantially complete but not in full compliance with this chapter and applicable codes, the Building Official shall give
the owner or applicant notice of the deficiencies and allow an additional 30 days from the date of inspection for the
deficiencies to be corrected. If the deficiencies are not corrected by such date, the permit shall lapse. If the construction is
then complete, the Building Official shall issue a Certificate of Sign Inspection.
§ 154.106 TEMPORARY SIGN PERMITS (PRIVATE PROPERTY).
Temporary signs on private property not exempted from regulation by section 154.103 shall be allowed only upon the issuance of a
temporary sign permit, which shall be subject to the following requirements:
(A) Term. A temporary sign permit shall allow the use of a temporary sign for a specified 30-day period.
(B) Number. Only one temporary sign permit shall be issued on the same zone lot during any consecutive 4-month
period.
(C) Other conditions. A temporary sign shall be allowed only in districts with a letter “A” or “P” for “temporary signs”
on table A and subject to all of the requirements for temporary signs as noted therein.
§ 154.107 SIGNS PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CHAPTER.
All signs not expressly permitted under this chapter or exempt from regulation hereunder in accordance with section 154.103 are
prohibited in the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction. Such signs include, but are not limited to:
(A) Beacons;
(B) Obscene signs;
(C) Inflatable signs and tethered balloons;
(D) Moving signs;
(E) Off-premises signs, except for those specifically licensed or permitted under the city's sign plaza program approved
on February 11, 2003; and
(F) Repealed.
§ 154.108 SIGNS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY.
(A) No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for those specifically licensed or permitted by the city.
(B) Sign forfeiture. Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this section,
shall be forfeited to the public and subject to confiscation. Owners shall be notified of any forfeited signs, which shall be held for a
period of 30 days for remittitur if claimed. Every sign claimed shall be returned to the owner upon payment of a confiscation fee of
$75.00 per sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/422
(C) In addition to other remedies hereunder, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner and any person placing such a
sign the full costs of removal and disposal of such sign.
§ 154.109 VEHICLES USED SOLELY AS SIGNS.
Signage is allowed on a truck, bus, car, or other motorized vehicle provided all the following criteria are met:
(A) Primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display of signs;
(B) Signs are painted upon applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle or equipment;
(C) Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when
applicable, and actively used in the daily function of the business to which such signs relate;
(D) Vehicles and equipment are not used primarily as static displays advertising a product or service, not utilized as
storage, shelter, or distribution points for commercial products or services for the general public; and
(E) During periods of inactivity exceeding 5 working days such vehicle/equipment are not so parked or placed that the
signs thereon are displayed to the public. Vehicles and equipment engaged in the active construction projects and onpremises
storage of equipment and vehicles offered to the general public for rent or cars shall not be subjected to this
condition.
This section shall not affect the use of wagons, old boats, and the like, which are integrated into the theme of an overall landscape
plan.
§ 154.110 POLITICAL AND CAMPAIGN SIGNS.
(A) Signs pertaining to candidates for public office, measures or issues on primary, general or special election ballots are permitted
in all zoning districts, subject to the regulations of this chapter.
(B) Signage is allowed on a truck, bus, car, or other motorized vehicle provided all the following criteria are met:
(1) Primary purpose of such vehicle or equipment is not the display of signs.
(2) Signs are painted upon or applied directly to an integral part of the vehicle or equipment.
(3) Vehicle/equipment is in operating condition, currently registered and licensed to operate on public streets when
applicable.
(4) Vehicles used as signs and parked for a period of more than two consecutive days on any lot will constitute the
allotted sign for that lot.
(C) Signs regulated by this chapter shall not be displayed earlier than 60 days prior to an election and shall be removed within ten
days following said election. Signs for successful primary election candidates, eligible for a general or runoff election, may remain
after the primary election.
(D) Signs may not be placed in any portion of the public right-of-way except on property where election polling places are located.
Signs may be placed no closer than allowed by state or federal law, no sooner than three days in advance of early voting for the
election, and must be removed no later than three days after the election.
(E) The person, party or parties responsible for the distribution and display of such signs will be individually and jointly
responsible for their removal.
§ 154.111 DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION, AND MAINTENANCE.
All signs shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in accordance with the following standards:
(A) Except for RS-1 and RT-1 zoning districts, all freestanding signs must be integrated into a masonry structure
consisting of a minimum of 50% of the total square footage of the face of the sign. The maximum masonry material
incorporated into the structure must not exceed 150% of the total square footage of the face of the sign. Other materials
may be utilized in the sign structure as long as the masonry requirements are met and the structure is comprised of
materials and a color scheme that are visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall project.
(B) All signs shall comply with applicable provisions of the adopted versions of Appendix H of the International
Building Code, 2006 version, and the National Electrical Code, 2005 version.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/422
(C) Except for banners, flags, temporary signs, and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of
this chapter, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be permanently attached to the ground, a
building, or another structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame, or structure.
(D) All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition, in compliance with all building and electrical codes, and
in conformance with this code, at all times.
(E) No sign may be placed within a sight triangle.
§ 154.112 CHANGEABLE ELECTRONIC VARIABLE MESSAGE SIGNS.
Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS) shall:
(A) Be permitted for on-premises use in the corporate city limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction along thoroughfares
identified as an “arterial” or a “collector” in the Master Transportation Plan.
(B) Be limited to 45 footcandles between sunset and sunrise and 450 footcandles between sunrise and sunset.
(C) Not change message more frequently than every 60 seconds.
(D) Not flash or scroll or display an image in motion.
(E) Only be located within monument signs with an electronic sign facade no larger than 32 square feet in accordance
with this chapter.
(F) Be located at least 150 feet from the front or side property line of a parcel zoned or used for a single-family
residence.
(G) Be limited to 1 per lot located no closer than 100 feet from another CEVMS.
§ 154.200 MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN.
§ 154.201 MASTER SIGNAGE PLAN.
(A) Master Multitenant Sign Plan. For any multitenant center on which the owner proposes to erect one or more signs requiring a
permit, the owner shall submit to the Building Official, a master signage plan containing the following:
(1) An accurate plot plan of the lot(s) at such scale as the Building Official may require;
(2) The location of buildings, parking lots, driveways, and landscaped areas on such lot;
(3) Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs and the
number of freestanding signs, including electronic message signs, if applicable, allowed on the lot under this chapter;
(4) An accurate indication on the plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether
requiring a permit or not, except that incidental window signs need not be shown;
(5) An accurate depiction of the sign structure and materials, specifying standards for consistency among all signs on
the lot(s) affected by the plan with regard to color scheme, lettering or graphic style, lighting, location of each sign on the
buildings, materials, and sign proportions; and
(6) If the signage in the plan meets the full intent of this chapter, then a 20% increase in the maximum sign area shall
be allowed for each sign.
(B) Multilot Development. A multilot development is one in which contains two or more contiguous and adjacent lots
(disregarding intervening streets and alleys) that may or may not be under common ownership that contain more than one building
(not including any accessory building). The owner(s) of such multilot development may file a master signage plan. For the purpose
of this paragraph, if the signage in the plan meets the full intent of this chapter, then a 20% increase in the maximum sign area shall
be allowed for each sign.
§ 154.202 COMMON SIGNAGE PLAN.
(A) Common Signage Plan. If the owner of two or more contiguous (disregarding intervening streets and alleys) zone lots or the
owner of a single lot with more than one building (not including any accessory building) file with the Building Official for such zone
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/422
lots a common signage plan conforming with the provisions of this section, a 25-percent increase in the maximum total sign area
shall be allowed for each included zone lot. This bonus shall be allocated within each zone as the owner(s) elects.
(B) Provisions of Common Signage Plan. The common signage plan shall contain all of the information required for a master
signage plan and shall also specify standards for consistency among all signs on the zone lots affected by the plan with regard to:
(1) Color scheme;
(2) Lettering or graphic style;
(3) Lighting;
(4) Location of each sign on the building;
(5) Material;
(6) Sign proportions; and
(7) Electronic message sign proportions included in the freestanding sign.
(C) Limit on Number of Freestanding Signs Under Common Signage Plan. The common signage plan, for all zone lots with
multiple uses or multiple users, shall limit the number of freestanding signs to a total of one for each street on which the zone lots
included in the plan have frontage and shall provide for shared or common usage of such signs.
§ 154.203 GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR MASTER OR COMMON SIGNAGE PLANS.
(A) Existing Signs not Conforming to Common Signage Plan. If any new or amended common signage plan is filed for a property
on which existing signs are located, it shall include a schedule for bringing into conformance, within three years, all signs not
conforming to the proposed amended plan or to the requirements of this chapter in effect on the date of submission.
(B) Showing Window Signs on Master or Common Signage Plan. A master or common signage plan including window signs may
simply indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs and the general type of the window signs (e.g., paper
affixed to window, painted, etched on glass, or some other material hung inside window) and need not specify the exact dimension or
nature of every window sign.
(C) Other Provisions of Master or Common Signs. The master or common signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the
owners of the zone lots may reasonably determine.
(D) Consent. The master or common signage plan shall be established by all owners or their authorized agents in such form as the
Building Official shall require.
§ 154.204 PROCEDURES.
(A) Procedures. A master or common signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development
plan, or other official plan required by the city for the proposed development and shall be processed simultaneously. Where no
official plan is required by the city, the Building Official may review the master signage plan and approve it provided it meets the full
intent and standards of this chapter, may approve it with conditions; or may deny the plan.
(B) Amendment. A master or common signage plan may be amended by filing a new master or common signage plan that
conforms with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect.
(C) Binding Effect. After approval of a master or common signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted, or maintained,
except in conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this chapter. In case of
any conflict between the provisions of such a plan and any other provision of this chapter, this chapter shall control.
§ 154.300 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
§ 154.301 This subchapter shall apply to all nonconforming signs. All nonconforming signs shall be brought into compliance with
this chapter in accordance with the provisions of this subchapter.
§ 154.302 All nonconforming signs that were erected in violation of the ordinances of the city in existence at the time the sign was
permitted or should have been permitted, and which violation was or has not been cured, shall, upon written notice, be required to be
brought into compliance with this chapter or removed within a reasonable time frame specified by the building official, but not to
exceed 30 days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/422
§ 154.303 Nonconforming signs that do not comply with the city construction code shall be subject to enforcement under the
construction code, as well as this chapter. Repairs or modifications required under the city construction code shall not entitle the
owner of the nonconforming sign to compensation under this subchapter.
§ 154.304 Subject to conditions of this subchapter, a Nonconforming Sign may remain in place. Provided that, if the property on
which the sign is located becomes vacant, the sign must be immediately removed or brought into compliance with this chapter.
§ 154.305 All nonconforming signs shall be subject to the following provisions:
(A) Any Nonconforming Sign that has been destroyed or damaged to the extent that the cost of repairing the sign is
more than 60 percent of the cost of erecting a new sign shall be removed or shall be brought into compliance with this
chapter within six months from receipt of an order from the Building Official.
(B) No Nonconforming Sign shall be required to be relocated or removed unless such Nonconforming Sign is more
than 60 percent destroyed or damaged as provided in (A) above.
§ 154.400 ABANDONED SIGNS AND SUPPORTING STRUCTURES.
§ 154.401 The owner of any premises on which there is displayed or maintained an abandoned sign or abandoned supporting
structure shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) Any sign that is deemed dilapidated by the Building Official on or before the adoption date of this chapter, the
owner shall remove the sign within 90 days after receiving written notice from the Building Official or the adoption of
this chapter, whichever is later.
(B) Any sign that is deemed dilapidated by the Building Official after the adoption date of this chapter, the owner shall
remove the sign within 90 days after receiving written notice from the Building Official.
(C) If a supporting structure used or designed to be used with a sign is deemed dilapidated by the Building Official on
or before the adoption date of this chapter, the owner shall remove the supporting structure within 90 days after receiving
written notice from the Building Official.
(D) If an abandoned supporting structure does not have a can, frame, or similar part of the supporting structure that
would hold the sign or to which the sign would be attached, the supporting structure shall be removed or made to comply
with the provisions of this chapter.
(E) No abandoned sign or supporting structure that is altered under the provisions of this section shall be made more
nonconforming.
(F) Any dilapidated sign or dilapidated supporting structure not in compliance with this chapter is an unlawful sign and
may be removed by the city in compliance with § 154.903 and the owner may be prosecuted or be enjoined from
continuing such violation.
(G) If any sign, which conforms to the regulations of this chapter, is abandoned, the owner, user, and persons who
benefit from the sign and the owner, operator, and tenants of the property on which the sign is located shall remove it,
paint out or cover the message portion of the sign, put a blank face on the sign, or otherwise bring it into compliance with
this chapter so as to leave the message portion and supporting structure neat and unobtrusive in appearance, within
180 days after receiving written notice from the Building Official.
§ 154.402 The following are required for the use, display, maintenance, or permitting of an alteration of any abandoned sign or
supporting structure regardless of when the sign was abandoned:
(A) Like Material. Only the same, like, or better quality material as that being replaced shall be used as a face on or in
the abandoned sign. The face of the supporting structure must be one that the supporting structure is designed to support.
(B) Routed, embossed, or raised messages or sign copy must not be visible to the ordinary observer, if the face or
message is blanked.
(C) Covered Messages.
(1) Abandoned signs may be painted in order to “blank” the face. However, the paint must completely cover the
sign face or message portion of the structure. The covered, painted over message must not show through the paint.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/422
(2) Covered sign faces must be of a material or substance that renders the resulting sign face completely blank,
opaque, and resistant to deterioration. It is a violation of this chapter to allow a covered message to bleed or show
through the paint or covering.
§ 154.403 No person shall alter an abandoned sign or supporting structure without first obtaining a permit to do so from the
building official.
§ 154.500 VARIANCES.
§ 154.501 Any applicant may appeal a denial of a permit by the building official to the city council by filing a request for a
variance within 30 days after the date the permit is denied. The city council may grant a variance if it finds that the unusual shape or
topography of the property prevents signage allowable under this chapter from adequately identifying the business or other activity
of the property.
§ 154.502 Variances to any procedural requirement established by this chapter are prohibited.
§ 154.900 ENFORCEMENT.
§ 154.901 VIOLATIONS.
Any of the following shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by
this chapter, by the zoning ordinance, and by state law:
(A) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign requiring a permit without such permit;
(B) To install, create, erect, or maintain any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or permit governing such
sign or the zone lot on which the sign is located;
(C) To fail to remove any sign that is installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter, or for which
the sign permit has lapsed; or
(D) To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation
when applying the penalty portions of this chapter.
§ 154.902 SEPARATE VIOLATIONS.
Each sign installed, created, erected, or maintained in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation when applying
the penalty portions of this chapter.
§ 154.903 PENALTIES.
Any violation or attempted violation of this chapter or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant hereto may be restrained,
corrected, or abated, as the case may be, by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. Any individual who
recklessly violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction will be subject to a fine not less than
$1.00 nor more than $500.00. Remedies of the city include the following:
(A) Issuing a stop-work order for any and all work on any signs on the same lot;
(B) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the removal of the sign(s) or the
correction of the nonconformity;
(C) Imposing any penalties that can be imposed directly by the city under the zoning code;
(D) Seeking in court the imposition of any penalties that can be imposed by such court under the zoning code; and
(E) In the case of a sign that posses an immediate danger to the public health or safety, taking such measures as are
available to the city under the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and building code for such circumstances.
§ 154.904 SIGNAGE PER ZONING DISTRICTS.
The city shall have such other remedies as are and as may from time to time be provided for and allowed by state law for the
violation of the zoning ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/422
All such remedies provided herein shall be cumulative. To the extent that state law may limit the availability of a particular remedy
set forth herein for a certain violation or a part thereof, such remedy shall remain available for other violations or other parts of the
same violation.
TABLE A. PERMITTED SIGNS BY TYPE AND ZONING DISTRICT
Table A1. Residential Zoning Districts and ETJ
Permitted Sign Type A SF-E SF-S SF-R SFMU
2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH INS1 ETJ
Freestanding
Residential2 A A A A A A A A A
A
Freestanding
P P P P P
Incidental3 A
A4 A4 A4 A4 A
Building
Banner5
P A
Building Marker6 A A A A A A A A A A P
Canopy
Incidental3 A
A7 A7 A7 A7 A
Marquee8
P
Projecting8
Residential2 A A A A A A A A A
A
Roof
Roof, Integral
Suspended8
P
Temporary9 A
A A
A A
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/422
Wall
P
Window10
Miscellaneous
Flag11 A A A A A A A A A A A
Portable
Electronic Message12
P P
******************************************************************************
Table A2. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Permitted Sign Type O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI CL3 CL4 CL5
Freestanding
Residential2
A A A
Freestanding P P P P P P P
P P P
Incidental3 A A A A A A A
A A A
Building
Banner5 P P P P P P P P P P P
Building Marker6 A A A A A A A A A A A
Canopy P
P
P P P
Incidental3 A8 A8 A8 A3 A3 A3 A3 A3 A A A
Marquee8 P P P P P P P P P P P
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/422
Projecting8 P P P P P P P
Residential2
A A A
Roof
P P
P P
Roof, Integral
P P
P P
Suspended8 P P P P
P
P P P
Temporary9 P
P P P P A
A P
Wall P P P P P P P P P P P
Window10 A A A A A A
A A A
Miscellaneous
Flag11 A A A A A A A A A A A
Portable
Electronic Message12
P
A = Allowed without sign permit.
P = Allowed only with sign permit.
Superscripts 1–12 = Conditions of sign types within the Zoning District.
1. Institutional Uses in Residential Zoning Districts. The “INS1” column does not represent a zoning district. It applies
to institutional purposes such as primary and secondary schools, churches, hospitals, institutions of higher education and
any governmental purpose.
2. Residential Signs. No commercial message allowed on sign.
3. Incidental Signs. No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign if such message is legible from any location
off the zone on which the sign is located.
4. Limitations of Incidental (Freestanding) Signs in certain Districts. Only address and name of occupant allowed.
5. Banner Signs. Banners are allowed to be placed up to six (6) times a year for a period not exceeding 3 weeks. There
is no fee but a permit application is required. This application may be submitted annually. Only one banner is allowed per
business at any one time.
6. Building Marker. May include only building name, date of construction, or historical data on historic site; must be
cut or etched into masonry, bronze, or similar material.
7. Limitations of Incidental (Building) Signs in certain Districts. No commercial message of any kind allowed on sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/422
8. Marquee Signs. If such a sign is suspended or projects above a public right-of-way, the issuance and continuation of
a sign permit shall be conditioned on the sign owner obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance for such a sign
and such amount as the Director may reasonably from time to time determine, provided that the amount of such liability
insurance shall be at least $500,000.00 per occurrence per sign.
9. Temporary Signs. The conditions of §154.106 of this chapter apply.
10. Window Signs. Window signs are allowed without a permit for up to 10% of window coverage. Coverage of more
than 10% requires a sign permit.
11. Flags of the United States, the state, the city, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and
any other flag adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided that such a flag
shall not exceed 60 square feet in area and shall not be flown from a pole the top of which is more than 40 feet in height.
These flags must be flown in accordance with protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and
Stripes. In the Central Business District (CBD) or currently known as the Downtown District overlay (DD), flags of any
patriotic, religious, charitable, civic, educational, or fraternal organization not exceeding forty (40) square feet in area and
thirty (30) feet in height are allowed. Flags decorative or seasonal are allowed if they are attached to the existing building
and do not exceed five (5) feet by five (5) feet.
12. Electronic Message Signage. The conditions of §154.112 of this chapter apply.
TABLE B. MAXIMUM TOTAL SIGN AREA PER ZONE LOT BY ZONING DISTRICT
The maximum total area of all signs on a zone lot except incidental, building marker, and identification signs, and flagsa, shall not
exceed the lesser of the following:
Table B1. Residential Zoning Districts and ETJ
Permitted Sign Type A SF-E SF-S SF-R SFMU
2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH INSb ETJ
Maximum Number of
Total Square Feet
200 8 8 8 8 8 200 200 200 100 800
Percentage of Ground
Floor Area of
Principal Building
2% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 10%
Square Feet of
Signage Per Linear
Foot of Street
Frontage
1.0 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5 6.0
******************************************************************************
Table B2. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Permitted Sign
Type
O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI CL3 CL4 CL5
Maximum Number
of Total Square Feet
200 200 100 800 200 200 400 2,000 100 800 800
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/422
Percentage of
Ground Floor Area of
Principal Building
6% 2% 4% 10% 6% 6% 2% 2% 4% 10% 5%
Square Feet of
Signage Per Linear
Foot of Street
Frontage
3.0 1.0 2.0 6.0 3.0 3.0 N/A N/A 2.0 6.0 0.75
a. Flags of the United States, the state, the city, foreign nations having diplomatic relations with the United States, and any other flag
adopted or sanctioned by an elected legislative body of competent jurisdiction, provided that such a flag shall not exceed 60 square feet in
area and shall not be flown from a pole the top of which is more than 40 feet in height. These flags must be flown in accordance with
protocol established by the Congress of the United States for the Stars and Stripes. Any flag not meeting any one or more of these
conditions shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulations as such.
b. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under the zoning ordinances in residential
zoning districts. Some uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
TABLE C. NUMBER, DIMENSIONS, AND LOCATION OF INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY ZONING DISTRICT
Individual signs shall not exceed the applicable maximum number, dimensions, or setbacks shown on this table and on Table D.
Table C1. Residential Zoning Districts and ETJ
Permitted Sign Type A SF-E SF-S SF-R SFMU
2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH INSa ETJ
Freestanding
Area (square feet) 72b 6 6 6 6 6 72b 72b 72b 72b 72b
Height (feet) 8c 3 3 3 3 3 8c 8c 8c 8c 8c
Setback (square feet) 10 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 10
Number Permitted
Per Zone Lot 1 1 1 1 1 1 N/A N/A N/A 1 1
Per Feet of Street
Frontagef
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 1 per
200
1 per
200
1 per
200
N/A N/A
Building
Area (max. square
feet)
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 72d 72d 72d 10 N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/422
Wall Area (percent)e 10% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 10%
******************************************************************************
Table C2. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Permitted Sign Type O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI CL3 CL4 CL5
Freestanding
Area (square feet) 72b 72b 72b 72b 72b 72b 72b 72b 72 72 72
Height (feet) 8c 8c 8c 8c 8c 8c 8c 8c 8 8 8
Setback (square feet) 5 10 5 2 2 2 10 10 5 2 2
Number Permitted
Per Zone Lot 1 1 N/A N/A 1 N/A N/A N/A 1 N/A 1
Per Feet of Street
Frontagef
N/A N/A 1 per
100
1 per
100
N/A 1 per
200
1 per
200
1 per
800
N/A 1 per
100
N/A
Building
Area (max. square
feet)
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 72 N/A N/A
Wall Area (percent)e 15% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 5% 5% N/A 10% 10%
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under the zoning ordinance in residential zoning districts.
Some uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. Maximum area may be increased to 200 square feet if the zoning district is within 200 feet of a freeway.
c. Maximum height may be increased to 25 feet if the zoning district is within 100 feet of a freeway.
d. Office or clubhouse only. Maximum area for all other signage is the same as that allowed in SF-S.
e. The percentage figure here shall mean the percentage of the area of the wall of such a sign in a part or to which each such sign is most nearly
parallel.
f. Lots fronting on two or more streets are allowed the permitted signage for each street frontage, but signage cannot be accumulated and used on one
street in excess of that allowed for lots with only one street frontage.
TABLE D. NUMBER AND DIMENSIONS OF CERTAIN INDIVIDUAL SIGNS BY SIGN TYPE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/422
No sign shall exceed any applicable maximum numbers or dimensions, or encroach on any applicable minimum clearance shown on
this table.
Table D1. Number and Dimensions
Type of Sign Number Allowed Maximum Sign Area Vertical Clearance
From Sidewalk or
Private Drive or
Parking
From Public Street
Freestanding
Residential See Table C See Table C N/A N/A
Other See Table C See Table C N/A N/A
Incidental See Table C See Table C N/A N/A
Building
Banner N/A N/A
Building Marker 1 per building 4 square feet N/A N/A
Canopy 1 per building 25% of vertical
clearance to canopy
9 feet 12 feet
Identification 1 per building N/A N/A N/A
Incidental N/A N/A N/A N/A
Marquee 1 per building N/A 9 feet 12 feet
Projecting 1 per building 40 square feet 9 feet 12 feet
Residential 1 per zone lot N/A N/A N/A
Roof 1 per principal
building
N/A N/A N/A
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/422
Roof, Integral 2 per principal
building
N/A N/A N/A
Suspended 1 per entrance N/A 9 feet N/A
Temporary See §154.106 N/A N/A N/A
Wall N/A N/A N/A N/A
Window N/A 25% of total window
area
N/A N/A
Miscellaneous
Flag N/A 60 square feet1 9 feet 12 feet
Portable 1 where allowed2 20 square feet N/A N/A
1. See Table A for flag regulations in the Central Business District.
2. Permitted on the same terms as a temporary sign, in accordance with §154.106, except that it may be freestanding.
TABLE E. PERMITTED SIGN CHARACTERISTICS BY ZONING DISTRICT
Table E1. Residential Zoning Districts and ETJ
Permitted Sign Type A SF-E SF-S SF-R SFMU
2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH INSa ETJ
Changeable Copy
P P
Illumination, Internalb
P
Illumination, Externalb
P P P P P
Illumination, Exposed
Bulbs or Neonb
P
******************************************************************************
Table E2. Commercial and Industrial Zoning Districts
Permitted Sign Type O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI CL3 CL4 CL5
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/422
Changeable Copy P P P P P P P
Illumination, Internalb P P P P P P P P - P P
Illumination, Externalb P P P P P P P P P P P
Illumination, Exposed
Bulbs or Neonb
P
P
P - P P
P = Allowed only with sign permit.
a. This column does not represent a zoning district. It applies to institutional uses permitted under the zoning ordinance in residential
zoning districts. Some uses may include, but are not necessarily limited to, churches, schools, funeral homes, and cemeteries.
b. No direct light or significant glare from the sign shall be cast onto any adjacent zone lot that is zoned and used for residential
purposes.
(Ord. 421-95-06-13, passed 6-13-95; Am. Ord. 502-98-08-08, passed 9-8-98; Am. Ord. 537-99-03-23, passed 3-23-99; Am. Ord.
687-02-11-19, passed 11-19-02; Am. Ord. 705-03-05-27, passed 5-27-03; Am. Ord. 726-03-12-09, passed 12-9-03; Am. Ord. 739-
04-02-10, passed 2-10-04; Am. Ord. 857-07-01-09, passed 1-9-07; Am. Ord. 904-07-09-11, passed 9-11-07; Am. Ord. 948-08-05-13,
passed 5-13-08; Am. Ord. 980-08-11-25, passed 11-25-08; Am. Ord. 1010-09-08-25, passed 8-25-09; Ord. 1158-13-09-24, passed 9-
24-13; Am. Ord. 1205-15-02-24, passed 2-24-15; Ord. 1212-15-04-28, passed 4-28-15; Ord. 1291-16-11-22, passed 11-22-16; Ord.
1315-17-08-22, passed 8-22-17; Ord.1357-18-07-24, passed 7-24-18)
CHAPTER 155: SITE DEVELOPMENT
SUBCHAPTER A
RESERVED*
SUBCHAPTER B CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 155.1100 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
§ 155.1101 TITLE.
This subchapter shall be known, and shall be cited, as the Central Business District Site Development Code of the City of
Pflugerville, Texas.
§ 155.1102 AUTHORITY.
Under the authority of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211, the City of Pflugerville adopts the regulations set out herein to
control the use of land within the designated jurisdiction of this subchapter.
§ 155.1103 JURISDICTION.
The jurisdiction of this subchapter shall be that portion of the City of Pflugerville known as the Central Business District (CBD) as
set forth in this section and depicted below:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/422
§ 155.1104 APPLICATION.
(A) No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed, moved on to, structurally altered, or used, except in
conformance with the provisions and requirements of this subchapter.
(B) The following are specifically exempt from compliance to the extent indicated.
(1) Structural alteration of an existing building when such alteration does not increase the building's gross floor area by
more than 1,000 square feet; and
(2) A change in use that does not increase the number of required parking spaces as set forth in §155.1201(G).
(C) Approval of an application for a major or minor site development permit, as required for the commencement of site
development or construction, requires conformity to the standards and guidelines established herein and by all codes and ordinances
of the city for the proposed development area.
(D) The general regulations described herein apply uniformly to all land, except as hereafter provided.
(E) No land shall hereafter be used or occupied except in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified.
(F) No site development permit, building permit, or certificate of occupancy shall be issued, or any use of land, construction of
structures, or similar action commenced unless in conformance with the standards, guidelines and procedures of this subchapter.
§ 155.1105 REQUIREMENTS AND GUIDELINES.
(A) The requirements set out in §§155.1200 through 155.1300 below, are required for development of all lots within the
jurisdiction of this subchapter, unless explicitly exempted.
(B) No site development permit shall be issued except in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter, or except where
superseded by standards in an approved alternative land use regulation district as established by the provisions of Chapter 157.
(C) The guidelines in this subchapter shall be considered during the approval of a site development permit by the final decisionmaking
authority. Noncompliance with these guidelines may be grounds for the denial of a site development permit.
§ 155.1106 INTERPRETATION OF TERMS.
CONSIDER. Where the term “consider” is used, a design suggestion is offered as an example of one method of how the design
guideline could be met. Applicants may elect to follow the suggestion, but may also seek alternative means of meeting the guideline.
GUIDELINE. In this subchapter, a “guideline” is a goal of the city that is relevant to a project. The final decision-making authority
shall determine when a requirement is relevant to the project under consideration. Meeting a guideline shall also require meeting the
intent of the appropriate section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/422
PREFERRED. In some cases, a certain design approach is “preferred.” In such a case, the reader is encouraged to choose the design
option at hand. However, other approaches may be considered.
SHALL. Where the term “shall” is used, compliance is mandatory.
SHOULD. Where the term “should” appears in a guideline, compliance is required unless circumstances of the project make it
impractical to comply as determined by the final decision-making authority.
STANDARD. In this subchapter, a standard is a requirement that shall be met for all projects to which the standard is applicable.
Compliance with standards is mandatory unless a variance has been granted by the Board of Adjustment.
§ 155.1107 GRAPHICS.
Where graphics included in this subchapter conflict with the text of the regulations, the text shall control.
§ 155.1108 FIRE STANDARDS.
All sites shall comply with the site specific fire code requirements of Chapter 150 of the city code at the discretion of the fire
marshal.
§ 155.1109 MEASUREMENT.
(A) The distances between driveways, streets, and trees are measured on center from the respective feature.
(B) In many cases, the project is required to relate to the “context” of the project area. The context shall be considered those
properties and structures adjacent to, and within the same block as, the proposed project.
§ 155.1110 CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.
(A) In interpreting and applying the provisions of this subchapter, the provisions will be deemed to be minimum requirements for
the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, morals, prosperity, and general welfare. It is not intended by this
subchapter to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties, or any statute, local
ordinance, or regulation, except that, if this subchapter imposes a greater restriction or higher standards, this subchapter controls.
(B) To the extent reasonable, this subchapter and all development-related codes and ordinances of the city will be construed to
harmonize with one another; if there is any irreconcilable conflict between them, the Administrator will determine which prevails
based on the overriding interest of the city under the circumstances.
§ 155.1200 SITE DESIGN.
§ 155.1201 SITE LAYOUT.
(A) Intent. These standards are intended to create a cohesive, unique and identifiable visual identity for downtown Pflugerville by
ensuring that buildings relate appropriately to surrounding development and streets, thereby creating a sense of place, safety and
convenience for both users and passers-by.
(B) Yard Standards.
(1) None, except as set forth in this subsection.
(2) Residential Yard Protection. When new development occurs on lots adjacent to any side or rear lot line of a
residential lot, the new development shall observe the same minimum yard requirements that apply to the residential lot.
In such cases, no buildings, loading spaces or dumpsters may be located within the front yard.
(3) Parking in Street Yards Prohibited. No parking or other vehicular use area shall be permitted between the front or
side building line and any street, except for alleys and driveways. On-site parking shall be located to the interior side or
rear of the proposed development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/422
Figure 155.1201(B)(3)
(C) Build-to Line.
(1) Standards.
(a) Continuous pedestrian activity shall be created in an uninterrupted sequence by minimizing gaps between
buildings on streets listed in Table 1.
(b) Primary streets shall have a continuous retail strip.
(c) Not less than 100 percent of the street facing primary facade shall abut the build-to line; however, the
percentage may be reduced in order to form an outdoor space such plaza, courtyard, patio or garden between a
building and the sidewalk. Such area should have landscaping, low walls, fencing or railings, a tree canopy or other
similar site improvements along the sidewalk designed for pedestrian interest, comfort and visual continuity.
(d) In order to further enhance the pedestrian-oriented street environment, and, in addition to any requirement
established in this chapter for a corner lot for both residential and nonresidential uses, new development along the
street segments listed in Table 1 is required to establish a build-to line.
(e) This build-to line shall be established based on the following criteria:
(i) Twenty-four-foot street widths.
(ii) 60 degree parking in accordance with the downtown parking plan comprising twenty feet.
(iii) Fifteen feet of sidewalk of which five feet is designated for benches, landscape planters, trash
containers, and other street furniture.
Table 1. Street Segments
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/422
Street From To
Main Street Fifth Street Railroad Avenue
Hall Street Fifth Street State R.O.W.
Walnut Street Third Street Railroad Avenue
Wilbarger
Street
First Street Railroad Avenue
First Street Hall Street Walnut Street
Second Street Hall Street Walnut
Third Street Hall Street Alley between Main Street
and Walnut Street
Fourth Street Hall Street Alley between Main Street
and Walnut Street
Wren Avenue Pecan Street Pfluger Street
Robbins Street Pecan Street Smith Avenue
Willow Street Pecan Street Paul Street
Smith Avenue Pecan Street Paul Street
Paul Street Smith Avenue Dead end
(f) To continue building a street wall on the streets listed in Table 1, side and front parking is prohibited and
driveways shall be allowed only from secondary streets.
(D) Intersection Enhancement Plan.
(1) All intersections identified in the CBD shall be enhanced through the use of decorative block pavers.
(2) Special paving treatment shall be used along Main Street and local street intersections.
(3) The enhanced paving used in these areas shall be a removable modular type “block paver.”
(4) Block pavers shall be laid in a random color pattern varying from warm earth tones hues to shades of gray. This
random color pattern shall be used in all paving applications. This will eliminate the problem of matching colors should
the need for street repairs arise in the future.
(5) The paving patterns shall be kept simple, not complex and confusing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/422
(6) A concrete band shall be used as a line of demarcation between the public right-of-way and private property. A
concrete band can also be used as a transition between block pavers and asphalt within the designated street intersections.
(E) Covered Pedestrian Walkways. In order to provide shade for pedestrians and enhance the visual interest of building facades,
new development on sites less than one acre is encouraged to provide an arcade, canopy, or awning along any facade featuring a
public entrance and any facade abutting an on-site parking area in accordance with the following.
(1) The arcade, canopy, or awning should not be less than six feet in depth and should cover no less than 100 percent of
the length of the facade.
(2) Arcades, canopies, or awnings should be integrated structurally and architecturally into the design of the facade.
(3) Arcades should be constructed of materials consistent with that of the facade from which it is attached.
(4) Arcades, canopies, or awnings may extend into a required street yard.
(5) An arcade may satisfy the build-to requirements of paragraph (C) above where:
(a) The depth of the arcade is not more than two-thirds of the average clear height of the arcade, measured from
the exterior face of the columns;
(b) The arcade does not visually separate retail frontage from pedestrian traffic; and
(c) The exterior face of the support columns abut the build-to line.
(F) General Parking Guidelines.
(1) Textures, patterns, and colors should [be] in the design of the surface parking in order to provide breaks in large
monolithic areas of pavement and distinguish between pedestrian and vehicular movement within the parking area.
(2) The pedestrian pathway should be landscaped and or delineated by nonasphaltic or concrete material in a different
color or texture from the parking areas to enhance pedestrian safety and improve the appearance of the parking lot.
(G) General Parking Standards.
(1) Any other type of parking design not listed here is not permitted in the CBD.
(2) The surface of all parking lots shall not dominate the building site. Through a combination of planning,
architectural, and landscaping elements, the visual impact on the surrounding streets and developments can be minimized.
(3) Facade elements around the entry to the structure shall be emphasized.
(4) Parking facilities shall incorporate a clearly defined pedestrian pathway from the public sidewalk, bus stops, and
off-site parking, through parking lots, to building entrances.
(5) Pedestrian pathways through parking areas to stairwells and elevators shall also be incorporated in parking
structures.
(6) Bicycle parking shall be provided in prominent, convenient, and secure locations.
(7) Minimum Parking Spaces. The Administrator shall determine the classification of all uses for these requirements.
(a) Sites Less Than One Acre. On-site parking shall not exceed 100 percent of the following minimum number of
parking spaces.
Table 2. Required Parking Ratios (Sites Less than One
Acre)
Use Spaces Required
Multifamily
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/422
Efficiency: 0.75
1 bedroom: 1
2 bedroom: 1.5
3+ bedroom: 2
Restaurants, including active outdoor
areas
1 per 100 SF
Nightclubs, including active outdoor
areas
1 per 50 SF
All other commercial uses 1 per 300 SF
(b) Sites More Than One Acre. On-site parking shall not exceed 100 percent of the following minimum number
of parking spaces.
Table 3. Required Parking Ratios (Sites More than One Acre)
Use Spaces Required
Single-family residential 3 per dwelling unit
Multifamily or two-family residential 2 per dwelling unit
Hotel or motel 1 per guestroom
Dormitory, lodging or boarding house 1 per bed
Convalescent home or hospital 0.5 per bed
Restaurant, including active outdoor
areas
1 per 100 SF
Nightclub, including active outdoor areas 1 per 50 SF
Church, funeral home or theater 1 per 4 seats
Bank, office, clinic, service or retail use 1 per 300 SF
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/422
(8) Off-Site Parking. In order to successfully implement the downtown parking plan and reduce the number of on-site
parking spaces as set forth in §155.1201(G)(7), new development is required to provide:
(a) At least 50 percent of the minimum number of required spaces off-site.
(b) Off-site parking shall be provided in the following preferred order:
(i) Spaces in the right-of-way abutting the site.
(ii) Spaces in the right-of-way within 200 feet of the site.
(iii) Surface lots within 400 feet of the site.
(c) Parking provided in the right-of-way abutting the site must comply with the following guidelines:
(i) 3" caliper cedar elm, red oak, burr oak, Mexican white oak, or Chinquapin Oak trees must be planted on
corners and intermediate parking islands.
(ii) Intermediate and corner parking islands shall be a minimum of 200 square feet and extend the full depth
of the adjacent parking space.
(d) Any lighting used to illuminate an off-site parking area shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from the
adjoining property.
(9) On-Site Parking Dimensional Standards.
(a) Each parking space shall be not less than nine feet in width or 18 feet in length.
(b) Minimum aisle widths shall be as follows:
Table 4. Minimum Aisle Widths
Aisle Width (feet)
Angle of Parking One Way Two Way
Parallel 15 20
30 degrees 15 22
45 degrees 15 22
60 degrees 18 24
90 degrees 22 24
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/422
(c) Aisle widths may be reduced to 20 feet for two-way traffic and ten feet for one-way traffic where no parking
occurs.
(d) Site access shall not lead directly into head-in parking.
(e) Parking serving buildings over 60,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be visually and functionally
segmented into several smaller parking areas. Each smaller parking area shall contain a maximum of 200 parking
spaces.
(10) Surfacing. Utilizing alternative pavers that permit water to penetrate reduces the overall impervious surface
coverage and creates less stormwater runoff. Alternatives to concrete asphalt and concrete include grass pavers, turf
blocks, and pervious concrete. Alternative pavers may not be ideal depending on site-specific characteristics such as
climate, soil type, and traffic volume. However, they should be used for overflow areas and in crosswalks and parking
stalls to create a break in the paved area, thereby, facilitating groundwater recharge.
(a) All Sites. Except as otherwise provided, all parking areas shall be asphalt or portland cement binder pavement
and shall be consistent with City paving standards. Such pavement surfaces shall be installed, maintained and
graded to dispose of surface water accumulated within the area.
(11) Aboveground Parking Structures. These standards are intended to encourage parking structures that reflect and
reinforce pedestrian orientation, protect the CBD character, and support development on small sites.
(a) Guidelines.
(i) Primary vehicular access to parking structures should consider the location of pedestrian routes and
avoid using a major pedestrian thoroughfare such as a primary street.
(ii) Pedestrian lighting is important consideration for any parking facilities. This should be a white light
source such as metal halide 15 footcandles.
(iii) Exterior architectural treatment should be divided into 30-foot increments to better integrate the parking
structure with the scale and character of adjacent buildings and to provide the visual breaks to hold the interest
of walkers passing by.
(b) Standards.
(i) Design parking structures so that they create a visually attractive and active pedestrian environment
through the use of retail/commercial wrap. The wrap shall be compatible with surrounding buildings.
(ii) New parking structures shall have retail, commercial, or office uses at the first level of all street
frontages.
(iii) Where aboveground structured parking is located at the perimeter of a building, this shall be screened in
such a way that cars are not visible from adjacent buildings or the street.
(iv) Aboveground parking shall be designed in such way the neighboring buildings are not adversely
affected by headlights.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/422
(v) The primary facade of the parking structure shall be designed to complement neighboring buildings.
Facades of the parking structure shall contain sufficient detail and modulation to break up the overall massing
of the structure.
(vi) Pedestrian lighting fixtures shall complement surrounding pedestrian lighting styles.
(vii) Continuous street-level lighting of all parking garages facades and openings shall be provided.
(viii) Pedestrian routes in structures and lots shall be easily identifiable and accessed. Clear visual
connections between a garage or surface parking lot and adjacent sidewalks and buildings are desirable.
Interior and exterior lighting shall be designed for safety as well as nighttime appearance.
(ix) Improvements to existing parking lots shall include a hard or hard-and-soft screening treatment.
(x) The main facades of parking garages shall be treated as building facades, with the same requirements as
apply to new buildings.
(12) Underground Parking Structure Standards. Underground parking, either fully or partially belowgrade, allows more
intense use of street-level and abovegrade areas, or more landscaped area. These enhance the life of Pflugerville and offer
greater convenience and amenity for building users, as well as allowing for more floor area to lease or sale.
(a) Visual links shall be provided to the outdoors to provide a sense of direction.
(b) Interiors shall be made logical, inherently guiding users to entrances and exits.
(c) Security shall be enhanced with good lighting throughout and by eliminating hiding places.
(d) Underground parking entrances shall be placed on secondary streets only.
(e) The minimum size for all surface and underground parking shall be nine feet by 20 feet.
(f) For all parking designs with parking spaces perpendicular to vehicle travel lanes, a minimum of 20 feet shall
be provided for automobile backup room.
(g) Designs shall minimize the need for multiple or complex turning movements.
(h) Driveways shall be located to preserve as much on-street curbside parking as possible.
(i) Driveways and other improvements on the property shall be designed for safe and unobstructed visibility of
pedestrians and automobile traffic both on and off the site.
(j) Underground parking garages may be constructed within required setbacks if significant trees will not be
removed or injured and the setback can still be effectively landscaped. Underground garage designs shall provide
sufficient room around the perimeter to accommodate existing and new tree root systems for all trees required as
part of the project.
(k) The grade of driveways providing access to underground garages shall not exceed five percent in the first 10
feet of the driveway slope near the street or sidewalk and shall not exceed 10 percent in the last 10 feet near the
level of the garage floor. The intervening grade shall not exceed 25 percent. Driveway designs shall provide
sufficient area to allow drivers to view automobile and pedestrian traffic before merging into such traffic.
(l) Daylight shall be introduced, particularly near pedestrian entrances and exits.
(m) Garages shall be ventilated to avoid the buildup of exhaust gases. When mechanical ventilation is used, noise
mitigation measure shall be incorporated such as low-noise fans, insulated ductwork and vibration absorbing
mounting systems. Ducts shall not exhaust toward any building openings or open space on any adjoining property
nor toward any on-site or off-site open space, pathway, street, place or park accessible to the public. Venting to the
roof is generally preferred.
(n) Plans for underground garages shall be reviewed to ensure accessibility for Police and Fire Department
personnel during emergencies.
(o) Utility meters, vaults and connections shall be located within garages or driveways and away from pedestrian
walking surfaces.
(H) Mechanical Equipment Standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/422
(1) Except where located underground, air compressors, mechanical pumps, water heaters, water softeners, utility
meters, utility boxes, air conditioners and other similar types of equipment shall be placed to the rear or side of the
building or mounted on the roof and shall be screened from view when visible from the street or adjacent properties
(2) Roof-mounted equipment may be screened by a parapet wall, which shall not be less than two feet in height.
(I) Drive-Thru Facility Standards.
(1) All Sites.
(a) No drive-thru facility shall be permitted within 50 feet of the CBD boundary.
(b) Drive-thru facilities shall be screened in accordance with §155.1206(G)(3).
(c) Drive-thru facility canopies shall be constructed in accordance with §155.1302(I).
(2) Sites Less Than One Acre. No drive-thru facility shall be permitted, except bank or pharmacy drive-thru facilities.
§ 155.1202 SITE ACCESS AND CIRCULATION.
(A) Intent. These standards are intended to promote safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian access into and within downtown
by minimizing disruptive and potentially hazardous traffic and vehicle and pedestrian conflicts while ensuring that adequate and
accessible vehicular parking areas are provided. The texture and color of ground level areas is an essential visual element of the
urban streetscape design.
(B) Sidewalk Guidelines.
(1) Fifteen-foot sidewalks should be constructed in the active portions of the Central Business District according to
Table 1.
(2) Sidewalks should be accompanied with brick feature treatments at crosswalks.
(3) Special paving should also be used in sidewalks to highlight important buildings and streets.
(4) These paving patters should be kept simple, not complex and confusing.
(C) Pedestrian Access and Circulation Standards for Streets Located in Table 1.
(1) The width of the street furniture strip in the streets located in Table 1 of the Central Business District shall be five
feet. This space, between the curb and the sidewalk, may contain turf, trees, other landscaping elements, or street
furniture.
(2) The enhanced paving used in sidewalk applications shall be removable modular type “block paver.”
(3) Block pavers shall be laid in a random color pattern varying from warm earth tones to shades of gray. This random
color pattern shall be used in all paving applications.
(4) A concrete band shall be used as a line of demarcation between the public right-of-way and property. A concrete
band can also be used as a transition between block pavers and asphalt within the designated street intersections.
(5) All sidewalks, public use buildings, and public open spaces shall be in compliance with the American Disabilities
Act (ADA) Standards. All accessible design elements must conform to applicable federal, state, and local codes.
(D) Pedestrian Access and Circulation Standards.
(1) A pedestrian walkway of not less than six feet in width shall be placed parallel to any property line adjacent to a
public street, not including an alley.
(2) Where applicable, pedestrian walkways shall connect to any existing adjacent walkway that abuts a shared property
line.
(3) Pedestrian walkways shall connect to parking within the Lot and to primary entrances of each building, including
outparcels.
(4) Required connections shall include driveway aisle crosswalks with an improvement in order to protect pedestrians
from vehicles. This type of improvement can include raised or striped pedestrian walkways. The Administrator shall have
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/422
the authority to discern which improvement is necessary.
(5) Pedestrian walkways shall also connect primary building entrances to all associated outdoor amenities, such as
courtyards and other outdoor gathering places.
(6) Vehicular and pedestrian traffic shall be separated with barriers such as low shrubbery, berms, fences, walls, gates,
bollards, curbs, shade structures and other similar design elements in order to minimize vehicle and pedestrian conflicts.
The Administrator shall have the authority to discern which barrier is necessary.
Figure 155.1202(D)(6)
(E) Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards.
(1) Access.
(a) For sites abutting an alley or side street, primary vehicular access shall be from the alley or side street.
(b) For sites with more than 60,000 square feet in gross floor area, primary vehicular access shall be provided
from an arterial street. No separate driveways for outparcels shall be permitted.
(2) Driveways.
(a) Driveways shall not be more than 24 feet in width.
(b) A driveway shall not be located within 30 feet of a street intersection.
(c) The number of driveway and private street intersections with public streets shall be minimized through the use
of shared driveways with adjoining uses.
(d) On streets without a median, sites with more than 150 feet of street frontage shall align driveways facing one
another across the street so that:
(i) Their centerlines are not more than two feet apart; or
(ii) Their centerlines are not less than 100 feet apart.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/422
(e) In no case shall driveways on the same side of the street be located within 50 feet of each other.
(3) Stacking Areas. Vehicle stacking standards shall apply unless otherwise expressly modified by the Administrator.
(a) Minimum Number of Spaces. Off-street stacking spaces shall be provided as follows:
Table 5. Minimum Off-Street Stacking Spaces
Minimum Stacking Spaces
Use Up to 1
Acre
More than
1 Acre
Measured From
Automated teller
machine
2 3 Teller
Bank teller lane 3 4 Teller or window
Carwash bay,
automated
X 4 Bay
Carwash bay, selfservice
X 3 Bay
Gasoline pump island 2 2 Pump island
Pharmacy pickup 2 3 Pharmacy window
Restaurant drive-thru X 6 Order box
Restaurant drive-thru X 4 Between order box
and pickup
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/422
window
Other Determined by Administrator
X=Facility not permitted on sites less than one acre in size.
(b) Design and Layout. Required stacking spaces shall be subject to the following standards.
(i) Size. Stacking spaces shall be not less than eight feet in width or 20 feet in length.
(ii) Location. Stacking spaces shall not impede on-site or off-site traffic movements or movements into or
out of off-street parking spaces.
(iii) Design. Stacking spaces shall be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians if deemed
necessary by the Administrator.
§ 155.1203 STREETSCAPE DESIGN.
(A) Intent. The street environment needs to appear uncluttered, offer clear direction for vehicular traffic, and provide a pleasant
environment for pedestrians. Streetscape elements, in addition to being functional and aesthetic, can also identify those
characteristics of a community that are unique to the area or to the specific street itself. Each element in the streetscape should be
selected with the intent to unify the overall environment, create a pleasant space to spend time by improving the visual aesthetics,
and accentuate and clarify existing uses in each area by reducing or eliminating visual clutter. The streetscape along the CBD will be
distinguished from the rest of the downtown area by the use of different plant materials, light fixture color and type, signage design
and materials, special paving materials, and the use of specific design elements as it is suggested in the master plan.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) Materials should be in keeping with the surrounding character of the finest qualities of adjacent buildings and of the
neighborhood as a whole.
(2) Simple elements with highlights of color and/or texture should be preferable to complicated elements that call
attention to themselves rather than complement their surroundings.
(3) Streetscape elements should be in scale with their surroundings. Elements too big to allow free pedestrian flow or
small enough to become unrecognizable obstacles easily stumbled over are not good uses of limited streetscape space.
Scale has much to do with surrounding elements as well as with functional uses involved.
(4) Ongoing maintenance should be planned and budgeted for at the onset of a project.
(C) Standards.
(1) Materials shall be durable, aesthetically pleasing, and of high quality. There is a respect for high quality materials
that helps keep a watchful eye on the street to preserve the streetscape integrity.
(2) Color is a unifying element that can be used to identify special areas within the CBD. The color that shall be used in
the CBD is black for public streetscape furniture. One color shall be used on all streetscape items to create a uniform and
a historical look.
(3) Materials shall be sturdy to withstand the rigors of a harsh outdoor environment. Constant wear from use and
temperature changes will take their toll on anything left outside the street. Materials do not need to last forever. Some
materials are long lasting, yet they are also unappealing. The materials chosen need to wear well–retaining aesthetic
interest–under period of maintenance. They also need to be replaced when they wear down.
(4) Materials placed on the sidewalk or pedestrian right-of-way shall either be fastened solidly to the pavement and/or
heavy enough to make theft unappealing. The ability to resist graffiti, damage from skateboards and other harsh
conditions should also be considered.
(5) All elements shall be sited to allow a free flow of pedestrian traffic, offer clear sight lines, and not pose a hazard to
anyone using the street or sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/422
(D) Street Furniture. There is a variety of street furniture currently available; but there are a number of recommended standards
that the ARB enforces through recent streetscape projects in the CBD. These designs start to establish a design vocabulary that can
be used throughout the downtown. Street furniture shall have a historical design. These types of furniture are discussed in the
following sections.
(1) Benches. There is a large selection of benches in shape, form, design and style. The benches in the CBD shall have
a historic traditional look and be black in color.
(2) Planter Boxes and Window Boxes.
(a) Guidelines. Boxes should fit within the dimension of the window frame and should be installed so they do not
damage original building materials.
(b) Standards.
(i) Planter and window boxes attached to the building frontage can add color and interest to the streetscape.
Planter and window boxes shall complement the color and materials of the facade, nearby buildings, and
architectural style of the building.
(ii) Private property owners shall maintain all planter boxes.
(3) Tables and Chairs. Tables and chairs, typically provided by private property owners, shall match the character of
individual businesses or architectural style of buildings, shall be of good quality and durability, and shall be replaced
when worn or damaged.
(4) Litter Receptacles. Litter receptacles shall have a historic and traditional look and have a black color finish. It shall
be stable and can be left outdoor all year–open design, self-cleaning, and discourages graffiti. Open design is strongly
suggested since it resists being blown over in strong winds. Surface shall be designed for safety and comfort where
surface never gets too hot or too cold, and will not splinter.
(5) Newspaper Racks. A modular newspaper rack system helps to reduce the clutter of individual newspaper boxes on
the street.
(a) Guidelines. Where possible, newspaper racks should be placed against the building edge.
(b) Standards.
(i) Where this location interferes with pedestrian traffic or building servicing, the racks shall be located at
the curbside.
(ii) A setback of 18 inches shall be allowed to avoid damage from vehicles.
(iii) No fewer than two and no more than six per rack are permitted in the CBD.
(6) Bicycle Racks. Bicycle racks encourage bikers to park their bikes in designated areas, minimized the use of trees,
light poles, and signs as locking posts. This improves the orderly look and aesthetic appeal of the streetscape. In the CBD
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/422
bike racks shall be black in color to unify with the rest of the street furniture.
(7) Bollards. Bollards can be used to protect elements of the streetscape or pedestrians. They can be placed to direct
pedestrian flow, or to prevent vehicular access. These may be permanent or removable. Bollards in the CBD shall have a
historic and traditional look and have a black color finish. Recommended bollards for the CBD are:
(8) Drinking Fountains. Drinking fountains can come in a variety of styles and designs. Drinking fountains shall have a
historic and traditional look and have a black color finish. Models shall meet all current federal regulations for the
Americans with Disabilities Act. These are the drinking fountains recommended to be used in the CBD:
(9) Tree Pit Guards. A tree pit guard is a low fence or border that is installed around the edge of a street tree pit.
Installing iron tree pit guards around street trees is an effective way to protect them from the pedestrians, cars, dogs and
pollution that threaten their health.
(a) Tree pit guard shall not prevent car doors from opening.
(b) Tree pit guards that are shaped like planter boxes not only encourage people to pile mulch and soil into them,
but they often prevent parallel-parked car doors from opening. Tree pit guards shall be placed no more than 4 inches
high on the curbside.
(c) Tree pit guard shall not restrict the growth of your tree. Make sure your pit guard will not girdle the tree trunk
as it grows. Also take care to protect the tree roots when you install your tree pit guards. Don't forget, a tree can
grow to be at least two feet in diameter.
(d) Tree pit guards shall not raise the level of soil around your tree. Filling up your tree pit guard with soil or
mulch will suffocate your tree's roots and rot the bark on the tree's trunk. Never let soil or mulch touch the trunk
above the level at which it was planted.
(e) Tree pit guards shall never become a trip hazard to pedestrians. Make sure your tree pit guards that are shaped
like planter boxes are large enough to be easily seen, and maintain it well so that it doesn't become a safety hazard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/422
(f) Metal and black in color tree guards shall be used to complement with the rest of the street furniture in the
CBD.
(E) Street Signs. Street signs shall be historic in character. Materials, design, style, scale and continuity are factors that should be
considered. Street shall reflect similar finishes, design and be black in color throughout the CBD. Recommended types of directional
and traffic control street signs for the Central Business District:
(F) Street Lighting. The primary pieces of lighting equipment are the lamp, the luminaires (the enclosure in which the lamp is
located), and the standard or pole. Coordinating various fixtures in terms of types and materials will help visually unify the
streetscape and other areas on the installation.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) To provide lighting that is appropriate for specific functions, equipment should be evaluated and selected
based upon its characteristic advantages and disadvantages.
(b) The type and size of the fixtures should be as consistent as possible along a single block.
(2) Standards.
(a) Light fixtures shall be selected based on existing architectural standards of installation and should reflect the
installation's architectural character.
(b) The placement of light fixtures shall be coordinated with tree locations to prevent tree canopies from
interfering with the proper distribution and level of lighting.
(c) Light fixtures and luminaires shall be durable and resistant to vandalism and damage from accidents.
(3) Luminaires. The distribution pattern of light on a surface will vary depending on the specific lighting application.
This pattern is controlled by placing the lamp in a luminaire that distributes light in a given direction by use of an
enclosure, reflector, refracting lens, or a combination of these.
(a) Guidelines.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/422
(i) A Type I luminaire distributes light in all directions from the light source at a distance of one to two
times the mounting height of the lamp. It should be used for overhead lighting areas such as parking lots,
plazas, courtyards, and along walkways.
(ii) Type II, III and IV luminaires all distribute light to one side of the light source. These luminaires should
generally be used for street lighting to direct light to the street side of the lamp but prevent it from shining into
the building side. The difference in the three luminaires is in the ratio of the horizontal spread of the light to
the mounting height of the lamp.
(b) Standards. Luminaires used in the CBD shall be compatible in architectural style with the building or match
with currently used luminaires on Main Street.
Current type of light on Main Street.
(4) Poles and Bases. Light poles and bases can be a significant visual element of the installation lighting system,
especially in the daytime environment.
(a) Guidelines. They are available in a variety of shapes, materials and finishes and should be selected according
to short and long term costs, functional considerations, and aesthetic concerns.
(b) Standards.
(i) The variety of light poles and bases used on an installation shall be limited.
(ii) Their selection shall follow the existing architectural styles or the existing poles and bases currently on
Main Street.
(iii) Poles made of cast iron, painted steel or aluminum are acceptable.
(iv) Poles made of concrete, fiberglass, and wood are prohibited.
(v) Lights mounted on wooden utility poles are prohibited.
(vi) Recommended street lighting for the CBD:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/422
(5) Other Equipment Considerations.
(a) Guidelines. To help establish continuity, the variety of light fixtures used on an installation should be kept to a
minimum.
(b) Standards.
(i) The design, material, architectural style, and scale of lighting equipment are factors that shall be
considered in the development of a lighting system.
(ii) Exterior lighting shall be integrated with the streetscape and other areas and should not visually
dominate either the nighttime or the daytime environment.
(iii) Light fixtures shall reflect similar design, materials, and finishes throughout the lighting system.
(iv) Fixtures shall be used consistently in each type of application and shall be appropriate in scale and
character with the setting.
(v) Light fixtures shall relate in appearance to other site furnishings.
(vi) Light fixture materials such as poles and luminaire enclosures shall have a black matte finish to prevent
glare and minimize their obtrusiveness.
(vii) To reduce negative visual impacts, clutter, and potential conflicts with trees and other elements, lines
supplying power to light fixtures shall be located underground rather than overhead. Existing overhead lines
should be buried in association with new construction or renovation projects.
(G) Exterior Lighting Applications. Exterior lighting supports various functions on the installation, including the operation of
vehicles, the activities of pedestrians, and the illumination of various features. Each of these functions has different requirements for
lighting relative to purpose, intensity of lighting, light color, and maintenance (see Figure 16-2). These requirements should guide the
type of lighting employed in various areas.
Figure 16-2: Minimum Recommended Illumination Levels for Various Uses
Use Footcandles
Primary streets 1.75
Secondary streets 1.00
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/422
Parking lots 0.50
Pedestrian facilities 0.50
Recreation areas 15.00
(1) Vehicular Lighting. The primary purpose of vehicular lighting is to increase the safety and facilitate the flow of
nighttime traffic by increasing visibility of the road and of potential hazards. Vehicular lighting also helps provide a sense
of organization of the installation and orientation for the driver.
(2) Safety and Traffic Flow.
(a) Standards.
(i) Street lighting levels shall allow drivers to clearly distinguish the alignment of the road and quickly
discern signs, traffic-control devices, obstacles, pedestrians, and other vehicles.
(ii) Intersections, pedestrian and bicycle crossings, and other potentially hazardous locations, as well as
curves, and other areas with restricted visibility, shall be illuminated at a higher level than other sections of the
street.
(iii) Streetlight poles shall be located so they do not present an obstacle to pedestrians or a hazard to
vehicles that may leave the roadway if a driver loses control. If a pole must be located where it could become
an obstacle to a vehicle, a breakaway-type pole mounting shall be used.
(iv) Glare created by light fixtures shall be minimized by the use of appropriate luminaires that direct the
light in a manner that will not interfere with the driver's view.
(3) Parking Lot Lighting.
(a) Guidelines.
(i) If possible, they should be located in raised islands or protected by wheel stops or other raised elements.
(ii) Light fixtures should have luminaires mounted approximately 25 feet high.
(b) Standards.
(i) Adequate lighting shall be provided in all parking lots that will receive nighttime use.
(ii) Light fixtures shall be set back a minimum of two feet from circulation aisle and parking stalls.
(4) Pedestrian Lighting. The primary purpose of pedestrian lighting is to extend the use of the nighttime environment
and provide for the safety and security of pedestrians.
(a) Guidelines.
(i) Light standards with the lamp mounted between 12 and 15 feet high should be the primary light fixtures
used along walkways and in plazas, courtyards, and other gathering areas, such as commercial and community
centers. These fixtures generally provide higher lighting levels and a broader light distribution pattern than
low-level lighting, are less susceptible to damage, and are still in proper scale with the pedestrian environment.
(ii) Low-level lighting refers to fixtures in which the lamp is mounted below eye level. It should be used
along the edges of walkways, ramps, and stairs to illuminate the pedestrian pathway.
(iii) Light should be regularly spaced but may need to vary to accommodate other streetscape elements.
(iv) Where possible, the light source should be incorporated into the structure of bus shelters, kiosks and
other furnishings.
(b) Standards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/422
(i) Pedestrian lighting shall help reinforce the hierarchy of the installation walkway network.
(ii) Lighting levels shall allow pedestrians to clearly distinguish the edges of the walkway, changes in
direction, intersecting walkways, and any potential obstacles or hazards.
(iii) Street crossings, changes in grade, and other potentially hazardous locations shall be illuminated at a
higher level than other sections of the walkway.
(iv) Light fixtures shall be located so that they do not impede pedestrian traffic.
(v) To provide a sense of security, light fixtures shall be located to minimize shadows and illuminate areas
adjacent to the walkway.
(vi) Pedestrian lighting shall illuminate the sidewalk at a level that is consistent in street and conducive to
pedestrian activities, rather than vehicular activity.
(vii) Bus shelters, kiosks, and other site furnishings shall be adequately lighted for nighttime use for both
security and functionality.
Figure 16-5 Pedestrian-Level Light Fixture
(5) Landmark Lighting. Illumination can be an effective tool to highlight landmarks and focus attention, which can also
assist with nighttime orientation. However, care should be taken not to overuse landmark lighting, which may weaken its
overall effectiveness.
(a) Guidelines.
(i) Installation entry areas, monuments, static displays, architectural landmarks, and other such features
should be lighted with floodlights or spotlights, creating patterns of light and shadow.
(ii) Lighting attached to buildings should be minimized and generally confined to entries.
(b) Standards. The lamp shall be directed away from viewers, and, if possible, the light fixture should be hidden.
(6) Landscape Lighting. Landscape lighting achieves special effects by controlling the type, intensity, and direction of
light to accent a landscape feature. As with landmark lighting, care should be taken not to overuse landscape lighting,
which may weaken its overall effectiveness and waste resources. Several basic lighting effects can be used to accent
landscape features (see Figure 16-6).
(a) Guidelines.
(i) Installation entry areas, monuments, static displays, architectural landmarks, and other such features
should be lighted with floodlights or spotlights, creating patterns of light and shadow.
(ii) Lighting attached to buildings should be minimized and generally confined to entries.
(b) Standards. The lamp shall be directed away from viewers, and, if possible, the light fixture should be hidden.
Figure 16-6: Landscape Lighting
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/422
§ 155.1204 PLAZAS, COURTYARDS, AND PATIOS.
The CBD Downtown Master Plan challenges outdoor spaces to become truly public places by creating comfort and amenities
available to everyone. Outdoor places can be well adjusted to the uses expected of them if consideration of their specific place within
the larger downtown is made.
(A) General Guidelines.
(1) Additional setback should be provided from the front setback line at public plaza areas.
(2) Building indentations should be used to create small pedestrian plazas along the street wall.
(3) Designs for new construction may include a courtyard set at the front of the first floor. The courtyard should
maintain the pattern of the street wall while providing ground-level private open space.
(4) Courtyards should have a three- to four-foot wall, fence, or other wall, fence or other barrier constructed of
materials that are compatible to the existing building or the new building respecting the architecture style.
(5) Any of these treatments shall leave at least five feet of the entire sidewalk width clear for pedestrians.
(B) Public Plazas. Downtown plazas should be designed with public use as a priority. The use of public open space
downtown is often dependent on the real estate maxim of “location, location, location.” Therefore, it is important to
analyze the location of a proposed plaza in terms of the existing plazas in the area, the linkage to a downtown pedestrian
and transit system, the primary population to be served, and the diversity of potential users. Creating open space in a
downtown without coordinating the size and use with other nearby plazas can result in declining use in the others.
Conversely, areas with too few outdoor spaces will generally be overused. Care should be taken to coordinate plazas with
their catchment areas.
(1) Determination for the need for a new downtown plaza should be based on the catchment area for that site. The
catchment area should extend for 100 feet in all directions from the center of the proposed plaza.
(2) The need for a high use corner location pedestrian thoroughfare should be reviewed; variety should be
provided with the downtown district.
(3) The number of potential workers in the catchment area should be determined to ensure a lunchtime clientele.
(4) Diversity should be provided in ground level retail to encourage daytime use by workers, tourists, and
shoppers.
(5) The plaza should be designed as a catalyst to enhance downtown pedestrian and transit circulation patterns.
(6) The plaza should be linked to a downtown open space plan which provides and encourages safe pedestrian
walkways.
(C) Plaza Function, Size and Activity Guidelines. Downtown plazas should be designed through the consideration of
the function, size and activity of the open space in relation to the context around it. They should not be viewed as leftover
exterior space to dress up, but rather as opportunities to create enlivened places for people to enjoy. The function could be
simply a visual setback for a building and transition zone or it could be a transit stop, place for lunchtime relaxation or
sidewalk cafes. The size may affect the comfort of its patrons and determine appropriate activities. Larger spaces may
accommodate displays, exhibits, and performances. Plaza design should always consider the diversity of uses and
activities that might occur such as passing through, relaxing and the need of different user groups.
(1) To determine plaza functions, the builder or developer should include:
(a) Visual setback for building;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/422
(b) Transition zone from street to interior foyer;
(c) Lunchtime relaxation and sidewalk cafes;
(d) Transit stop;
(e) Exhibits or performances.
(2) To determine plaza activities, the builder of developer should consider:
(a) If plaza is to accommodate pedestrian traffic, barriers should be eliminated between the sidewalk and the
street.
(b) If the plaza is to accommodate stopping and relaxing, dense furnishings, focal elements, and defined
edges should be provided.
(c) If the plaza is to accommodate concerts or rallies, unimpeded open space should be provided.
(d) Consider sight lines when designing plazas for public gathering or events.
(e) Active areas should be provided which accommodate public interaction as well as areas which provide a
more relaxed and secure experience.
(f) Heavy use across varied activities should be encouraged to minimize vandalism.
(D) Microclimate in Plaza Design. The semitropical climate in Pflugerville, offers short winters and long, hot summers.
Annual rainfall is approximately 30 inches per year. Temperatures in the 90's and above often last from May through
September. Heat stored in the concrete and asphalt downtown can create a microclimate at least ten degrees hotter than in
undeveloped areas. Tall buildings can block south east breezes and during the winter, blue-northers can come in quickly,
dropping the temperature 40 degrees in two hours. As a result, our downtown plazas need special attention to make them
habitable during the summer months and inviting in the winter months. Opens spaces should be located to receive and
encourage south east breezes, yet block the blue-northers. Shade should be provided by vegetation, canopies, and trellises.
Water can be used as cooling element, and the use of adjacent air-conditioned indoor public spaces can help temper
spaces near entrances.
(1) If possible, the plaza should be sited to receive summer breezes from the southeast.
(2) Filtered shade should be provided by means of deciduous trees and vine covered trellises which reduce
temperatures in summer, yet allow sun in the winter.
(3) Continuous shade should be provided by means of arcades, canopies, and awnings adjacent to buildings
respecting the architectural styles.
(4) Consider the use of ceiling fans in exterior overhead structures to create air movement.
(5) The amount of hard plaza pavement which retains heat should be minimized; provide only the amount
necessary for projected pedestrian circulation and volume.
(6) The amount of vegetation in trees, shrubs, groundcovers, and vines should be maximized to cool surrounding
areas.
(7) Water features should be provided where appropriate.
(8) Consider the use of air-conditioned indoor public spaces adjacent to the outdoor spaces.
(E) Views, Circulation, Boundaries, and Subspaces in Plaza Design. The design of outdoor plazas should consider how
they will be used by people. The layout of a plaza affects pedestrian circulation between the plaza and streetscape,
between the plaza and the building, and should take into account the ability to create subspaces for relaxation. The layout
can enhance or block views, invite people in, or keep people out.
(1) The plaza should be designed as a distinct space.
(2) Grade changes greater than three feet should be avoided.
(3) Where appropriate, planting should be extended into the public right-of-way to draw attention to the plaza.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/422
(4) Direct pedestrian routes from sidewalks to building entrances should be provided.
(5) Easy access to ground level retail as well as seating and viewing areas should be provided.
(6) Opportunities for pleasant meandering shortcuts should be provided.
(7) Pedestrian flow should be guided through the use of built elements.
(8) The needs of the disabled, elderly, and parents with strollers should be accommodated with easy access to
each level.
(9) Consider the transition between the interior and exterior building uses at the plaza level; ensure that one does
not interfere with the other.
(10) The edges of plazas should be designed with nooks and corners to provide a variety of seating and viewing
opportunities.
(11) Subspaces should be provided to accommodate small groups within a larger plaza area.
(12) Subspaces should be scaled to invite people in.
(13) Subspaces should be defined with grade changes, planting diversity, or seating arrangement.
(F) Plaza Seating. Urban plazas are the outdoor rooms of downtown. They are the places where people gather to relax
and socialize. Research has shown that the most important element in encouraging plaza use is an adequate amount of
seating. A link between the size of the plaza and the amount of seating provided has been established through the study of
successful outdoor spaces. In addition, location and orientation of seating, types and styles of seating, and materials have
been shown to be important in determination of use.
(1) One seat per 50 linear feet of the perimeter of the plaza shall be provided.
(2) A variety of seating locations should be provided to accommodate the needs of various sitters.
(3) Seating should be placed in shaded areas as well as in sunny areas; shade may be created by trees, trellises,
canopies, umbrellas, or building walls.
(4) Seating should be placed where sitters can watch passersby.
(5) At least 50% of recommended seating should be secondary, in the form of steps, planter seat wafts, retaining
walls.
(6) Seating wall heights should be approximately 16-18".
(7) Benches should be provided that are wide enough to serve many needs.
(8) Linear or circular seating should be provided which encourages interaction.
(9) Backless benches, right angle arrangements, or movable chairs and tables should be provided to accommodate
groups.
(10) Seating materials should be provided that are inviting and which do not damage clothing.
(G) Visual and Spatial Complexity in Public Spaces. Broad expanses of hard paving create uninviting and alienating
environments. Framed views, changes in level, subspaces, different places to sit, and trees and shrubs create a diversity of
places for people to use and enjoy. A wide variety of forms, colors, and textures offer a humane character to our public
open spaces.
(1) Framed views out of the plaza should be provided, where appropriate, to visually link the plaza with the rest
of the city.
(2) Sub areas should be visually connected within the plaza.
(3) Sub areas should be physically separated with modest level changes where appropriate.
(4) Level changes should be physically connected with ramps as well as steps.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/422
(5) An elevated area with wall or railing should be provided to lean on for people watching.
(6) Dramatic grade changes should be avoided which discourage public use.
(7) Where plazas are sunken, focal points should be provided to draw people downward.
(8) Where plazas are raised, plantings should be used to draw people upward.
(9) Plants should be used to define different areas within the plaza.
(H) Urban Area Landscaping. Humans are part of the biological world and comfort is our judge for the quality of our
habitat, natural or unnatural. Plants provide an intimate connection to this world and a respite from the built interiors of
office buildings, apartments, and condominiums. Groupings of plants can create urban oases. Trees offer shade to help
cool the city. Their leaves catch the breeze and respond to weather changes. Flowering shrubs and vines provide a
connection to the seasons, color, texture, and fragrance. Panels of turf provide green spaces which soothe the eye and
invite relaxation. Native plants are adapted to the vagaries of our climate. They have a better opportunity for survival in
the harsh urban environment. In addition, native plants celebrate the unique character of Pflugerville. Plants have
requirements for growth such as orientation, soil depth and width, water, nutrients, and drainage. Overall design and
construction detailing of plazas needs to accommodate these requirements.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) Feathery-leafed trees should be used to provide a see through effect to subspaces within the plaza.
(b) The eventual height and mass of mature plants should be considered in regard to views, shade, and
maintenance.
(2) Standards.
(a) Consider the impact of expanses of paving on the heat gain of the plaza; at least 30% of the plaza surface
shall be covered in plant material.
(b) A variety of native and adapted plants shall be selected to provide color, texture, and fragrance; consider
using trees, evergreen shrubs, flowering shrubs, vines, groundcovers, perennials, and annuals.
(c) Adequate soil depth and width to encourage healthy growth shall be provided.
(d) Underground irrigation and drainage shall be provided to all plantings to ensure their survival.
(I) Interactive Civic Art and Fountains in Plazas Guidelines. Civic art, sculpture, and fountains are popular features in
urban plazas worldwide. They function best when they promote interaction and communication among people who use
the space. In Pflugerville, we have the opportunity to select civic art which speaks to our unique character and sense of
place. It can tell the story of our natural and cultural heritage in a way which enriches our experience and understanding
of our history.
(1) Civic art should be included in the plaza design. Consider any built element as an opportunity for art, such as
manhole covers, paving, railings, overhead structures, or signage.
(2) Art should be selected which communicates a relationship to our sense of place, creates a sense of joy and
delight and stimulates play and creativity.
(3) Fountains should be included for visual attraction, to screen traffic noise, and for cooling effects.
(4) Art, sculpture, and fountains should be provided with which people can interact by means of touch,
movement, and play.
(5) The location sculptures should not impede pedestrian circulation patterns and lines of sight.
(6) Sculptures and fountains should be scaled to the size of the plaza.
(7) Civic art in plazas should be linked with a downtown civic art plan; consider the opportunities of a downtown
art walk.
(J) Food Service for Plaza Participants Guidelines. In William Whyte's book, The Social Life of Small Urban Spaces,
field researchers concluded that plazas with food service attract users more frequently than those which do not. Food
concessionaires' benefit and more people are drawn to nearby shops which increases the economic vitality of the district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/422
Increase of liveliness and activity increases security and leaves little room for vandals. Food services may take the form
of indoor/outdoor restaurants, cafes, food kiosks, and vendors.
(1) Food service should be located in and next to the plaza.
(2) A variety of food service options from cafes to vendors should be considered.
(3) The plaza should be designed to accommodate vendors; these can add vitality, promote security, and draw
people to the ground level retail.
(4) Space for vendors should be provided which is highly visible and accessible, yet out of the way of direct
pedestrian traffic.
(5) Comfortable places to sit and eat should be provided.
(6) Drinking fountains, restrooms, telephones should be provided for users.
(7) Trash containers should be distributed around the plaza.
(K) Plaza Safety in Plazas Through Wayfinding, Lighting, & Visibility Standards. To encourage the feeling of safety in
plazas both during the daytime and at night, designs need to include appropriate wayfinding and lighting. Plaza layout
needs to promote visibility both into and out from the plaza.
(1) The main building entrance shall be highlighted with lighting, signage, materials and detailing.
(2) Directional signs shall be provided that link the plaza to transit stops, taxistands, nearby neighborhood streets,
and orientation within the district.
(3) At adjacent interior lobbies, signs shall be provided to direct visitors to reception, elevators, restrooms,
telephones, and restaurants.
(4) Lighting shall be provided which promotes a feeling of safety at night. Be sure to light corners and out of the
way locations.
(5) Plaza lighting shall be linked to streetscape lighting.
(6) Plazas shall be designed for visibility from the street and the ability to see through from one part of the plaza
to another.
(L) Plaza Management and Maintenance Standards. In many urban plazas the future management and maintenance is
not considered up front in the conceptual design. How the space will be used should be an integral part of the design
process. If the plaza is to be used for special events, exhibits and performances, the layout needs to be flexible. Temporary
canopied shade, a stage, a place for concessions, and information kiosks may need to be provided. Maintenance issues
will affect the design of fountains and irrigation systems, the selection of materials, plants, lighting, and civic art.
(1) If special events are planned, a flexible stage and audience area away from the main circulation path shall be
provided.
(2) Exterior electrical needs of lighting and speaker systems shall be provided.
(3) Attachment locations for banners, decorations, and temporary signs shall be provided.
(4) Information kiosks to post scheduled events shall be provided.
(5) Locations shall be provided for temporary concessions.
(6) Fountains shall be designed to prevent overspray onto adjacent paving.
(7) An adequate number of litter containers and an appropriate collection schedule shall be provided.
(8) Coordinate with other plaza furnishings and architecture style of the building.
(9) Built materials shall be selected for durability and longevity.
(10) Plant materials shall be selected for low water use and low maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/422
(M) Cafes. Outdoor cafe dining may be placed in the plazas and courtyards but not in the public right-of-way under the
following conditions:
(1) The cafe area must be defined by a substantial perimeter such as fencing, stanchions and chains, or planters
constructed with compatible materials and the architectural style of the building.
(2) Business serving alcohol in sidewalk cafes must comply with any additional regulations.
§ 155.1205 DRAINAGE.
(A) Intent. These guidelines and standards are intended to encourage drainage facilities that respect and complement existing
drainage patterns. Site drainage should be considered early in the project design process. Runoff from sites has an effect on the
overall community in terms of the direct costs associated with infrastructure. Improvements and damage due to flooding and the
indirect costs associated with pollution of creeks and streams and the subsurface water supply.
(B) Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all sites more than one acre in size.
(C) Location, Construction and Design.
(1) Drainage facilities shall not be located within the 25-year floodplain.
(2) Drainage facilities shall not be located within 15 feet of a street.
(3) Drainage facilities shall be located at the rear or side of structures unless, upon approval of the City Engineer, it is
shown that lot conditions dictate otherwise.
(4) Drainage facilities shall not be located within a required buffer or landscape area.
(5) Drainage facility fencing or railing fronting on a street shall be screened from view.
(6) Offsite drainage facilities may be approved by the City Engineer if the parcel where the drainage facility is located
has the same or more intense zoning.
(7) Parking lots and other paved areas shall be designed to reduce the velocity, quantity, and pollutant load of water
leaving a site using vegetative buffers or other bioretention areas both within and around the perimeter of paved areas to
capture runoff. Curbstops shall be installed to prevent vehicle entry into the bioretention area. The use of traffic islands,
pedestrian walkways, trees, and other landscaping feature shall be integrated into these biorentention areas.
(8) Drainage facility walls or other formed vertical surfaces projecting above the surrounding finished grade shall be
covered with a limestone or similar veneer.
(9) Subject to approval by the City Engineer, drainage facility requirements may be waived if participation in a shared
or regional drainage project produces the same or superior results.
(10) Alternative drainage facility designs may be approved by the City Engineer; however, the applicant shall
substantiate the effectiveness of the proposed control with a verifiable engineering study.
(D) Performance.
(1) All drainage facilities shall be designed to minimize the potential for erosion at the outfall. This may be achieved
through the use of natural (e.g. stone), manufactured (e.g. concrete), or a combination of erosion control devices subject
to the approval of the City Engineer.
(2) Stormwater runoff control may be obtained through water detention or retention facilities provided the facilities are
designed so that the water will not become stagnant or foul.
(E) Fences. Fences shall be constructed and located so as not to interfere with stormwater runoff.
(F) Stormwater Management Easements.
(1) Stormwater management easements shall be provided in compliance with the Construction Standards Manual by
the property owner if necessary for:
(a) Access for facility inspections and maintenance; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/422
(b) Preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and detention areas and facilities, including flood
routes for the 100-year storm event. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in the maintenance agreement
signed by the property owner.
(2) Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is
granted by the City Engineer.
(3) Easements shall be recorded with the City of Pflugerville prior to issuance of permit.
(G) Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
(1) General. The erosion and sediment control plan shall include:
(a) A natural resources map at a scale no larger than 1"=100' identifying soils, forest cover, and resources
protected under other chapters of this code.
(b) A sequence of construction of the development site, including stripping and clearing, rough grading,
construction of utilities, infrastructure, and buildings, and final grading and landscaping. Sequencing shall identify
the expected date on which clearing will begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the
sequence of clearing, installation of temporary erosion and sediment measures, and establishment of permanent
vegetation.
(c) All erosion and sediment control measures necessary to meet the objectives of this local regulation throughout
all phases of construction and permanently, after completion of development of the site. Depending upon the
complexity of the project, the drafting of intermediate plans may be required at the close of each season.
(d) Seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and
rate of lime and fertilizer application, and kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures.
(e) Provisions for maintenance of control facilities, including easements and estimates of the cost of maintenance.
(2) Modifications.
(a) Major amendments of the erosion and sediment control plan shall be submitted to the City Engineer and shall
be processed and approved, or disapproved, in the same manner as the original plans.
(b) Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the City Engineer by written authorization to the
permittee.
§ 155.1206 LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING.
(A) Intent. These guidelines and standards are intended to enhance the overall aesthetics of commercial development by promoting
attractive and maintainable landscapes. In addition to the breaking up of building mass and the softening architectural materials, the
benefits of these standards include shading, climate control and noise reduction. This section is also intended to provide buffers
between incompatible uses, define building and vehicular parking entrances, and assist in water quality and stormwater management.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) Landscaping and screening should be designed as an integral part of an overall project.
(2) Planting choices, placement and scale should relate to both site and architectural design.
(3) Plantings should be selected and positioned in such a way as to promote a feeling of safety, to aid occupant
surveillance, and to deter crime.
(C) General Landscaping Standards.
(1) Required minimum plantings:
(a) For every 600 square feet of landscaping required, two trees with a minimum 3" caliper selected from the tree
list provided in Table 6 and four shrubs, selected from the shrub list provided in Table 6a, shall be planted.
(b) The total caliper calculation of trees may be substituted for the total number of trees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/422
(c) Plant material required for landscaping shall be of healthy stock, be native or naturalized, and have low water
requirements.
(d) No more than fifty percent of all trees per development shall be in the same species.
(e) Xeriscaping and water use reduction strategies shall be incorporated into overall landscape design through the
use of drought tolerant plant species native and well suited to Texas.
(f) Deviation from the types of trees and shrubs listed in Tables 6 and 6a shall require Administrator approval.
(g) Any tree with a mature canopy larger than 1,000 square feet must be planted at least thirty feet from another
tree.
(h) Any tree with a mature canopy smaller than 1,000 square feet, but greater than 500 square feet, must be
planted at least twenty feet from another tree.
(i) All required landscaped areas shall be irrigated by one of the following methods:
(i) Drip irrigation system;
(ii) Sprinkling system; or
(iii) Any other comparable method approved by the Administrator.
(2) Any plant material that fulfills a landscape requirement and subsequently dies shall be replaced with similar plant
material.
(D) Conservation Standards.
(1) Those portions of a lot that are located within ten feet of the lot line that have a natural slope greater than 4:1 shall
be terraced or otherwise modified so that the slope shall not be greater than 4:1.
(2) Treelines that are located along or within two feet of a lot line and that do not adversely affect drainage or public
safety shall be preserved.
(3) Any protected tree removed, damaged, or killed as a result of development shall be replaced by a tree or trees of a
similar type and with a total of caliper inches equal to or exceeding that of the tree removed.
(4) Fill placed within the dripline of an existing tree shall be no more than four inches in depth and at least 50 percent
of the dripline shall be maintained at its existing, uncompacted grade.
(5) A protected tree is considered to be removed by the uprooting or severing of the main trunk of a protected tree, or
any act that causes, or may reasonably be expected to cause, the tree to die including, but not limited to, damage inflicted
upon the root system by:
(a) Machinery;
(b) Storage of materials;
(c) Soil compaction;
(d) Substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk;
(e) Excessive pruning; or
(f) Placing an impervious cover over more than 50 percent of the area within the dripline.
(E) Bufferyard Standards.
(1) When new commercial or multifamily development or when a new commercial or multifamily certificate of
occupancy is required, one of the following types of bufferyards shall be provided:
(a) Four tree units and 15 shrubs in the side and/or rear yard for every 100 linear feet of the abutting side and/or
rear yards. The type of trees proposed shall match the site limitations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/422
(b) A masonry wall along the entire length of the side and/or rear lot line that abuts the residential lot and two
Type A tree units and eight shrubs in the rear and/or side yard for every 100 linear feet of the abutting side and/or
rear yards. Shrubs shall be placed at the base of the wall. Such wall shall be six feet in height and constructed of
high quality materials, such as decorative blocks, bricks or stone. Breaks in the wall shall accommodate pedestrian
walkways and spaces.
(c) The following trees shall be used to fulfill the requirements of subsection (1) above. Type “A” trees shall be
equal to one tree unit and Type “B” Trees shall be equal to one-half of a tree unit. Type B trees shall not be counted
for more than 50 percent of the total tree units.
Table 6. Approved Tree List
Type A Trees Type B Trees
Evergreen
Deodar Cedar Cedrus deodara Afghan Pine Pinus eldarica
Live Oak Quercus virginiana Cherry Laurel Prunus caroliniana
Mountain Laurel Sophora
secundiflora
Mexican Bird of
Paradise
Caesalpinia
mexicana
Prairie Flameleaf
Sumac
Rhus lanceolata
Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria
Deciduous
Bald Cypress Taxodium distichum American Smoke Tree Cotinus Obovatus
Bigtooth Maple Acer grandidentatum Anacacho Orchid Tree Bauhinia congesta
Burr Oak Quercus macrocarpa Carolina Buckthorn Rhamnus
caroliniana
Cedar Elm Ulmus crassifolia Crape Myrtle Lagerstroemia
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/422
indica
Chinquapin Oak Quercus muehlenbergii Desert Willow Chilopsis linearis
Green Ash Fraxinus
pennsylvanica
Escarpment Cherry Prunus serotina
‘Escarpment'
Lacebark Elm Ulmus parvifolia Eve's Necklace Sophora affinis
Mexican White
Oak
Quercus polymorpha Flameleaf Sumac Rhus copallina and
lanceolata
Montezuma
Cypress
Taxodium mucronatum Golden Raintree Koelreuteria
paniculata
Pecan Carya illinoensis Golden-ball Lead Tree Leucaena retusa
Shumard Oak
(Red)
Quercus shumardii Honey Mesquite Prosopis glandulosa
Texas Ash Fraxinus texensis Lacy Oak Quercus glaucoides
(laceyi)
Texas Red Oak Quercus texana Mexican Buckeye Ungnadia speciosa
Wax Myrtle Myrica cerifera Mexican Plum Prunus mexicana
Mexican Redbud Cercis Canadensis
var. mexicana
Pomegranate Punica granatum
Possumhaw Ilex deciduas
Roughleaf Dogwood Cornus drummondii
Texas Persimmon Diospyros texana
Texas Pistache Pistachia texana
Texas Redbud Cercis canadensis
var. texensis
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/422
Western Soapberry Sapindus saponaria
var. drummondii
(d) The following shrubs shall be used to fulfill the requirements of subsection (1) above.
(e) All shrubs for the required landscaping shall be at least three-gallon container in size.
Table 6a. Approved Shrub List
Evergreen
Agarito Berberis trifoliolata
Agave Agave sp.
Bee Brush Aloysia gratissima
Burford Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordii'
Bush Germander Teucrium fruticans
Cotoneaster Cotoneaster ssp.
Damianita Chrysactinia mexicana
Dwarf Burford Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Burfordi Nana'
Dwarf Chinese Holly Ilex cornuta ‘Dwarf Chinese'
Dwarf Yaupon Holly Ilex vomitoria ‘nana'
Elaeagnus Elaeagnus pungens
Evergreen Sumac Rhus virens
Indian Hawthorn Raphiolepis indica
Nandina2 Nandina domestica
Oleander3 Nerium oleander
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/422
Prickly Pear Opuntia ssp.
Primrose Jasmine Jasminium mesnyi
Red Yucca Hesperaloe parviflora
Rose Rose ssp.
Rosemary Rosemary officianalis
Ruellia Ruellia brittoniana
Sacahhuista Bear Grass Nolina texana
Skeleton-leaf Goldeneye Viguiera stenoloba
Skullcap Scutellaria suffrutescens
Texas Oregon-grape Mahonia swaseyi
Texas Sage Leucophullum frutescens
Texas Sotol Dasylirion texanum
Texas Dwarf Palmetto Sabal minor
Virburnum Sandankwa Virburnum suspensum
Yucca Yucca ssp.
Semi-Evergreen
Aspidistra Aspidistra elatior
Autumn Sage Salvia greggi
Barbados Cherry Malpighia glabra
Flowering Senna Cassia corymbosa
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/422
Glossy Abelia Abelia grandiflora
Mexican Oregano Poliomentha longiflora
Orange Zexmenia Zexmenia hispida
Pineapple Guava Feijoa sellowiana
Pomegranate Punica granatum
Rose Mallow Pavonia lasiopetala
Deciduous
American Beautyberry Callicarpa americanna
Bird of Paradise Caesalpinia gilliesii
Black Dalea Dalea frutescens
Butterfly Bush Buddleja spp.
Coralberry Sympforicarpos orbiculatus
Fall Obedient Plant Physotegia virginiana
Flame Acanthus Anisacanthus wrightii
Fragrant Mimosa Mimosa borealis
Fragrant Sumac Rhus aromatica
Gaura Gaura lindheimeri
Indigo Bush Dalea greggi
Indigo Spires Salvia ‘indigo spires'
Mock orange Philadelphus coronatius
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/422
Mountain Sage Salvia egal
Possumhaw Holly Llex deciduas
Pride of Barbados Caesalpinia pulcherrima
Red Buckeye Aesulus pavia
River Fern Thelypteris kunthii
Rusty Blackhaw Viburnum Viburnum rufidulum
Texas Creeping Oxeye (Zexmenia) Wedelia texana
Texas Kidneywood Eysenhardtia texana
Velvet Leaf Senna Senna lindheimeriana
Vines and Ground Covers
Evergreen
Asian Jasmine1 Trachelospermum asiaticum
Bigleaf Periwinkle1 Vinca major
Carolina Jessamine Gelsemium sempervirens
Coral Honeysuckle Lonicera sempervirens
Creeping Germander Teucrium cossonii
Cross Vine Bignonia capriolata
English Ivy1 Hedera helix
Fig Vine Ficus pumila
Halls Honeysuckle1 Lonicera japonica
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/422
Lady Banksia Rose Rose banksias
Litriope Litriope muscari
Littleleaf Periwinkle1 Vinca minor
Monkey Grass Ophiopogon japonicus
Santolina Santolina chamaecyparissus
Sedum (Stonecrop) Sedum ssp.
Trailing Prostrate Rosemary Rosemarinusprostratus
Deciduous
Boston Ivy Parthenocissus tricuspidata
Cypress Vine Quamoclit pennata
Gregg Dalea Dalea greggii
Horseherb Calyptocarpus vialis
Leadwort Plumbago Cerotostigma plumbaginoides
Mountain Pea Orbexilum sp.
Mustang Grape1 Vitis mustangensis
Old Man's Beard Clematis drummondii
Oregano Origanum vulgari
Passion Vine Passiflora incarnata
Pigeonberry Rivina humilis
Purple Heart Setcreasea pallida
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/422
Queen's Wreath/Coral Vine Antigonon leptopus
Silver Ponyfoot Dichondra argentea
Trumpet Creeper Campsis radicans
Virginia Creeper Parthenocissus quinquefolia
Wooly Stemodia Stemodia tomentosa
Flowering Perennials
Artemesia Artemesia schmidtiana
Bat-faced Cuphea Cuphea llavea
Big Red Sage Salvia penstemonoides
Black-eyed Susan Rudbeckia hirta
Blackfoot Daisy Melampodium leucanthum
Blue Mist Flower Conoclinium coelestinum
Blue Plumbago Plumbago auriculata
Bush Morning Glory Ipomoea fistulosa
Calyophus Calylophus berlandieri
Cedar Sage Salvia roemeriana
Chile Pequin Capsicum annuum
Copper Canyon Daisy Tagetes lemmonii
Coreopsis Coreopsis lanceolata
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/422
Daylily Hemerocalis spp.
Drummond's Skullcap Scutellaria drummondii
Fall Aster Aster oblogifolius
Firebush Hamelia patens
Four Nerve Daisy Hymenoxys scaposa
Garden Phlox Phlox paniculata
Gayfeather Liatris mucronata
Greggs Mistflower Eupatorium greggi
Heartleaf Hibiscus Hibiscus cardiophyllus
Hill Country Penstemon Penstemon triflorus
Hinckley's Columbine Aquilegia ‘hincklyana'
Indian Blanket Galliardia sp.
Iris Iris spp.
Lamb's Ear Stachys byzantina
Lantana Lantana spp.
Maximilian Sunflower Helianthus maximiliani
Mealy Blue Sage Salvia farinacea
Mexican Bush Sage Salvia leucantha
Mexican Honeysuckle Justica spicigera
Mexican Mint Marigold Tagetes lucida
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/422
Michaelmas Daisy (Texas Aster) Aster frikarti
Orange African Bulbine Bulbine frutescens
Oxeye Daisy Chrysanthemum leucanthemum
Porterweed Stachytarpheta jamaicensis
Purple Coneflower Echinacea purpurea
Rock Penstemon Penstemon baccharifolius
Royal/Scarlet Sage Salvia coccinea
Russian Sage Perovskia atriplicfolia
Shrimp Plant Justicia brandegeana
Society Garlic Tulbaghia violacea
Spiderwort Tradescantia sp.
Texas Betony Stachys coccinea
Toothleaf Goldeneye Viguiera dentate
Turk's Cap Malvaviscus drummondii
Verbena Verbena spp.
Whitemouth Dayflower Commelina erecta
Winecup Callirhoe involucrata
Yarrow Achillea millefolium
Yellow Bells Tecoma stans
Yellow Columbine Aquilegia chrysantha
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/422
Ornamental Grasses
Bushy Bluestem Andropogon glomeratus
Dwarf Fountain Grass Pennisetum alopecuroides
Indian Rice Grass Achnatherum hymenoides
Inland Sea Oats Chasmanthium latifolium
Maiden Grass Miscanthus sinensis ‘Gracillimus'
Mexican Feathergrass Stipa tenuissima
Muhly Grass Muhlenbergia spp.
Purple Fountain Grass Pennisetum setaceum ‘rubrum'
Sedges Carex spp.
Side Oats Gramma Bouteloua curtipendula
Zebra Grass Miscanthus sinensis ‘Zebrinus'
Turf Grasses
Bermuda Grass Cynodon spp.
Buffalo Grass Buchloe dactyloides
Zoysia Grass Zoysia spp
Annual Rye Grass4 Lolium multiflorum
Perennial Rye Grass4 Lolium perenne
1 These plants have been classified as invasive in certain situations. Do not plant these adjacent to parkland areas or preserves.
2 Choose the dwarf nonberrying varieties only, as the other types are invasive.
3 Use carefully, as these plants are poisonous to wildlife, pets, and people.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/422
4 These grasses may be used for revegetation between October 15 and April 1, but they must be eradicated in the spring and the area revegetated with a
permanent warm season grass.
(2) Neither hackberry (Celtis occidentalis) or cedar (Juniperas virginiana or Juniperus ash) trees shall meet the
landscape requirements of this section, even when they are naturally occurring.
(3) All open space within a bufferyard shall be planted with grass or other vegetative ground cover.
(4) A bufferyard may provide additional plantings in excess of the minimum requirements.
(5) A bufferyard may be interrupted in order to provide access (pedestrian or vehicular) to adjacent parcels.
(6) The plant material indicated in this section is required to be planted within 20 feet of the subject site property line.
(7) Trees used to meet the requirements of this section shall have a caliper of three inches or more at time of planting
and shall be located in an area free of impervious cover extending at least three feet in every direction from the base of
the tree. Each tree credited shall be located in a landscaped area that is at least 150 square feet in area and is not less than
five feet in width at all points.
(F) Street Tree Standards.
(1) The following types of street trees shall be installed:
(a) Pecan;
(b) Live Oak;
(c) Crape Myrtle; or
(d) Redbud.
(2) Required street trees shall have a caliper of at least three inches at the time of planting.
(3) For streets not listed in Table 1, required street trees shall be planted in the area of the site that is within 20 feet of
the right-of-way of the street so that no tree is further than 30 feet from another tree or the side boundary line. When two
street trees are separated by a driveway or perimeter diagonal parking, the trees shall be no further than 60 feet apart.
(4) For streets listed in Table 1, the following ornamental trees shall be planted within five feet of the curb:
(a) Redbud;
(b) Crape Myrtle;
(c) Texas Mountain Laurel;
(d) Lacey Oak;
(e) Yaupon Holly.
(G) General Screening Standards.
(1) Service Area Standards. Trash collection or compaction, recycling collection or other similar service areas shall not
be oriented towards a street, not including an alley, sidewalk or on-site parking area and shall be fully contained and
screened from adjacent streets, properties, and vehicular use areas.
(a) Trash collection, trash compaction, recycling collection and other similar service areas shall be integrated into
the overall design of the primary building and landscape.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/422
(b) Waste containers shall be located on the side or rear of the building and screened from public view.
(c) Waste containers must be located at least 10 feet away from residentially-zoned property lines.
(d) Screening enclosures shall be designed with self-closing access doors and shall be constructed of the same
materials as the primary building.
(e) Where it is not feasible to integrate screening enclosures into the overall design of the primary building and
landscape, such areas shall be fully enclosed by opaque walls or fences at least eight feet high with self-closing
access doors and comprised of the following materials:
(i) Brick, stone, reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry materials; or
(ii) Redwood, cedar, preservative pressure-treated wood, or other similar materials; and
(iii) All fence posts shall be rust-protected metal, concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars; and
(iv) Six-inch concrete filled steel pipes shall be located to protect the enclosure from truck operations.
(f) Waste containers shall be located on a minimum six-inch reinforced slab, sloped to drain.
(g) Waste container enclosures shall have steel framed gates with spring-loaded hinges or the equivalent and
fasteners to keep them closed. When in use, tie-backs should be used to secure the steel framed gates in the open
position.
(h) Waste container screening shall be maintained by the owner at all times.
(2) Mechanical Equipment.
(a) Except where underground air compressors, mechanical pumps, water heaters, water softeners, utility meters,
utility boxes, air conditioners and other similar types of equipment shall be placed to the rear and side of the
building or mounted on the roof and shall be screened from view when visible from the street or adjacent properties.
(b) Roof-mounted equipment shall be fully screened from view when visible from the street or adjacent properties
in accordance with §155.1303(F).
(3) Permitted Drive-Thru Facilities. Drive-thru facilities located between an associated building and a street, not
including an alley, shall be screened from view in accordance with paragraph (H)(4) below.
(H) On-Site Parking Area Landscaping Standards.
(1) Landscaped Area.
(a) Landscape equal to not less than 20 percent of any on-site vehicular use area shall be provided.
(b) Landscaped areas that are located adjacent to pavement shall be protected from vehicles with concrete curb
stops or equivalent barriers such as tire stops or railroad ties.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/422
(2) Landscape Plants. All proposed landscape plants located in or immediately adjacent to vehicular use areas shall
have heights and clearances at maturity according to the following:
(a) Shrubs shall be a maximum 36 inches in height.
(b) Trees shall have a minimum 72-inch clearance.
(3) Tree Requirement.
(a) One tree unit for every 1,500 feet of vehicular use area shall be required.
(b) All required parking spaces shall be within 50 feet of a tree.
(c) Only trees and shrubs from the tree list and shrub list in §155.1206(E) shall be planted.
(4) Screening.
(a) The perimeter of all parking areas and other vehicular use areas shall be screened from adjacent streets or
properties and pedestrian walkways by either a berm, a continuous landscaped hedge, a decorative masonry wall or
any combination thereof.
Figure 155.1206(H)(4)(a)
(b) At the time of installation, such screening from adjacent streets and properties shall be at least 30 inches in
height, not to exceed 36 inches. Any vegetative screen shall reach a height of 36 inches within two years of planting.
(I) Fencing And Wall Standards.
(1) Except as otherwise allowed under this subchapter, a fence or wall not more than six feet in height may be installed
along any side and rear lot line.
(2) Fences and walls shall be constructed of high quality materials, such as decorative blocks, brick, stone, treated
wood and wrought iron. Chain-link fences shall not be permitted.
(3) Breaks in the fence or wall shall be made to provide for required pedestrian connections to adjacent developments.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/422
(4) The maximum length of a continuous, unbroken and uninterrupted fence or wall plane shall be 100 feet. Breaks
shall be provided through the use of columns, landscaped areas, transparent sections and a change in material.
§ 155.1207 SITE LIGHTING.
(A) Intent. These guidelines and standards are intended to ensure aesthetically appropriate outdoor lighting in keeping with the
character of downtown by reducing light pollution and trespass, preventing glare, conserving energy, and promoting safety and
security.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) Lighting fixtures should be compatible with the historic character of downtown.
(2) Lighting should be scaled to the pedestrian and provide for the safe use of sidewalks.
(3) Lighting should enhance and complement, not overpower, landscape materials.
(4) Security lighting should not negatively impact the site, building architecture or adjacent properties.
(C) Lighting Design Standards. Lighting shall be used to provide safety while accenting key architectural elements and to
emphasize landscape features. Light fixtures shall be designed as an integral design element that complements the design of the
project. This may be accomplished through style, material or color. All lighting fixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any
portion of a site shall meet the following requirements.
(1) Fixture (Luminaire).
(a) The light source shall be completely concealed within an opaque housing and shall not be visible from the
street or adjacent properties. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill into the night
sky and onto adjacent properties, all lighting fixtures shall be full cutoff fixtures.
(b) Lighting shall be oriented not to direct glare or illumination onto streets in a manner that may distract or
interfere with the vision of drivers on such streets.
(2) Fixture Height.
(a) Lighting fixtures shall not be more than 30 feet in height within an on-site parking area and shall be not more
than 15 feet in height within a pedestrian area. However, on sites more than one acre parking area lighting located
more than 100 feet from any property line may be up to 35 feet above grade.
(b) Lighting fixtures located within 50 feet of any residential use shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/422
(3) Light Source (Lamp). Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, or color corrected high-pressure sodium may be
used. The same light source type shall be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site throughout any
development.
(4) Mounting. Lighting fixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on-site and does
not cross any property line of the site.
(5) Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity. The use of sensor technologies, timers or other means to activate lighting
during times when it will be needed may be required by the administrator to conserve energy, provide safety, and promote
compatibility between different land uses.
(D) Illumination Standards.
(1) Subject to the limits in subsection (3) below, all site lighting shall be designed so that the level of illumination as
measured in footcandles (fc) at any one point meets the following requirements.
Table 7. Light Level
Light Level (footcandles)
Type of Lighting Minimum Average Maximum
Architectural lighting 0.0 1.0 5.0
Building entrance 1.0 5.0 15.0
Canopy area lighting 2.0 10.0 15.0
On-site parking area 0.2 1.5 10.0
Walkways, landscape or decorative
lighting
0.2 0.8 5.0
(2) Minimum and maximum levels shall be measured on the pavement within the lighted area. The average level is the
overall, generalized ambient light level, and shall be measured as a not-to-exceed value calculated using only the area of
the site intended to receive the illumination.
(3) The maximum illumination permitted at the edge of a lot line set forth below. Where a development is unified with
shared parking, the maximum illumination levels shall apply only to the exterior lot lines of the projects (any interior lot
lines shall be exempt from this paragraph).
(a) The maximum illumination at the edge of a lot line adjacent to any lot line of a residential use or residentially
zoned property shall be 0.5 footcandles.
(b) The maximum illumination at the edge of the lot line adjacent to a nonresidential use or nonresidentially
zoned property within the CBD shall be 5.0 footcandles.
(c) The maximum illumination at the edge of the property line adjacent to a street shall be 5.0 footcandles.
(d) The Administrator may adjust the standards for the maximum illumination at the edge of a property adjacent
to another nonresidential Use if it is determined that the design and nature of the adjacent Use creates a need to
either reduce or increase the maximum illumination.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/422
(E) Specific Lighting Standards.
(1) Architectural Lighting.
(a) Wall-mounted flood lamps shall be shielded so that the light source is not visible off site.
(b) Fixtures used to accent architectural features, landscaping or art shall be located, aimed or shielded to
minimize light spill into the night sky.
(2) Canopy Area Lighting.
(a) All development that incorporates canopy area lighting shall use fixtures recessed into the canopy ceiling. The
fixture covers shall be flush with the surface of the canopy ceiling and provide a cutoff or shielded light distribution.
(b) As an alternative to recessed canopy ceiling lights, indirect lighting may be used in which case the light is
directed upward and then reflected down from the underside of the canopy. In this case, light fixtures shall be
shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the ceiling of the canopy.
(c) Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy, and the sides of the canopy shall not be
illuminated.
(F) Prohibited Light Sources. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the following light sources and light fixtures shall not
be used within the CBD where the light emitted is visible from adjacent areas.
(1) Low-pressure sodium, mercury vapor and neon light sources.
(2) Cobra-head-type fixtures having dished or drop lenses or refractors which house other than incandescent sources.
(3) Searchlights and other high-intensity narrow-beam fixtures.
(4) Lighting fixtures that have flashing, rotating, moving, pulsing or alternating colored sources except between
Thanksgiving Day and January 15.
(G) Nonconforming Fixtures. Except where otherwise noted, all lighting fixtures existing and legally installed and operative
before the effective date of this subchapter are exempt from the requirements of this section. Whenever a nonconforming fixture is
replaced or moved, the replacement fixture shall meet the requirements of this subchapter.
§ 155.1300 ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN.
§ 155.1301 BUILDING HEIGHT, MASSING AND ARTICULATION.
(A) Intent. These standards are intended to foster and maintain a coherent architectural aesthetic and visual downtown image and
create a comfortably-scaled urban environment through an organized variety of building heights, mass and discipline of form by
encouraging buildings that are similar in scale and architectural style to adjacent buildings.
(B) Height standards.
(1) Maximum Height.
(a) When new development occurs adjacent to or is separated by a street from any residential lot, the new
development shall observe the same maximum height that applies to the residential lot. Height shall be measured as
the vertical distance between the average finished grade at the base of the building and the highest point of a flat
roof including parapet walls or the midpoint between the eaves and the ridge line of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof.
Additional height shall be permitted at a rate of one foot of additional height for every foot of additional setback of
the upper floors of the structure. However, in no case shall any building be taller than 35 feet. Unenclosed balconies
on the building above the 24-foot transition line setback shall be permitted to encroach into the setback.
(b) The maximum height for all other new development shall be 50 feet.
(2) Exceptions to Height Limits.
(a) Roof structures housing or screening elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilation fans, or similar equipment for
building operation and maintenance, fire or skylights, flagpoles, chimneys, utility lines, towers, antennas, water
tanks, fire towers, and any screening parapet wall, or other appurtenances usually required above the roof level and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/422
not intended for human occupancy; provided, that no structure shall be erected more than 15 feet above the height
limit of the district, whether such structure is attached or free standing.
(b) Steeples, crosses, spires, belfries, and cupolas when integrated as an architectural element of a building may
be erected up to 18 feet above the height limit of the district.
(C) Maximum Gross Floor Area. The maximum gross floor area of any building on any parcel shall not exceed 60,000 square feet.
(D) Articulation Standards.
(1) Except for building facades subject to §155.1201(C), build-to line, all primary facades shall include projections or
recesses (articulation). No uninterrupted horizontal length or uninterrupted curve of such facade shall exceed the lengths
set forth below:
(a) Buildings of less than 20,000 square feet in gross floor area shall require articulation of not less than one foot
in depth for every 35 feet in length. Such articulation shall extend at least one foot horizontally.
(b) Buildings 20,000 square feet or more in gross floor area shall require articulation of not less than ten feet in
depth for every 100 feet in length. Such articulation shall extend at least ten feet but no more than 50 feet
horizontally.
(2) Except for building facades subject to the build-to requirements of §155.1201(C), a single exterior wall plane shall
not constitute more than 60 percent of any primary facade of 100 feet or more in length. The wall plane shall be measured
at one foot off the exterior wall surface (variations of less than one foot in depth are not considered to break the plane).
(3) Compatibility of building mass shall be created by stepping back upper floors facing the street or small surrounding
structures.
§ 155.1302 BUILDING FACADE TREATMENT.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/422
(A) Intent. These Guidelines and standards are intended to enhance the community image and create a consistent visual pattern for
downtown by encouraging a sense of scale, utilizing a better building facade design in order to avoid large featureless building
facades.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) Building facades should incorporate consistent architectural style, detail and trim features.
(2) Building facades should incorporate a sense of rhythm. Consider changing materials, patterns, offsets, setbacks,
facades, banding. Use other design elements such as columns or pilasters.
(3) Building entrances should be clearly defined and highly visible. Consider features such as changes in wall plane or
building massing, differentiation in material or color, peaked roof forms, raised corniced parapets, benches and other
seating components, structural and vegetative shading, awnings, and enhanced lighting. Consider using recessed building
entrances.
(4) Street corners should have special treatment. Consider providing building entrances, additional building mass, and
distinctive architectural elements at street corners.
(5) Downtown buildings should incorporate more traditional facades.
(C) Exterior Building Wall Standards.
(1) Nonresidential Sites. All nonresidential exterior building walls shall be constructed of the following materials:
(a) Brick;
(b) Stucco (cementitious finish only);
(c) Architectural concrete masonry;
(d) Hardiplank® or similar cementitious siding;
(e) Field stone, ledge stone or other native veneer;
(f) Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements and ornaments);
(g) Wood trim accents;
(h) Reflective glass (not more than 50 percent of any facade); or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/422
(i) Exterior insulation and finish system (EIFS).
(2) Residential Sites.
(a) Brick;
(b) Hardiplank® or similar cementitious siding (horizontal lap siding with an exposure not greater than 6 inches);
(c) Field stone, ledge stone or other native veneer;
(d) Wood (horizontal lap siding consisting of beveled lap, ship lap, rusticated lap, channel siding or tongue and
groove); or
(e) Wood trim accents.
(3) Blank Wall Area. Blank wall areas on primary facades shall not extend more than 15 feet in a vertical direction or
30 feet in the horizontal direction of any primary facade without variation. Relief or reveal work depth shall be not less
than one-half inch in depth. The following shall expressly constitute a variation in blank wall area:
(a) Control and expansion joints.
(b) Channel letter or similar three-dimensional signs.
(c) Facades that face rear and side parking areas shall contain windows.
(d) Windows with a vertical emphasis shall be placed on the upper facade of two-story building to enhance street
level sidewalk activity.
(D) Building Entrance Standards.
(1) Building entrances shall face the primary street on which the Structure is located (normally, the street from which it
takes its address).
(2) Buildings shall provide entrances on each primary facade.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/422
(3) Building entrances on corner lots shall be either oriented in the same direction as entrances of adjacent buildings or
oriented toward the corner of the lot.
(4) Any building entrance shall be set back from any on-site parking area a minimum distance of 12 feet.
(E) Storefront Guidelines. To enhance pedestrian atmosphere, it is important to provide transparent storefronts to maintain visual
interest.
(1) Buildings facing pedestrian streets should incorporate design features that provide visual interest at the street level.
(2) Building elements should be designed in a way that enhances the visibility of merchandise and store related
activities by pedestrians.
(3) The storefront should be as transparent as possible with large window areas to emphasize display, maximize natural
light, and allow for visibility into and out of the store.
(4) The storefront or other street level facades should be contained within the frame of the building, expressed by piers,
and subdivided into smaller bays.
(5) Vertical elements of the storefront should be accentuated.
(6) Large display windows should be provided to establish a visual connection between the interior and exterior.
(7) Clear glass windows and doors should be utilitzed to maintain 80 percent of the storefront and other street level
facade visually open.
(8) Clear glass should be used for display windows; opaque or smoked glass may be used for accent elements such as
borders.
(9) Storefront windowsills should be located between 18" and 30" above the sidewalk.
(10) Nonretail windowsills shall be located no more than 42" above the sidewalk.
(11) First floor window header height should not be less than 9 feet above the sidewalk.
(F) Store Entrance Guidelines.
(1) Entrance doors should be provided with a minimum of 70% of their area in clear glass.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/422
(2) Doorways should be recessed whenever possible.
(3) When installing a new door, proportions and materials compatible with those of the building should be used.
(4) Outward swinging doors at the storefront should have a recessed entry off the sidewalk, to meet building coder
requirements and to create a more intimate sense of entry. The primary entry should be oriented towards the street and
clearly identified.
(5) Buildings adjacent to parking areas or parking structures should have the primary entrance on the street facing
elevation. A secondary or minor entrance may face the parking area. Secondary or minor entrances shall follow the same
criteria as front entrances.
(6) For buildings that provide a separate, upper-story entrance on the exterior facade, the street-level entrance should be
the primary focus of the building facade.
(7) Access for handicapped users should be appropriately designed, and use the same access routes as those used by
nonhandicapped users where possible. Ramps and related elements should be modest in their design and be visually
integrated with the overall building design, architecture style, and site plan.
(8) In existing buildings, where only one route is determined to be accessible, and it is not the principal entrance, this
route should be clearly visible from the main entranceway or should be signed.
(9) Corner buildings should have a designated primary and secondary facade. The primary entrance to the building
should be on the primary facade of the buildings that have a corner entrance facing the intersection of both streets.
(G) Secondary Facade Guidelines.
(1) Sidewalls and rear walls are often visible and sometimes function as secondary facades within the downtown. They
should be simply designed to emphasize their secondary role and should not compete with the primary facade. When
visible from public streets, side and rear wall materials should complement the primary facade and nearby existing
buildings.
(2) Where buildings are built on an alley or other public right-of-way, consider the opportunity for windows, secondary
entries, or other activators.
(3) Rear and side facades should provide sufficient architectural features from their respective architecture style. They
should also be developed and maintained to support the overall appearance of downtown.
(H) Covered Pedestrian Walkway Standards. New development on sites more than one acre in size shall provide an arcade or
canopy along any facade featuring a public entrance and any facade abutting an on-site parking area in accordance with the
following:
(1) Single Use Building. A single use building shall provide an arcade or canopy not less than six feet in depth,
covering not less than 50 percent of the length of the facade.
(2) Multitenant Building. A multitenant building shall provide an arcade or canopy not less than six feet in depth,
covering not less than 85 percent of the length of the facade.
(3) General Standards.
(a) Arcades and copies shall be integrated structurally and architecturally into the design of the facade.
(b) Arcades shall be constructed of materials consistent with that of the facade to which it is attached.
(c) Arcades and canopies may extend into the required street yard.
(I) Service Station and Permitted Drive-Thru Facility Canopy Standards.
(1) Canopies shall be constructed of roof style building material consistent with that of the principal building.
(2) Canopies shall be integrated structurally and architecturally into the design of the principal building.
(3) Service station canopies shall be no higher than the principal building. In no case shall the canopy height exceed 20
feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/422
(4) Permitted drive-thru facility canopies shall cover the full width of the drive-thru lane and shall not be less than 20
feet in length.
§ 155.1303 ROOF TREATMENT.
(A) Intent. These guidelines and standards are intended to provide visual interest and coherence in a manner that is consistent with
existing downtown development and to ensure that roofs are designed to acknowledge their visibility from other buildings and the
street.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) Roofs should correspond to and denote building elements and functions such as entrances, arcades and canopies.
(2) Roofs should relate to adjacent buildings.
(C) Roof Change Standards.
(1) Roofs shall have variable roof lines through the use of gabled and/or hipped roofs or overhanging eaves, while
utilizing appropriate pitch, parapets and cornices.
(2) A vertical change from the dominant roof condition with a minimum of three feet of vertical change for a distance
of not less than ten feet shall be required for every 100 feet of primary facade. Such changes may occur anywhere along
the primary facade, provided that the total number equals the required number of changes based on the length of the
facade.
(D) Pitch Standards.
(1) Gable and hip roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and 8:12.
(2) Shed roofs, porch roofs, and arcade roofs subordinate and attached to the primary structure, shall be pitched
between 2:12 and 6:12.
(E) Roof Type and Material Standards. In visible areas, tile, metal or laminated shingles shall be the dominant roof material. The
following types of roof materials are prohibited:
(1) Asphalt shingles, except laminated 320 pound 30-year architectural grade asphalt shingles or better;
(2) Mansard roofs; and
(3) Back-lit awnings used as a mansard roof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/422
(F) Parapet Wall Standards.
(1) A parapet wall that extends up to two feet above the roof surface that incorporates simple traditional cornices shall
be permitted.
(2) A parapet wall may be used to conceal rooftop equipment from the street.
(3) Skylights and roof vents shall be permitted only on the roof plane opposite the street-facing facade or when
screened from street view by a parapet wall.
(G) Overhang Standards.
(1) Eaves shall extend not less than two feet beyond the supporting walls.
(2) Gable end rakes shall overhang not less than 18 inches.
(3) Eaves and rakes on smaller accessory buildings shall overhang not less than eight inches.
(4) Open eaves and simple classical soffits and fascia shall be permitted. Soffits shall be placed perpendicular to the
building wall, not sloping in plane with the roof (except for gable end rakes).
§ 155.1304 ARCHITECTURAL STYLES.
(A) Intent. The city's CBD contains a multitude of architectural styles. This rich architectural heritage enhances the CBD, provides
a strong sense of place and fosters a coherent architectural aesthetic throughout downtown.
(B) Architectural Styles.
(1) Any site development permit that requires a major or minor permit, as defined in §155.1502, shall choose
characteristics from no more than two of the architectural styles listed below.
(2) New additions should be compatible in material, design, and scale with the existing structure.
(a) Adam Style (1780-1820).
(i) A simple box with two or more rooms;
(ii) Strict symmetry;
(iii) Flat lintels and keystones;
(iv) Quoins, urns, swags, tooth like dentils and/or garlands;
(v) Semicircular or elliptical fanlight over front door; and
(vi) Palladian-style windows.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/422
(b) Gothic Style (1850-1940).
(i) Asymmetrical floor plans;
(ii) Steeply pitched roof;
(iii) Cross-gabled roof;
(iv) Wall surface extending into gable without break;
(v) Pointed-arch shape windows; stained glass may be utilized;
(vi) Castellated parapets on towers; and
(vii) Narrow pinnacles.
(c) Richardsonian Romanesque Style (1880-1900).
(i) Asymmetrical forms with articulation to break the building mass;
(ii) Heavy fortress-like form; usually of masonry walls with two or more textures of stone or brick;
(iii) Recessed entrances;
(iv) Wide round-topped arches over windows, porch or entryways;
(v) Groupings of three or more arched or rectangular windows;
(vi) Arches rest on squat columns; and
(vii) Round towers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/422
(d) Queen Anne Style (1880-1910).
(i) Steeply pitched roof, irregular shape to building, and an irregular ground plan;
(ii) Asymmetrical facade;
(iii) Bay windows and towers;
(iv) Use of wall surfaces as primary decorative elements (ie, utilize variations of wood shingle patterns on
the walls);
(v) Spacious wrap around porches; and
(vi) Patterned masonry utilized in construction.
(e) Folk Victorian Style (1870-1910).
(i) Symmetrical forms;
(ii) Roof types: front-gabled, side gabled or gable front and wing;
(iii) Roof-wall junction may be either boxed or open;
(iv) Spindlework detailing in porches;
(v) Cornice-line brackets; and
(vi) Porch supports are either spindles or square posts with beveled corners.
(f) Craftsman Style (1905-1930).
(i) Regular floor plan, with preferred orientation being the narrow side of the building facing the street;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/422
(ii) Low-pitched, gabled roof with wide eave overhang;
(iii) Roof rafters, braces, brackets and roof-wall junctions are exposed;
(iv) Decorative beams or braces commonly added under gables;
(v) Large roof extension porches;
(vi) Porch supports have distinctive and variable columns shapes; roof supported by tapered square
columns; columns or pedestals frequently extend to ground level (without a break at level of porch floor); and
(vii) Material used for piers, columns and solid balustrades are varied; columns rest upon massive piers, or
upon a solid porch balustrade; stone, shingle, brick, concrete block, or stucco are all common materials used
for piers.
(g) Frontier Style.
(i) Simple box shaped structure with symmetrical lines;
(ii) A facade with a wood or metal panel above the roof to display the signage;
(iii) Build to line of the property; and
(iv) Utilizes canopies.
§ 155.1305 SIGNS.
(A) Intent. Signage is an integral and very noticeable part of a commercial use. Collectively, signage influences a street's character.
They are one of the least expensive and most effective ways to enhance a storefront. With imagination and high quality design, signs
can add a new level of visual excitement to the streetscape.
(B) Guidelines.
(1) The primary focus of downtown signs is that they should be oriented toward pedestrian traffic and not vehicular
traffic.
(2) Signs should be compatible with their building, neighboring buildings and the character of the Pflugerville's CBD.
(3) All signs should be compatible with the respective architecture style.
(4) Signs should present a clear message about the business they identify.
(5) Signs should be consistent and harmonious with the architectural style of the property and the surrounding district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/422
(6) Signs should convey the message with simplicity.
(7) Signs should restrict copy to the name, address, function and logo of the establishment.
(8) Signs should avoid rates and advertising of commodities and ancillary services.
(C) Standards. One primary sign shall be installed and, if necessary, one secondary sign.
(D) Graphics.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) The size and style of the graphic, its scale, proportion, design, material and texture as well as the size and style
of the lettering, should relate to the building to which it is attached, with the property, and with the district.
(b) The graphic should be attached to the building or otherwise supported on the premises in a manner that
respects the spirit as well as the letter of these guidelines.
(c) Signs for a row of storefronts in the same building should be of similar size, material, proportion, and location
of the building. While it is not necessary for them to be all the same color or design, they should look like a familyreinforcing
rather than competing with each other.
(d) Maintain signs regularly and remove unused sign supports. Broken, faded signage and empty sign supports
suggest a vacant or inactive business.
(e) The letter style chosen should be appropriate to the business and the building.
(2) Standards. Hard-to-read and overly intricate typefaces shall be avoided.
(E) Sign Types. Signs other than those listed below are prohibited. With all of these sign types, simplicity is important. Signs
should be designed in simple, straightforward shapes that convey their message clearly. Lettering styles should be simple, well
proportioned, and easy to read. As a general guide, the number of type styles should be limited to two, and the text should occupy no
more than 75% of the total sign panel.
(1) Monument signs.
(2) Sign bands
(3) Wall signs
(4) Projecting signs
(5) Window signs
(6) Banners
(7) Sidewalk signs
(F) Signage Materials.
(1) Wood. Wood can be used for backing or lettering and is highly useful for a sign that has carved, recessed or
dimensional lettering or decoration. Use wood that allows the grain to contribute to the design. Large pieces of wood can
crack or check as they age–exterior plywood with protected edges can help solve this problem.
(2) Metal. Metal can be used for backing or lettering. Copper, bronze, brass and stainless steel offer richness and
durability. Gold and silver leaf, properly applied, can last for 50 years or more.
(3) Glass. The transparency of glass allows graphics or lettering painted on its surface to float in place, while also
allowing a view beyond. Glass can be etched or sand-blasted and lit from the bottom edge for dramatic effects. The area
of glass used for the sign may also be entirely back-painted with a solid color after lettering has been applied.
(4) Plastic. Plastic is most successful when used for individual letters. Large areas of plastic can look flimsy and cheap.
If used as a backing, it should be made rigid or placed in a frame. Avoid vacuum-formed plastic faces in metal frames.
(G) Sign Color. Coordinate sign and building colors so that the entire face of the building works together to look attractive and
draw attention. Too many colors used together on a sign (or on adjacent signs) tend to overwhelm the viewer. It is best to limit the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/422
number of colors on a sign to three or four. Any additional colors should be used sparingly as accents.
(H) Sign Contrast. Make sure that there is enough contrast between lettering and background colors. In general, lighter letters on a
dark background are more legible than dark letters on a light background. This applies to signage on glass or on board backing. If a
building contains a number of shops, it is best if all signs have dark backgrounds and light letters, or vice versa. Lack of this basic
uniformity destroys the rhythm of a building's facade.
(I) Sign Lighting. Well-lit signs are particularly important for stores that stay open at night. Even after hours, lighted signs,
displays, and facades contribute to the safety, enjoyment and visual interest of the streetscape. Illuminated signs attract attention
after-hours and lend warmth to a commercial district. Exterior lights can be controlled by timers or photoelectric cells.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) If a building has multiple storefronts, the lighting for their signs should be coordinated.
(b) If all storefronts have signs lit externally with hooded fluorescent lights, for example, all the lamp colors
should be the same (i.e., all warm white, all cool white, and so on).
(2) Standards. Use micro fluorescent tubes or neon to backlight solid letters or signs.
(3) Incandescent Light. Spots or floodlights attached to the building facade and spaced at intervals can usually
illuminate the full area of a sign. There are a variety of exterior fixtures that can be used as decorative elements–from
simple housings to elaborate, fluted, gooseneck fixtures. Attached to the building and spaced at intervals, use
incandescent spot or floodlights to illuminate the full area of a sign.
(4) Fluorescent Light. Properly shielded with hoods, a series of fluorescent fixtures can light signs more uniformly than
incandescent spots. They are typically cooler in color, but new tube types can closely match the quality and color range of
incandescent lights, which many people still prefer. Fluorescent fixtures typically look more utilitarian than incandescent
ones and blend less easily with historic building facades; therefore, the provision of a valence to conceal the fixture is
required. Provide a valence to conceal fluorescent light fixtures used on historic building facades.
(5) Backlit Signs/Letters and Neon Light. Micro-fluorescent tubes or neon behind solid letters or signs can highlight a
building's textured surface as well as provide a pleasant glow around an establishment's name. Neon signs and accent
lighting are appropriate to the CBD, particularly to enliven and advertise evening entertainment uses that give it its unique
identity. Neon lights are permitted in window signs only.
(6) Up/Down-Lighting. Although lighting signs from below is dramatic and allows fixtures to be more easily hidden,
mounting fixtures above signs and lighting down avoids many weather and water-related problems.
(7) Glare. Glare from unshielded lights makes adjacent signs or displays difficult to see. Bare bulbs are prohibited on
all buildings. Overly bright signs, especially at night, can actually cause passers-by to look away rather than toward the
sign and storefront.
(J) Monument Signs. Freestanding or ground signs are seen from furthest away, often from automobiles. They should be used for
business occupying residential buildings, which typically have no sign band or display window, and for businesses or spaces, such as
rear parking lots, not visible from the street.
(1) Monument Sign Standards.
(a) Monument signs shall have an aggregate sign face area of no more than 8 square feet in area.
(b) Maximum monument sign height shall be no more than 6 feet to the top of the sign and minimum sign height
shall be no less than 4 feet to the bottom of the sign. These dimensions shall be measured from the top of curb
elevation.
(c) Use monument signs of no more than 4' in height to mark parking areas.
(d) Materials and design shall be consistent with the architectural style of the building and complement with the
surrounding areas.
(e) Landscaping under monument signs shall consist of planting beds provided with at least 60% of landscape
area of trees, shrubs, and/or floral with the other 40% consisting of lawn or other ground cover materials.
(f) Landscaping shall leave the letters and design of the sign visible.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/422
(g) Monument signs are prohibited on streets listed on table 1 with the following exceptions for the rest of the
Central Business District:
(i) Monument signs are allowed in front of residences that have been converted to commercial uses; or
(ii) To identify businesses in buildings not visible from the street.
(K) Sign Bands.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) The sign band should be articulated or divided so that each section clearly relates to an individual store.
(b) Multiple-storefront buildings, should use signs of similar size, proportion and materials for each store.
(c) Sign bands should coordinate colors in continuous sign band or among continuous signs.
(d) Sign bands should vary the color of individual signs within a coordinate range.
(L) Wall Signs. Often viewed from across the street, a wall sign will be legible from that distance. The sizes of a wall sign, within
the allowable maximum, depends on the width of the street as well as the size of the business and contain simple information such as
the name of the store and the type of business. Board signs use a background board, generally rectangular in shape, that contains the
letters, graphic image and logo, where applicable. Individual letters mounted directly on a building can also create appealing signs.
Carefully sized and designed micro-tube neon signs can add an element of excitement to the streetscape at night.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) Walls signs should be compatible with the architectural style of the building, neighboring buildings, and/or the
character of the Pflugerville's CBD.
(b) Wall signs should be carefully sized to fit in with the building's facade design and should avoid obscuring
important architectural features such as cornices, piers, and pilasters, doorway pediments and upper-floor
windowsills.
(c) Wall-mounted signs should align with others on the block, to maintain established patterns.
(d) Wall signs should be located within a sign band when one exists, usually above the transom.
(e) Where a sign band doesn't exist, the wall sign should be located between the first floor transom and the second
floor windowsill or below the eaves/cornice on a one-story building.
(f) Signs on main facades should generally use readable letter types; however, smaller letters for smaller stores
and larger letters for larger stores are possible.
(g) Internally illuminated individual letters are not encouraged, but back-lit letters are.
(2) Standards.
(a) No more than two signs, one primary, one secondary shall be installed.
(b) The size of wall signs shall be limited to a maximum width of two-thirds of the width of the building front and
a maximum height of one-third of the height of the space between the first floor transom and the second floor
windowsill or eaves/cornice on one story buildings.
(c) Wall signs shall be located within the sign band if applicable.
(d) Wall signs shall be located so as not to obstruct display areas.
(e) Flush-mounted wall signs shall be located above the store-front display window or transoms and below the
second story windowsills.
(f) Lettering on wall signs shall be between 8" to 16" in height and occupy no more than 65% of the board.
(g) Internally illuminated box signs shall not be used.
(h) Wall signs on the rear of buildings shall be no larger than 9 square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/422
(M) Projecting Signs. High quality projecting signs can add a special character to the streetscape. Viewed from medium to short
range, projecting signs can highlight the storefront and attract pedestrians' attention as they walk along the sidewalk. A threedimensional
object or special shape often makes the most effective projecting sign. Merchants can use these signs to express what is
unique about their merchandise or their business; for example, a hammer-shaped sign for a hardware store, or an eyeglasses-shaped
sign for an optometrist. The information on a projecting sign need not duplicate the information on the wall sign; it should augment
the primary sign by describing the business in a different, more visual way. Projecting signs are not usually considered the
predominate sign for any business.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) Projecting signs should be small and unique in character.
(b) The design should be carefully coordinated with the building, the storefront and the design of the primary wall
sign.
(c) A projecting sign should complement or replace the principal wall sign. In a building with multiple
storefronts, coordinate with other business owners for a uniform approach to either one or both types of signs.
(d) Projecting signs should be located above the storefront display windows or transoms and below the secondstory
windowsills.
(e) Projecting signs should be small and eye-catching; but should not block visibility of existing signs.
(f) Projecting signs along storefronts should be spaced so that they do not obstruct each other in the pedestrian's
line of vision.
(g) The maximum surface area of the projecting sign should be nine square feet per face and lettering 4" to 10"
high.
(h) Projecting signs should be attached perpendicular to the building, and normally project more than 15 inches,
but no more than 36 inches from the building.
(i) Signs should not project more than six feet from the facade of the building, or half the width of the sidewalk,
whichever is less.
(j) Projecting signs should be positioned along the first floor level of the facade and, should align with others on
the block to create a rhythm.
(k) Projecting signs should have no less than eight feet of clearance between the sidewalk and the lowest part of
the sign.
(l) The maximum distance between the projecting sign and the face of the building should be one foot.
(m) The bracket from which the sign hangs should be part of the overall sign design. If several stores within a
building are to have projecting signs, their design and placement should be considered together, and in general they
should be hung at the same height.
(n) Internally illuminated projecting sign boxes tend to look heavy and are strongly discouraged.
(2) Standards. If the sign is suspending or is a projecting sign above a public right-of-way, the issuance and
continuation of a sign permit shall be conditioned on the sign owner obtaining and maintaining in force liability insurance
for such a sign and such amount as the Administrator may reasonably from time to time determine, provided that such
liability insurance shall be at least $500,000.00 per occurrence per sign.
(N) Window Signs. White, light colors or gold leaf are most legible for graphics on glass. Signs taped to the glass or painting a
temporary sign on the glass in neon colors is not desirable.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) The amount of information to convey, the importance of information, the design of the display area and the
design of the storefront should all be considered in determining the height of the letters.
(b) Window signs should be seen from short range, in front of the store.
(c) Window signs should be used to provide information that is more detailed and to complement the window
display.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/422
(d) Small stenciled letters, addresses or logos should be used for window signs; do not paint large areas of glass.
(e) Lettering may be hand painted directly on glass, etched in glass or applied with vinyl, die-cut letters.
(f) Window signs should use lettering 1/2" to 8" high.
(g) Colors and lighting should be appropriate to the building and neighborhood.
(h) Signs painted on second-floor windows are seen from a greater distance than those on first floor windows, and
the letter size and amount of information should be adjusted accordingly.
(i) Temporary signs should be hung a foot or more behind the glass, fixed to a rigid backing board and
highlighted with display spotlights.
(2) Standards.
(a) Window signs shall be designed to be pleasing and to aesthetically enhance storefronts.
(b) Window signs shall be compatible with the architectural style and the surrounding areas.
(c) Window sign area on first floor windows shall cover no more than 20% of the total window area.
(d) Window sign area on second floor windows shall cover no more than 25% of the total window area.
(e) Window signs shall be geared to the pedestrian and be at eye level.
(f) Interior signs shall be within 36" of the window so as to be readable from the exterior.
(g) Neon tubes may not be used on larger signs or to accent a letter or logo, or to outline significant building
features.
(O) Awning/Canopy Signs. Historically, awnings served as protection from the elements for storefront activities. In addition, they
may serve to identify a business and differentiate storefronts. Signs on awnings or canopies can complement or become the primary
wall sign. When a single business occupies several bays of a storefront, a small wall sign at each bay, or a sign on each awning or
canopy, can be very effective in discreetly repeating the name of the business. More numerous, smaller signs also contribute to a
fine-grain pedestrian experience along the sidewalk. The only information appropriate for this sign panel shall be the business name,
address, and logo.
(1) Guidelines.
(a) Canopies should be designed as an integral component of the building.
(b) Canopies should be in proportion to the overall building facade and supporting framework should not block
pedestrian movement.
(c) In many cases the sign should be limited to the skirt panel.
(d) Awnings should be in proportion to the overall building facade, architectural style and should match the width
of the storefront or window opening.
(e) Upper floor awning should be mounted within the window opening.
(f) Canvas, or some other type of durable fabric, is the most appropriate material for awnings and canopies. The
color, font, and design of the projection should be both complementary to the building and the color and details of
other buildings and signs nearby.
(g) Awnings on a single structure should have a consistent color and pattern with the building and surrounding
areas.
(2) Standards.
(a) A standard street-level awning shall be mounted so that its valance is approximately 8-1/2 feet above the
sidewalk, directly over an individual window opening or bay-without covering storefront elements such as cornices
or piers.
(b) The awning or canopy sign shall be restricted to 25% of the awning or canopy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/422
(c) Retractable awnings shall be recessed within the storefront bay, so it does not compete with the structure of
the base.
(d) The awning shall project no more than six feet from the building, and typically, includes a 12-inch valance
attached at the awning bar. The valance shall remain unfixed and is the only portion of the awning that may serve as
sign panel.
(e) Awnings on the storefront level shall not extend into the second story of the building facade.
(f) Lettering 6" to 8" high shall be used.
(g) Sign copy shall be centered on the awning to achieve symmetry.
(h) Awnings shall be kept in good repair and be replaced when fading and deterioration occurs.
(i) Awnings materials shall be fire rated.
(j) All awning and canopies shall be assessed on case-by-case basis by the Building Official.
(P) Banners. Banners can be a lively way to announce a special event or seasonal theme. They are most effective when using a
bold design and brightly colored shapes or letters.
(1) Standards.
(a) Banners materials shall include cloth, plastic, or other materials which have been tested and shown to have
long life expectancy and resistance to the elements.
(b) Banners shall be attached to or suspended from any structure, staff, pole, line framing or vehicle.
(c) Bright colors shall be appropriate because they stand out against light-colored backgrounds.
(d) A banner shall be not larger than 16 square feet in area.
(e) Banners shall be kept in good repair and be replaced when fading and deterioration occurs.
(f) Banners are allowed to be placed up to six times a year for a period of not more that three weeks. Only one
banner is allowed per business at any one time.
(Q) Sidewalk Signs. Sidewalk signs are often referred to as sandwich signs.
(1) Standards.
(a) One sidewalk sign per business shall be allowed.
(b) Sidewalk signs shall be located next to the curb edge of the sidewalk in such manner so not to interfere with
pedestrians or opening of parking car doors.
(c) Sidewalk signs shall be placed in front of a storefront during business hour only.
(d) Sidewalk signs shall be placed so to maintain a minimum four-foot pedestrian walkway.
(e) Sidewalk signs shall maintain a clear building ingress and egress.
(f) Sidewalk signs shall not obstruct any loading zone.
(g) Sidewalk signs shall not be placed within six feet of any street intersection.
(h) Sidewalk signs shall be no less than three feet and no more than four feet high.
(i) Sidewalk signs shall be no less than 18 inches and no more than two feet wide.
(j) Sidewalk signs shall feature the name of the business.
(k) Sidewalk signs shall not advertise any service or product not available at the related business.
(l) Sidewalk signs shall not have additional signs taped or attached to the base sign.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/422
(m) Sidewalk signs shall be kept in good repair at all times.
(n) If the sidewalk in front of a building is les than six feet wide exclusive of the curb lawn, the business may not
display a sandwich sign on the sidewalk area.
(o) An unobstructed passage of 48 inches shall be maintained for wheelchair travel on a sidewalk.
§ 155.1306 PUBLIC ART.
The Central Business District has a rich heritage and history that can be expressed through public art. Public [art] can be located in
public parks, streets, plazas and squares. Types of arts can be sculptures, statues, monuments, fountains, water features, mosaics and
murals. When you apply, the process is usually handled in conjunction with the Architectural Review Board. Any public art projects
in the public right-of-way will require a license agreement. If your project will not be located in the right-of-way but the working
group will use the public right-of-way to create or install the artwork, you likely will be required to apply for a license agreement.
Many banner, signage and mural projects will require a sign/awning permit.
(A) Guidelines.
(1) The work should have the ability to enhance the downtown experience, bring people together, invite activity
and interaction, or create interest.
(2) The artist should select the sturdiest, safest, and most durable materials available for construction.
(B) Standards.
(1) The work shall be scaled with respect to the location, street, and surrounding buildings.
(2) The work shall add to the local identity and profile in the context of the CBD.
(3) The work shall be robust and maintainable.
(4) The work of art shall be placed to celebrate a gateway, or create a focal point.
(5) The artwork shall be relevant to the location and not confuse the public with artwork that creates a false sense
of history.
(6) The artwork shall not obscure building elements or details.
(7) The artwork shall not physically damage the building or site.
(8) When related to a specific landmark building or site, the artwork shall be subordinate to the overall building.
(9) Keep in mind that art can come to a premature end for a variety of reasons. A neighborhood may change. A
new building or other structure may block the view of the art. Or the land may eventually be reclaimed for another
purpose. Unfortunately, it is also possible for artwork to become irreparably damaged. It shall be the responsibility
of the sponsoring group, owner or City to remove or replace the artwork should this happen.
(10) Moving site-specific artwork to another location shall require the artist's permission, as artwork often reflects
the character of the site and is designed specifically for a particular location.
(11) The artwork shall be so constructed, placed, and protected as to not become a convenient target for
vandalism.
(12) Title to the art shall be presented to the Planning and Zoning Commission before final approval.
(13) The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether a project is inappropriate for the display of
art.
(14) The artist and/or group shall install the artwork in a safe and timely way.
(15) The artwork shall be accessible as an experience, which includes following Americans with Disabilities Act
(ADA) standards for viewing and accessibility to the artwork, touching the artwork, etc.
(16) The durability of materials and the maintenance requirements listed under of the proposed work shall be
presented to the ARB:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/422
(a) The artist shall present a maintenance budget for long-term costs to maintain the artwork's original
appearance and structural integrity.
(b) An object maintenance sheet or maintenance summary shall be provided as well as comments about the
permanency and durability of materials.
(c) If paint is used, the artist shall spell out exactly what paint was used and where the paint suppliers are
located.
(d) The information provided shall include drawings and diagrams with installation details, as well as names
of fabricators and information about the fabrication process if appropriate.
(e) Photo documentation of artwork shall be provided. This gives a permanent record of the artwork at the
time of installation and helps to document materials, techniques, and conditions over time.
(C) Safety and Liability. Safety and liability are also significant factors that must be considered when designing a work of public
art. A work with public access cannot pose a safety or liability hazard of any kind. For example, the sharp edges of cut perforated
steel must be ground and finished to avoid inflicting injury. All artists or landowners are required to carry insurance as indicated
below for the duration of the project:
(1) Commercial General Liability Insurance. Insurance designed to protect businesses (artists) for third party bodily
injury or property claims arising from an occurrence involving premises, operations, products and completed operations,
products and completed operations exposures. A requirement of a minimum bodily injury and property damage per
occurrence limit of $500,000.00 is required.
(2) Automobile Liability Insurance. Insurance in which the insurer agrees to pay all sum for which the insured is
legally obligated because of bodily injury or property damage arising from the ownership, maintenance, or use of a
vehicle. This insurance is required any time the artist or subcontractors will be using any vehicle to provide the services
as stated in the presentation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) Worker's Compensation and Employer's Liability Insurance. Insurance that pays for the medical expenses of injured
workers and indemnifies them for lost wages while they are unable to work. This insurance is required if the artist or
subcontractors will be providing services on the City of Pflugerville premises. The artist and legal partner only may waive
this coverage for themselves, but all subcontractors must be covered. It is in the artist's best interest to hire subcontractors
who already carry this insurance. Minimum policy limits are required for employers liability of $100,000.00 bodily injury
each accident, $500,000.00 bodily injury by disease policy limit and $100,000.00 bodily injury by disease for each
employee.
(4) Artist or landowners are responsible for insuring the artwork until it is installed and ownership is accepted by the
city, if applicable.
§ 155.1400 INCENTIVE-BASED PROVISIONS.
§ 155.1401 IN GENERAL.
The elements in this section are considered desirable elements of downtown development. However, due to specific site conditions,
differing development approaches and other factors, these elements may not be appropriate for all sites within the downtown.
Therefore, an incentive-based approach to the inclusion of these elements is desirable.
§ 155.1402 REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
The City Council, or any designated administrative body, shall review and approve all incentives. Qualifying projects shall be those
that meet the requirements for one or more of the elements listed below. The City Council, or other designated administrative body,
shall consider whether to offer the developer an incentive for the proposed project, including, but not limited to:
(A) Use of right-of-way for parking spaces required for the development;
(B) Funding of a portion or all of the cost of extending utilities or utility improvements; or
(C) Any financial incentive considered appropriate by the City Council, or other designated administrative body.
§ 155.1500 ADMINISTRATION.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/422
§ 155.1501 REVIEW BODIES.
(A) Administrator. The Administrator shall have the review and approval authority established in Subchapter 2 Administration of
the Unified Development Code. This section does not restrict the powers and duties of the Administrator granted or assigned by
other sections of the City's Code of Ordinances.
(B) Review Bodies.
(1) Review Responsibilities.
(a) Approval of Plans and Specifications. No Improvement shall be commenced, erected or maintained that
requires a major site Development permit, nor shall any exterior addition to, or change or alteration to any
Improvement, be made, nor shall any site grading or landscaping be undertaken until the plans and specifications
thereof (including but not limited to exterior views, exterior materials, colors and elevation) are submitted to, and
approved in writing by, the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with this subchapter B. The Planning
and Zoning Commission shall have the discretion to make final, conclusive and binding determinations in matters of
architectural and aesthetic judgment in accordance with this subchapter B. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may exempt certain Guidelines of this subchapter B so long as it determines the architectural and aesthetic intent of
the code is still satisfied.
(b) Preliminary Action on Major Permits. An applicant shall meet with the Planning and Zoning Commission at a
preapplication conference at which the Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and provide the applicant
comments on the Preliminary Architectural Plan prior to the submittal of a major site Development permit.
(c) Final Action on Major Permits. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review and then issue, issue with
conditions or deny the application for a major site Development permit.
(d) Final Action on Referrals of Minor Permits. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review any
application for a minor site Development permit referred by the Administrator.
§ 155.1502 GENERAL REVIEW PROVISIONS.
(A) Applicability.
(1) The site Development permit review process assures any future Development will occur in a planned, orderly and
attractive manner.
(2) No Construction or site Improvement work may commence until the issuance of a site Development permit.
(3) A site Development permit shall be required as a condition to the Development of any site within the CBD except
for: buildings or other Structures exclusively for agricultural or accessory Use.
(B) Preapplication Conference for a Minor Site Development Permit.
(1) Prior to the submission of an application for a minor site Development permit, it is recommended that each
applicant schedule a preapplication conference with the Administrator to discuss the procedures, requirements and
Guidelines required for approval in the CBD.
(2) There is no required format for a minor preapplication conference; it may occur in any form so long as the potential
applicant receives the information described above.
(C) Preapplication Conference for a Major Site Development Permit.
(1) A mandatory preapplication conference with the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be required for applicants
requiring a major site Development permit
(2) At the preapplication conference, the applicant shall submit a Preliminary Architectural Plan to the Planning and
Zoning Commission, applying the Guidelines of this subchapter B and considering the approval criteria in section
155.1505 below. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall comment on the Preliminary Architectural Plan to aid the
applicant in preparing its major site Development permit.
(3) Completion of a preapplication conference does not imply or assume subsequent approval of the final permit or
application.
(D) Application Submittal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/422
(1) Submittal of a major or minor site Development permit application may be undertaken by the Owner of the affected
property or an authorized agent.
(2) An application for a major or minor site Development permit shall be submitted in accordance with following table.
Table 9. Major and Minor Permits
Type of Development Major
Permit
Minor
Permit
Residential – New Development
Up to 4 units (Multifamily)
x
5 or more units (Multifamily) x
Residential – Additions
Adding up to 4 units (Multifamily)
x
Adding 5 or more units (Multifamily) x
Nonresidential – New Development
Under 5,000 SF impervious cover
x
Over 5,000 SF impervious cover x
Nonresidential – Additions
Additions under 10% gross floor area or 500 SF impervious
cover
x
Additions over 10% gross floor area or 500 SF impervious
cover
x
Modifications
Substantial modification to approved permit x
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/422
Minor modification to approved permit x
(E) Submittal Standards.
(1) Filing fee.
(2) Blue line or black line copies of the plan in the amount and to the specifications indicated in the Site Development
Code Supplemental Schedule.
(3) Complete application form.
(4) Runoff computation for drainage areas in accordance with the City of Austin Drainage Criteria Manual including
drainage calculations, drainage plan, and other pertinent information.
(5) If the proposed site is expected to generate 2,000 or greater vehicle trips on the peak day expected for the proposed
uses, according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers' Trip Generation, a qualified professional
with experience in traffic flow analysis and approved by the Planning Administrator must make, prepare and sign a traffic
impact analysis and certify to its completeness and accuracy. The traffic impact analysis must include the information
specified in the citywide Site Development Code Supplemental Schedule. The independent variable used to calculate the
number of expected trips is at the discretion of the Planning Administrator.
(6) If the proposed site requires driveway access from a state highway, a permit to construct driveway facilities on
highway right-of-way from the Texas Department of Transportation is required.
(7) A deed conveying any required park land to the city, or payment of a fee in lieu of dedicating park land, if
applicable.
(8) At the administrator's discretion, a lighting diagram from a licensed professional engineer.
(F) Content Standards. An application form shall contain all of the following:
(1) Legal description, including a deed reference and a plat reference and, where applicable, a metes and bounds
description.
(2) Lot lines, front, rear, and side yard lines, total lot area, and lot widths and depths.
(3) Existing and proposed easements.
(4) Existing and proposed contours at two feet intervals.
(5) Existing zoning designation if applicable and proposed land Use.
(6) Adjacent zoning districts.
(7) All current uses of adjacent land.
(8) Location of any existing or proposed stream, pond, or waterway.
(9) Any rights-of-way, or other existing or proposed dedicated open space.
(10) Location of 25- and 100-year floodplains, according to the best information available, with the source indicated.
(11) Stormwater detention basins and outflow release device detail, either permanent or temporary.
(12) All drainage calculations, including storm routing and elevation/storage tabulations for 25- and 100-year
frequency storm events.
(13) Existing and proposed drainage channels with modifications, if any.
(14) Where a drainage channel is existing or proposed, complete plans, profiles, and specifications showing complete
construction details.
(15) Location of existing trees with a caliper of more than four inches with the caliper labeled and proposed trees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/422
(16) Special notation describing the measures that will be used to safeguard protected trees during construction, if
applicable.
(17) Location of existing trees proposed to be removed.
(18) Existing landscaping, vegetation, and other natural features.
(19) Proposed landscaping and buffering with an indication of plant materials proposed to satisfy bufferyard
requirements.
(20) Existing and proposed sidewalks.
(21) Existing and proposed water and sewer lines, hydrants, and manholes within 50 feet of the site.
(22) Proposed street access, loading areas, and any proposed street improvements associated with the development of
the site.
(23) Detailed plans parking and paving of parking areas.
(24) Location of, and distance between, all existing and proposed driveways, including all driveways within 200 feet of
the site, including their proposed construction, paving, and their slope, measured between the street end of their apron and
the opposite end of the driveway.
(25) Designation of existing and proposed joint-use driveway.
(26) Existing and proposed fences and earth berms, including height.
(27) Location of all proposed development under this subchapter.
(28) Location and height of proposed lighting.
(29) Proposed measures to control runoff and erosion during construction.
(30) Proposed measures to control runoff and erosion after completion of development.
(31) Location of existing and proposed self-service devices.
(32) Height of proposed and existing buildings.
(33) A table indicating the number of parking spaces required and the number of parking spaces provided.
(34) A table indicating the landscaping required and the landscaping provided.
(35) A table indicating the amount of impervious cover proposed consistent with the table included in the Site
Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
(36) Proposed development area boundary and any applicable development sub-area boundaries.
(37) Distance to nearest residentially-zoned land on all sides of the subject site if the height of the proposed building is
greater than the maximum height at the setback line.
(38) The finished floor elevation of all buildings proposed on the site.
(39) The following signature block:
This site development plan has been reviewed and approved by the City of Pflugerville. All construction on the subject
site must be constructed consistent with these plans.
Administrator, City of
Pflugerville
(G) Sufficiency Review.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/422
(1) The determination of whether an application is complete and satisfies the submittal requirements shall be made by
the Administrator within five working days of the application being submitted.
(2) An application for a site development permit may not be submitted for a determination of completeness until the
preapplication conference has been held.
(3) If the application is determined incomplete, the Administrator shall notify the applicant in writing. The notification
shall list all missing or incomplete items and provide a specific period of time (no fewer than five working days) for the
applicant to resubmit the material. The applicant may request an additional meeting for explanation of the missing or
incomplete items. If the application is not resubmitted within the period specified by the Administrator, the application
shall be deemed rejected and shall not be accepted for filing. After an application has been rejected, a new application and
fee shall be required.
(4) Determination that an application is complete does not preclude any negative final action and does not include any
implied determination that the application successfully meets any review criteria.
(H) Permit Expiration.
(1) All site development permits are valid for two years from the date the permit is issued.
(2) A modification to an approved site development permit replaces the previous site development permit and is valid
two years from the date the latest permit modification is approved.
(I) Appeal. An appeal of a decision denying a minor or major site development permit shall be in accordance with §157.306 of the
code.
§ 155.1503 MINOR PERMIT REVIEW.
(A) The applicant for a minor site development permit shall submit legible copies of a complete application to the Administrator in
the amount and to the specifications indicated in the Site Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
(B) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Administrator shall distribute the application to the proper reviewing authorities.
(C) Not longer than 21 days following the submittal of a complete minor site development permit application, the Administrator
shall review the application for compliance with the submittal requirements, and the requirements and guidelines of this subchapter
considering the approval criteria in §155.1505 below, and present the applicant with comments regarding the review or approve the
plan and issue the minor site development permit if there are no comments.
(D) Not longer than 60 days following the presentation of the Administrator's comments requiring revisions to the application, the
applicant must submit revised copies of the application.
(E) The Administrator must review and submit comments to the applicant and the applicant must revise the application or submit
additional information as required in continual cycles in accordance with subsections (C) and (D) above until all comments are
addressed and the application is ready for approval by the Administrator.
(F) The Administrator may then issue, issue with conditions or deny the minor site development permit.
(G) The Administrator may issue a minor site development permit with conditions only to the extent that such conditions specify
the actions necessary to bring the application into complete compliance with applicable regulations, or where additional conditions
have been agreed to by the applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/422
§ 155.1504 MAJOR PERMIT REVIEW.
(A) Administrator Review.
(1) After completion of the preapplication conference and comments on the Preliminary Architectural Plan by the
Planning and Zoning Commission as described in section 155.1502(C), the applicant for a major site Development permit
shall submit legible copies of a complete application to the Administrator in the amount and to the specifications
indicated in the Site Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
(2) Upon receipt of a complete application, the Administrator shall distribute the application to the proper reviewing
authorities.
(3) Not longer than 21 days following the submittal of a complete major site Development permit application, the
Administrator shall review the application for compliance with the submittal requirements, and the requirements and
Guidelines of this subchapter considering the approval criteria in section 155.1505 below, present the applicant with
comments regarding the review and forward a written recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(4) Not longer than 60 days following the presentation of the Administrator's comments requiring revisions to the
application, the applicant must submit revised copies of the application.
(5) The Administrator must review and submit comments to the applicant and the applicant must either revise the
application or submit additional information as required in continual cycles in accordance with subsections (3) and (4)
above until all comments are addressed and the Administrator forwards a written recommendation to the Planning and
Zoning Commission or the applicant requests submission to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(6) The Administrator may establish procedures for administrative review necessary to ensure compliance with this
code and state statutes, and may assign staff to review the application and make a preliminary report.
(B) Planning and Zoning Commission Final Action.
(1) Within 30 days of its receipt of the Administrator's recommendation or the applicant's request for submission, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing, at which time it shall review the application, applying the
Guidelines of this subchapter and considering the approval criteria in section 155.1505 below.
(2) The Planning and Zoning Commission may then issue, issue with conditions, or deny the application for a major
site Development permit.
(3) An application before the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be considered approved by a simple majority vote
of all members of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(4) The time within which the decision shall be rendered may be extended by mutual consent of the petitioner and the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
(5) The final site development application, including any conditions imposed by the Planning and Zoning Commission,
shall be reviewed by the Planning Department prior to the issuance of the Building Permit by the Building Official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/422
§ 155.1505 CRITERIA FOR APPROVAL.
The Administrator or Planning and Zoning Commission, as designated by this subchapter B, shall determine whether to grant a site
Development permit based on the following criteria:
(A) The application is complete and the information contained within the application is sufficient and correct enough to
allow adequate review and final action.
(B) The application illustrates compliance with the requirements and Guidelines of this subchapter.
(C) The application exhibits compatibility of the design with surrounding properties.
(D) The application exhibits no substantial negative impacts on the historic, cultural or architectural nature of the site or
surrounding area, or successfully mitigates such impacts.
§ 155.1506 INSPECTIONS.
(A) It shall be the responsibility of the Administrator to issue the actual site development permit following approval, with any
designated conditions, and to maintain a copy of the site development permit, together with the proposed plans. These shall be public
documents for all purposes.
(B) Work performed pursuant to the issuance of a site development permit shall conform to the requirements of such permit. In the
event that such work is not in compliance, the Building Official shall issue a stop work order.
(C) Upon completion of the construction of the site, the site development permit holder shall request a final inspection of the
development.
(D) Within seven days of the date of the request, the Building Official shall perform the final inspection and shall determine
whether the development conforms with the site development permit approved for such site.
(E) If the development does not conform with the site development permit approved for the development site, the Building
Official, within seven days of the date of the inspection, shall submit to the permit holder a list of deficiencies. The permit holder
shall correct the deficiencies and thereafter request a re-inspection.
(F) Until all development for which a site development permit was issued is complete and all such development has been approved
by the Building Official, no certificate of occupancy nor utility service connection for permanent utility service will be issued or
approved by the city.
§ 155.1507 MODIFICATIONS TO APPROVED PERMITS.
(A) Substantial Modifications.
(1) A substantial modification to an approved major site Development permit shall be reviewed in accordance with
section 155.1504. A substantial modification to a minor site Development permit shall be reviewed in accordance with
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/422
section 155.1503. However, any modification to a site Development permit (major or minor) for a single-family or twofamily
residence shall be reviewed in accordance with section 155.1503.
(2) In reaching a decision as to whether or not proposed changes are to be considered a substantial modification, the
Administrator shall, after reviewing the record of the project, determine if any of the following changes are proposed.
(3) In general, any modifications that affect the building envelope or the perimeter of the proposed site shall be
considered a substantial modification.
(4) Substantial modifications shall include:
(a) Increase in building area;
(b) Relocation or addition of parking;
(c) Increase or relocation of stormwater facilities;
(d) Addition or substantial relocation of an access point; and
(e) Any change in either:
(i) The architectural design;
(ii) Schematic landscape plan that decreases the height or quantity of plants; or
(iii) Any other conditions specifically approved or required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
(B) Minor Modifications. A minor modification shall mean any modification other than a substantial modification above, and shall
be reviewed in accordance with section 155.1503.
§ 155.1508 OTHER REVIEW PROCEDURES.
(A) Appeals. All appeals to the Building Official's or Administrator's decision, request for variances or special exceptions, shall be
reviewed by the Board of Adjustment in accordance with §157.306.
(B) Phasing.
(1) Development areas may be divided into separate sub-areas. The development sub-area shall comply with the
established standards. If a sub-area is combined with another sub-area for the purpose of complying with the requirements
of this subchapter, all of the combined sub-areas shall comply with the current established standards.
(2) A sub-area shall not include portions of the development site that would cause the balance of the development site
to become nonconforming to this subchapter or further increases its existing nonconformity.
(3) Phasing of a development is permitted, provided all proposed phases are included in the approved site development
plan. All phases are subject to the expiration date established for the permit. Each phase will be treated as a development
sub-area.
§ 155.1509 NONCONFORMITIES.
(A) Nonconforming Uses.
(1) A nonconforming use shall be allowed to remain provided the site does not become vacant.
(2) A nonconforming use shall not be enlarged except when required to do so by law or by court order, or when
authorized by the Board of Adjustment as a special exception pursuant to §157.306.
(3) Nonconforming uses are subject to regulations prohibiting the creation of a nuisance and regulations reasonably
protecting adjacent property.
(4) Nonconforming uses may be continued or enlarged upon the approval of the Board of Adjustment.
(B) Nonconforming Structures.
(1) Any nonconforming structure that is damaged by fire, explosion, wind, earthquake, war, riot, or other calamity or
Act of God to the extent that the reasonable cost of repair exceeds 50 percent of its then appraised tax value, shall not be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/422
restored or reconstructed and used as it was before such happening unless such restoration, reconstruction, and use occurs
within six months of the date of the damaging event. The six-month period does not include the period of time necessary
to conclude any litigation related to such calamity or to the repair thereof.
(2) A nonconforming structure may be repaired and maintained as necessary to keep it in sound condition. Nothing in
this subchapter prohibits the strengthening or repair of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper
authority.
(3) A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on the lot, or on any other
lot, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all the regulations of this subchapter.
(4) Any expansion of a nonconforming structure shall meet the requirements of these zoning regulations.
(C) Nonconforming Site Characteristics. If characteristics of a site, including, but not limited to, site layout, access, drainage,
landscaping, screening, parking, lighting, or architectural design are made nonconforming by this subchapter, as adopted or
amended, no change shall thereafter be made in such characteristics of use that increases the degree of nonconformity with this
subchapter.
§ 155.1600 DEFINITIONS.
§ 155.1601 DEFINED TERMS.
For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. Terms not defined herein are construed in accordance with customary usage.
ADMINISTRATOR. The Planning Administrator of the city.
APRON or DRIVEWAY APRON. That part of a driveway situated in a street right-of-way.
ARTICULATION. A projection or recess of a building or structure.
ARTIST. An individual professionally engaged in the production of creative and original artwork.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT. As defined in Chapter 157.
BUFFERING. The use of berms, plant material, fences, walls, or any combination thereof placed within a required yard for the
purpose of partially screening certain areas from other areas.
BUILD. To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, or alter a building or structure.
BUILDABLE AREA. The area available for building on a lot after deletion of areas not available for building, such as any floodplain,
easement, or yard.
BUILDING OFFICIAL. The person responsible for enforcement of the city building code and other development related codes and
ordinances or a duly authorized designee. See §155.1501(A).
BUILD-TO LINE. An alignment establishing a certain distance from the curb/property line to a line along which the building shall be
built. (Front porches and handicap ramps shall be exempt from build-to line requirements, and must occur behind the property line.)
CALIPER. The measurement of the diameter of a tree trunk measured three feet above the natural grade level.
CITY. The City of Pflugerville, Texas.
CONSTRUCTION. The commencement and continuous uninterrupted prosecution of construction pursuant to a site development
permit which includes the permanent placement and fastening of materials to the land or structure for which the permit has been
issued. Where demolition, excavation or removal of an existing structure has been substantially begun preparatory to new
construction, such excavation, demolition or removal shall be deemed to be actual construction, provided that work shall be
continuously carried on until the completion of the new construction involved. Fill and the installation of the drainage facilities shall
be considered a part of construction. Actual construction shall include only work begun under a valid building permit.
COVERAGE. The percent of a lot or tract covered by the first story of a building.
DEVELOPMENT. Any of the following activities:
(1) The commencement of mining, excavation, or dredging;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/422
(2) The clearing or removal of natural ground cover and/or trees in connection with site preparation for construction,
immediate or future;
(3) The deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste or fill;
(4) The alteration or improvement of a bed, bank, or floodplain of a waterway; or
(5) The construction or relocation of a building or structure on a lot.
“To develop” is to create a development.
DEVELOPMENT AREA. The boundary of the area indicated in a site development plan that is the ultimate boundary of the
developed site.
DEVELOPMENT SUB-AREA. The boundary of the area included in a site development plan that encloses the area currently under
consideration, but is joined to existing development or future development within the same development area.
DEVELOPMENT SITE. That area of a lot for which there is an application pending or a grant made of a site development permit.
DRIPLINE. The periphery of the area underneath a tree that would be encompassed if perpendicular lines were dropped from the
farthest edges of the crown of the tree.
DRIVE-THRU. An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits
customers to receive services, or obtain goods while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY. The portion of a defined access located in public street right-of-way designed for the ingress or egress of vehicles into
vehicular use area of a site.
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. As defined in Chapter 157.
EARTH BERM. A landscaped strip of ground used as a visual screen.
FACADE, PRIMARY. Any facade facing a street, parking area or pedestrian walkway shall be considered a primary facade.
FACADE, SECONDARY. Any facade not considered a primary facade that is visible from a public street or adjacent residential
development shall be considered a secondary facade.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS. Except as may be otherwise indicated in these regulations, gross floor area shall be construed as the sum of
the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two buildings, and including outside decks and/or patios uses for commercial purposes.
FLOOR AREA RATIO. The total floor area of all buildings on a site divided by the area of that site.
FOYER. A decorative porch or impressive court at the primary entrance to a building.
FULL CUT-OFF LIGHT FIXTURE. A lighting fixture where no light is emitted above the horizontal plane.
GARAGE, PARKING. A building or portion thereof designed or used for temporary parking of motor vehicles.
IMPERVIOUS COVER. A surface which will not allow rainfall to pass into the ground, including impermeable concrete, asphalt
paving, compacted base material, and brick pavers on compacted base.
IMPROVEMENT. Every structure and all appurtenances of every type, whether temporary or permanent, including but not limited to
buildings, outbuildings, sheds, patios, swimming pools, garages, storage buildings, gazebos, signs, fences, gates, walls, decks,
landscaping, landscape improvements, poles, mailboxes, and antennae.
JOINT-USE DRIVEWAY. A driveway apron providing vehicular access to adjacent sites.
LANDSCAPED AREA. An area which has been enhanced by the use of plant material, planters, brick, stone, natural forms, water
forms, and gravel, but not including the use of smooth concrete or asphalt.
LINER BUILDING. A building that wraps around a parking lot or parking structure in order to mask it from the street.
LOADING, OFF-STREET. An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/422
LOCAL IDENTITY. Local identity can be defined by the different aspects of a region such as history, culture, economy, philosophy,
the character, and the people in the area. Local identity in art could be expressed using any of these aspects. The City of Pflugerville
has defined architectural styles, German, Mexican, and African-American history in the CBD that can be used as inspirational pieces
for art work.
LOT. As defined in Chapter 157.
LOT, CORNER. As defined in Chapter 157.
LOT DEPTH. As defined in Chapter 157.
LOT, INTERIOR. As defined in Chapter 157.
LOT WIDTH. As defined in Chapter 157.
MAIN BUILDING. A building on a lot that is designed to fulfill a primary function of an establishment, institution, or other entity.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY. The outdoor display of products actively available for sale for less than 24 hours a day. This definition does
not include products in shipping boxes, crates, on pallets, or other shipping containers, which shall be considered outdoor storage.
OUTDOOR STORAGE. The Outdoor Storage of products, whether for sale or as material for processes occurring on the site,
generally for more than 24 hours a day. This definition expressly includes any products on pallets, in shipping containers or in crates.
OUTPARCEL. A parcel of land generally located on the perimeter of a larger parcel of commercial land and often subordinate to the
larger parcel for access, parking and drainage purposes.
OUTSIDE CORNER. An exterior corner of a building, outside of the building.
OUTSIDE SURFACE PARKING. Large paved areas used for extensive vehicle parking beyond the incidental parking provided for
individuals, official governmental parking, and short term drop-off located adjacent to a building.
OWNER. The person who has legal title to a particular property or a lessee, agent, employee, or other person acting on behalf of, and
with the authorization of, such title holder.
PARKING SPACE. A part of a vehicular use area designed to be used for parking of a motor vehicle.
PEDESTRIAN MALL. A plaza with widened sidewalks on both sides of the streets.
PERSON. As defined in Chapter 157.
PLANT MATERIAL. Grass, trees, shrubs, flowers, vines, and other ground cover.
PRELIMINARY ARCHITECTURAL PLAN. A plan submitted for review by the Planning and Zoning Commission comprised of
elevations of the four sides of the building at a scale of 1/8"=1-0' minimum and a clear indication of openings and fenestration.
Elevations should be augmented with dimensions and notes describing major Construction materials. Delineations by varying line
weights and/or shade and shadow to depict a flat three-dimensional image is encouraged, as is any other technique that helps to
explain the Structure. The plan shall also include a basic footprint of the site showing placement of buildings and landscaping.
PROJECT CONSULTANTS. Associated individuals or firms which provide services as part of the project team (e.g., architects,
landscape architects, engineers, designers, etc.).
PROTECTED TREE. Any tree having a caliper of 5-3/4 inches or more, except any tree that is determined by the Building Official to
be diseased or dying due to natural causes.
PUBLIC PLAZA. A citywide plaza for concentrated public use and gatherings.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT. Either one dwelling unit or one lot that is designed to accommodate one family at a time for residential
purposes. One dwelling unit located on one or more lots is considered one residential unit. Multiple dwelling units located on one or
more lots is considered the number of dwelling units only.
ROOFLINE. The roofline shall be the lower edge of the eave or gable on a pitched roof or the uppermost height of a parapet wall.
SCALE DRAWINGS. A drawing or rendering that indicates the exact measurements or dimensions of the design or artwork.
SELF-SERVICE DEVICES. Pay telephones, automatic teller machines, and similar devices that are generally always available for use
by the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/422
SHRUB. Any self-supporting woody evergreen or deciduous species that typically grows no taller than 36 inches.
SIGHT TRIANGLE. The area formed by three lines, two of which begin at the same point and extend 30 feet in different directions.
The third line connects the ends of the two points. Sight triangles at the intersections of two public streets are measured along rightof-
way lines (or projections of right-of-way lines). Sight triangles at the intersections of a public street and a driveway or private
street are measured along the right-of-way line (or projection of a right-of-way line) and the edge of the driveway.
SQUARE FOOT DIMENSIONS or SF. As defined in Chapter 157.
STREET LINE. A dividing line between a lot, tract, or parcel of land and a contiguous street; also known as the right-of-way line.
STREET PLAZA. A widened sidewalk or arcaded plaza.
STREETSCAPE. An improvement to a public right-of-way, including a sidewalk, tree, light fixture, sign, and furniture, usually
intended to enhance the pedestrian experience.
STRUCTURE. Buildings as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to something having location on the
ground, or requiring construction or erection on the ground.
STRUCTURED PARKING SPACE. An abovegrade, ramp access, open-air structure specifically designed to accommodate vehicle
parking.
STUCCO. Exterior cement plaster, applied in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 25 of the International Building Code,
2003 Edition.
TEMPORARY BUILDING. A structure designed for relocation, to be set on a modularly constructed foundation, and with removable
porch, steps or ramp, intended to be placed and maintained for use only for a finite period of time.
Examples: Job management trailer, materials storage trailer, mobile-mini or POD, portable restroom building, portable classroom
building.
TREE. A woody plant having one well defined stem or trunk and a more or less definitely formed crown, and usually attaining a
mature height of at least eight feet.
TREELINE. Three or more protected trees that are so situated with reference to one another as to appear to be grouped together.
UNDERGROUD PARKING. Parking located below grade within an occupied building.
URBAN OASIS. A sheltered plaza with a high concentration of shading and plants.
USE. As defined in Chapter 157.
USERS. Construction industry, public school systems, parochial school systems, businesses requiring relocation and on-site housing
of employees during addition to or renovation of an existing facility.
VACANT. A site for which all uses have been discontinued for six months or longer, whether with the intent to abandon said use or
not. The six-month period does not include the period of time necessary to conclude any litigation related to such calamity or to the
repair thereof.
VEHICULAR USE AREA. That part of a lot utilized by motor vehicles for stopping or parking, including but not limited to parking
areas (whether striped for spaces or not), loading areas, and drive-through lanes.
WATERWAY. Any open channel that carries surface water drainage at a rate of over five cubic feet per second in a 25-year frequency
storm event.
YARD, REAR. The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a rear site boundary line, extending across the dimension of a site
between the side site boundaries.
YARD, SIDE. The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a side site line, extending across the dimension of a site between the front
and rear yards.
YARD, STREET. The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a street line, extending across the dimension of a site that is adjacent
to a street between the side site boundaries.
(Ord. 735-04-01-27, passed 1-27-04; Am. Ord. 741-04-02-24, passed 2-24-04; Ord. 757-04-09-28, passed 9-28-04; Ord. 763-04-11-
23, passed 11-23-04; Ord. 791-05-07-12, passed 7-12-05; Ord. 813-06-01-24, passed 1-24-06; Ord. 820-06-02-28, passed 2-28-06;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/422
Ord. 824-06-04-11, passed 4-11-06; Ord. 832-06-06-27, passed 6-27-06; Ord. 845-06-09-26, passed 9-26-06; Ord. 882-07-05-08,
passed 5-8-07; Ord. 884-07-05-15, passed 5/15/07; Ord. 1070-11-02-08, passed 2-8-11)
CHAPTER 156: RESERVED*
CHAPTER 157: UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE
§ 157.001 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE ADOPTION.
The Unified Development Code (UDC), adopted by Ordinance 1203-15-02-24, adopted February 24, 2015, as amended, is not
printed herein but is on file in the development services offices of the city and may be viewed at the following webpage:
http://online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/index.aspx
(Editorially supplied)
CHAPTER 158
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION CONTROL
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 158.01 SHORT TITLE.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the Stormwater Pollution Control Ordinance of the City of Pflugerville, Texas.
§ 158.02 ADMINISTRATION.
The City Engineer shall implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter, except for public works construction projects and
municipal operations that are administered or controlled by another city department. For public works construction projects that are
administered, performed, contracted, or funded (in whole or in part) by the city, the Director of the city department that is
administering, performing, or contracting for the construction project shall implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The
Director of each city department shall also implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter for all municipal operations under
his/her direction. Any powers granted to or duties imposed in this chapter upon the City Engineer or the Director of another city
department may be delegated by him/her to other city personnel.
§ 158.03 ABBREVIATIONS.
The following abbreviations when used in this chapter shall have the designated meanings:
BMP -Best management practices
BOD -Five day biochemical oxygen demand
CFR -Code of Federal Regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/422
City -City of Pflugerville
COD -Chemical oxygen demand
CSCE -Comprehensive site compliance evaluation
CWA -Clean Water Act
EDGCS -Engineering design guidelines and construction standards
EPA -U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
ESCP -Erosion and sedimentation control plan
HHW -Household hazardous waste
LPE -Licensed professional engineer
MEP -Maximum extent practicable
Mg/l -Milligrams per liter
MS4 -Municipal separate storm sewer system
MSGP -Multi-sector general permit
NEC -No exposure certification
NOC -Notice of change
NOI -Notice of intent
NOT -Notice of termination
PCMOM -Post-Construction Maintenance and Operation Manual
pH -Measure of acidity or alkalinity
POTW -Publicly owned treatment works
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/422
PPM -Parts per million
PST -Petroleum storage tank
SWPPP -Stormwater pollution prevention plan
TCEQ -Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
TPDES -Texas Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
TSS -Total suspended solids
USC -United States Code
§ 158.04 DEFINITIONS.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context indicates or requires a different meaning.
Terms not defined herein shall be construed in accordance with customary usage.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP's).
(1) Methods that have been determined to be the most effective, practical means of preventing or reducing pollution
from nonpoint sources, such as pollutants carried by urban runoff. These methods can be structural (e.g., devices, ponds,
engineered or constructed to prevent or manage stormwater) or nonstructural (e.g., policies to reduce imperviousness).
BMP's classified as “nonstructural” are those that rely predominantly on behavioral changes rather than construction in
order to be effective. “Structural” BMP's are engineered or constructed to prevent or manage stormwater.
(2) BMP's also include schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMP's also include treatment
requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal,
or drainage from raw material storage.
CERTIFIED STORMWATER INSPECTOR. This is a person knowledgeable in the principles and practices of erosion and sediment
controls who possesses the skills to assess conditions at the construction site that could impact stormwater quality and to assess the
effectiveness of any sediment and erosion controls measures selected to control the quality of stormwater discharges from the
construction site.
CLEAN WATER ACT. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION. The initial disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, excavating, landfilling,
and other construction activities.
COMMERCIAL. Pertaining to any business, trade industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY. Activities associated with the disturbance of soils or other earthen materials including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition or other construction activities.
CONTAMINATED. Containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
CONVEYANCE. Including, but not limited to stream, channel, drainage way, tributary, floodplain, storm drainage system, drainage
system appurtenance, waterbody, watercourse, or waterway.
DIRECTOR. City Manager or designee, who shall serve as an authorized representative of the city, that is responsible for
administering, performing, or contracting for the construction project.
DISCHARGE. Any addition or introduction of any substance into the Municipal Separate Stormwater Sewer System (MS4).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/422
DISCHARGER. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, but not limited to,
any operator of a construction site of industrial facility.
ENGINEERING DESIGN GUIDELINES AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS. The city's guidelines pertaining to the City's
Engineering practices and standard details that conform to the city's Comprehensive Master Plan as well as city standards, codes, and
ordinances.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY, U.S. (EPA). The United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office
thereof, any federal department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized
official of the EPA or such successor agency.
EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL PLAN (ESCP).
(1) A site plan that contains the following information:
(a) The outline of the site.
(b) A delineation of the area of the site that will be disturbed by construction activities.
(c) The general direction of flow of stormwater drainage entering and leaving the site. If the drainage patters will
be altered, both the existing and proposed drainage patterns shall be shown.
(d) A description of how runon stormwater will be handled, including sheet flow entering the site from adjoining
property.
(e) A description and the location of any environmentally sensitive area that is located on the site or that adjoins
the site and that will receive stormwater directly from the site.
(f) The boundary line between the site and any adjoining state-owned submerged land. A preliminary boundary
line may be used with a preliminary plat. The ESCP shall be amended prior to filing of a final plat, once a final
boundary determination has been approved by the General Land Office to reflect any difference between the
preliminary boundary line and the approved boundary line.
(g) The location of any Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood Insurance Rate Map 100-year
floodplain boundaries, floodway boundaries, or FEMA Velocity Zone boundaries that encroach on the site. A
preliminary boundary line may be used with a preliminary plat. The ESCP shall be amended prior to filing of a final
plat, once a final boundary determination has been made.
(h) A description and location of all temporary control measures that will be implemented during construction to
control erosion, sedimentation, and the discharge of pollutants into the city's MS4.
(2) A description of permanent control measures that will be constructed to control erosion, sedimentation, and the
discharge of pollutants into the city's MS4 after construction is completed.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE. Any substance listed in the Appendices to 40 CFR Part 355, Emergency Planning and
Notification.
FACILITY. Any building, structure, installation, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
FERTILIZER. A solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to
plants and is used primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or
improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of two or more fertilizers.
FINAL STABILIZATION. The status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform perennial
vegetative cover with a density of 90% of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures have been
established, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food,
including waste materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products.
HARMFUL QUANTITY. The amount of any substance due to volume or concentration that will cause pollution.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or
potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/422
otherwise managed. This term shall include household hazardous wastes as classified under 40 CFR Part 261, hazardous substances
as listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302, and hazardous wastes identified or listed by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR Part 261.
HERBICIDE. A substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid waste generated in a household by a consumer including, but not limited to,
products, such as paints, cleaners, oils, batteries, and pesticides that contain potentially hazardous ingredients that require special
care upon disposal.
ILLICIT CONNECTION. Any connection to the MS4 or conveyances that allows for an illicit discharge.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any direct or indirect discharge of pollutant to the MS4 or conveyances, except as specifically exempted in
this chapter.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. Any activity at an industrial facility described by the TPDES multi-sector general permit, TXR050000, or
by any other TCEQ or TPDES permit including, but not limited to, manufacturing, processing, materials storage, and waste materials
disposal.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business from the development of any
natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or domestic wastewater, or distinct from domestic wastewater.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (LPE). A person who has been duly licensed (and registered if practicing as an individual)
by the Texas Board of Professional Engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the State of Texas.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE. The technology-based discharge standard for MS4's established by section 402(p) of the
Federal Clean Water Act.
MOTOR VEHICLE FLUIDS. Any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline,
diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
MUNICIPAL OPERATIONS. The day-to-day operation and maintenance activities that have the potential for contributing pollutant
runoff to the MS4.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4). The storm drainage system operated and maintained by the city, which is
comprised of the following: the system of conveyances (including, but not limited to, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catchbasins, curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for
collecting or conveying stormwater.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater runoff.
NOTICE OF CHANGE (NOC). The Notice of Change that is required by the TPDES General Permit related to stormwater
discharges associated with industrial activity.
NOTICE OF INTENT (NOI). The Notice of Intent that is required by either the Industrial General Permit or the Construction General
Permit.
NOTICE OF TERMINATION (NOT). The Notice of Termination that is required by either the Construction General Permit, the
TPDES General Permit for industrial activity, or other General Permit for the discharge of stormwater.
OIL. Any kind of oil in any form, including but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof that is liquid at
standard conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste. This term shall include used oil that
has become unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for
further use and is recyclable in compliance with state and federal law.
OPERATOR. The person or persons who, either individually or collectively, meet the following two criteria:
(1) Have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make modifications in
specifications); and
(2) Have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with
pollution prevention requirements and any permit conditions.
OWNER. The person who owns a facility or part of a facility.
PERSON. Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents, lessees, or assigns. This term shall also include all
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/422
federal, state, and local governmental entities.
POINT SOURCE. Any discernible, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel,
conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system,
vessel or other floating craft from which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated
agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
POLLUTANT. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes,
and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter,
or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any surface water
in the State that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public
health, safety or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
POST-CONSTRUCTION MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION MANUAL. The city document which serves as guidance to assist users
in establishing proper erosion and pollution control measures to be used during the maintenance and operations of facilities. It
outlines the city's procedures for complying with water quality regulations, and guides in the selection of BMP's for postconstruction
maintenance activities and facilities operations related to the MS4.
QUALIFIED PERSONNEL. Persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient
education, training, experience, and/or when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to perform a specific activity in a
timely and complete manner consistent with the applicable regulatory requirements and generally-accepted industry standards for
such activity.
RELEASE. The act of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching,
dumping, or disposing into the MS4 or conveyances.
SANITARY SEWER (SEWER). The system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry sewage from residential dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the sewage treatment
plant utilized by the city (and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
STATE. The State of Texas.
STORMWATER. Any surface flow, runoff, and discharge consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and
resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP). A document which describes the Best Management Practices and
activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to Stormwater Conveyance Systems, and/or Receiving Waters to the Maximum Extent
Practicable (MEP).
SURFACE WATER IN THE STATE. Lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, wetlands,
marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state (from the mean high water mark (MHWM) out
10.36 miles into the Gulf), and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or
nonnavigable, and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or
bordering the state or subject to the jurisdiction of the state; except that waters in treatment systems that are created for the purpose
of waste treatment are not considered to be water in the state.
SUSPENSION ORDER. A written document authorized by the Director revoking MS4 discharge access.
TEXAS COMMISSION ON ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY (TCEQ). The state agency by that name, the regional offices thereof, any
state department, agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the TCEQ, and any duly authorized official of TCEQ
or such successor agency.
TEXAS POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (TPDES). The program delegated to the state by the EPA pursuant to
33 USC §1342(b).
TPDES GENERAL PERMIT RELATING TO STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY.
General Permit No. TXR150000 issued by TCEQ on February 15, 2008, as authorized under provisions of section 402 of the Clean
Water Act and chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/422
TPDES MULTI-SECTOR GENERAL PERMIT RELATING TO STORMWATER DISCHARGES ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL
ACTIVITY. TPDES General Permit No. TXR050000 issued by TCEQ on July 22, 2011, and effective August 14, 2011, as authorized
under provisions of section 402 of the Clean Water Act and chapter 26 of the Texas Water Code.
WASHWATER. Any water containing pollutants from the act of cleaning parking lots, vehicles, or building exteriors.
WATERCOURSE. Any defined creek, stream, ditch, arroyo, or other natural conveyance that is capable of passing stormwater across
property and onto adjacent property. A watercourse shall have observable banks, and is either a natural conveyance or an artificially
altered natural conveyance. A conveyance that is contained wholly within a single property and does not convey stormwater off the
property onto adjacent property is not considered to be a watercourse for purposes of this chapter.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES. Defined by the 33 CFR Part 328, all waters that are currently used, were used in the past, or
may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all
interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could
affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this
definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any
waters within the federal definition of “waters of the United States.”
WATER QUALITY STANDARD. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the State for desirable uses and the
narrative and numerical criteria deemed by the State to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in chapter 307 of Title 30 of
the Texas Administrative Code.
WETLAND. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions.
Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
YARD WASTE. Leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land
clearing operations.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE PREVENTION
§ 158.21 APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS.
Effective February 1, 2012 the regulations set out in this chapter shall apply to all areas of the MS4 within the corporate limits of the
city.
§ 158.22 MINIMUM STANDARDS.
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not
intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized
discharge of pollutants.
§ 158.23 DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS.
(A) Prohibition of Illegal Discharges. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the municipal storm sewer system
(MS4) or conveyances any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or
contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater or authorized nonstormwater discharges.
(B) Exemptions. The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as described
as follows:
(1) The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this chapter:
(a) water line flushing or other potable water sources;
(b) landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(c) diverted stream flows;
(d) rising groundwaters;
(e) uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to storm drains;
(f) uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/422
(g) foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems);
(h) crawl space pumps;
(i) air-conditioning condensation;
(j) springs;
(k) noncommercial washing of vehicles;
(l) natural riparian habitat or wetland flows;
(m) swimming pools (if dechlorinated - less than one PPM chlorine);
(n) firefighting activities;
(o) and any other water source not containing pollutants.
(2) Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety are exempt from
discharge prohibitions.
(3) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test.
(4) The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under a TPDES permit, waiver, or waste
discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Environmental Protection Agency,
provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other
applicable laws and regulations of the MS4.
(C) Specific Prohibitions.
(1) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the
general prohibition.
(2) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or
cause, allow, or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4 or conveyances:
(a) Any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with clearing, grading,
excavation or other such construction activities, or associated with landfilling or other placement of soil, rock, or
other earthen materials.
(b) Any motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid.
(c) Any industrial waste.
(d) Any hazardous material, including household hazardous waste, hazardous substances, and hazardous waste.
(e) Any wastewater or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste.
(f) Any garbage, trash, or yard waste, including brush, leaves, grass clippings, or other yard waste previously
gathered for disposal.
(g) Any washwater from a commercial carwash facility or from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at
any automotive-related facility.
(h) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle salvage yard or storage yard.
(i) Any pavement washwater from a service station unless such washwater has passed through a properly
functioning and maintained grease, oil, and sand separator before discharge into the MS4 or conveyance.
(j) Any ready-mix concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or material from
the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such materials.
(k) Any swimming pool, fountain, or spa water, including backwash water, containing total residual chlorine of 1
ppm or more or containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or
disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/422
(l) Any introduction of oil into the environment including oil applied to a road or land for dust suppression, weed
abatement, or other similar use, or any direct disposal of oil on land or into the MS4 or conveyances.
(m) Any washwater from parking garage pavement cleaning, unless such washwater has passed through a
properly functioning and maintained grease, oil, and sand separator before discharge into the MS4 or conveyance.
(D) Prohibition of Illicit Connections.
(1) The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 is prohibited.
(2) This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
(3) A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4,
or allows such a connection to continue.
§ 158.24 SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS.
(A) Suspension due to Illicit Discharges in Emergency Situations. The city may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge
access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present
imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4, Surface Waters in the
State, or Waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the Director or
his/her designee may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or Waters of the United States,
or to minimize danger to persons.
(B) Suspension due to the Detection of Illicit Discharge. Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have
their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The city will notify a violator of the
proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an
offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the city.
§ 158.25 INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES.
Any person subject to a TPDES industrial or construction stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such
permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the Director prior to the allowing of discharges
to the MS4.
§ 158.26 MONITORING OF DISCHARGES.
(A) Applicability. This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity or
construction activity. Nothing in this section relieves facility and construction site operators of responsibilities to obtain appropriate
coverage under general or individual permits through the TCEQ and to notify or otherwise report to the TCEQ in accordance with
any such permit. Further, nothing in this section implies that the city is assuming the duties of the TCEQ or EPA for inspection or
monitoring of activities required under the TPDES permitting system.
(B) Access to Facilities.
(1) The Director or his/her designees shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this
chapter as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has security measures in
force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the
necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city.
(2) Facility operators shall allow the Director or his/her designees ready access to all parts of the premises for the
purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that shall be kept under the conditions of an
TPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law.
(3) The Director or his/her designees shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are
necessary in the opinion of the Director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge.
(4) The Director or his/her designees shall have the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as
necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper
operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall
be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall
be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the Director and shall not be replaced. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the operator.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/422
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the Director or his/her designees access to a permitted facility is a violation of a
stormwater discharge permit and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with a TPDES permit to
discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an offense if the person denies the city reasonable access
to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this chapter.
(7) If the Director or his/her designees has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is
discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of
the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 158.27 WATERCOURSE PROTECTION.
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the
watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or
significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately
owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or
physical integrity of the watercourse.
§ 158.28 NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS.
(A) Hazardous Spills. Notwithstanding other requirements of this chapter, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or
operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials that result in, or may result in, illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4, or water of the U.S.,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and clean up of such release. In the event of such a
release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency
dispatch services.
(B) Nonhazardous Spills. In the event of a release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the city in person or by
phone or facsimile no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice
addressed and mailed to the Director within three business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates
from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record
of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 158.29 ENFORCEMENT.
(A) Notice of Violation. Whenever the Director or his/her designee finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this chapter, he/she may order compliance by written “Notice of Violation” to the responsible person by regular and
certified mail, return receipt requested. If the return receipt is not completed, receipt of the notice is presumed after ten (10) calendar
days. Within twenty (20) days of mailing of such “Notice of Violation” by certified mail, return receipt requested, the alleged
violator shall submit to the Director a written explanation of the violation and a written plan for the satisfactory correction and
prevention of recurrence thereof, including specific required actions.
(B) Mandatory Compliance Order.
(1) When the Director or his/her designee finds that any discharger has violated, or continues to violate, any provision
of the chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the Director may issue a “Mandatory Compliance Order” to the violator by
regular and certified mail, return receipt requested. If the return receipt is not completed, receipt of the notice is presumed
after ten (10) calendar days.
(2) A “Mandatory Compliance Order” may not extend the deadline for compliance established by a state or federal
standard or requirement or otherwise alter such an order, nor shall it relieve the violator of liability for any violation,
including any continuing violation. The issuance of a “Mandatory Compliance Order” shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator or any responsible party. The “Mandatory Compliance Order”
may constitute the ordering of any one or more of the following:
(a) Compliance within Time Limit. Directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit.
Such an order also may contain other requirements to address noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring
and management practices designed to mitigate the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 or conveyances.
(b) Remediation, Abatement, and/or Restoration.
(i) Directing that the violator, if the violation has adversely affected the MS4 or conveyances thereof,
undertake and implement any appropriate action to remediate and/or abate any adverse effects of the violation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/422
upon the MS4 or conveyances, and/or to restore any part of the MS4 or conveyances that have been harmed.
Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may include, but shall not be limited to:
a. Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate
remedial, abatement and/or restoration action;
b. Confinement, removal, clean up, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollutant or
contamination;
c. Prevention, minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, safety, welfare, or
the environment that may result from the violation;
d. Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation.
(ii) Any expenses related to the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration incurred by the city shall be fully
reimbursed by the person deemed responsible by the Director. If the amount due is not paid within a timely
manner, as determined by decision of the city, then the charges shall become a special assessment against the
property and shall constitute a lien for the amount of the assessment.
(c) Emergency Cease and Desist Order.
(i) The “Emergency Cease and Desist Order” directs that the violator immediately cease and desist from all
violations if the violations have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or any
conveyances which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health,
safety, or welfare of persons or to the environment; or if past violations are likely to recur. The “Emergency
Cease and Desist Order” may also direct the violator to immediately comply with all chapter requirements and
take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened
violation, including immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(ii) Any violator notified of an “Emergency Cease and Desist Order” shall immediately comply and stop or
eliminate the endangering discharge. In the event of the violator's failure to immediately comply voluntarily
with the “Emergency Cease and Desist Order,” the Director and his/her designees may take such steps as
deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or conveyances, and/or endangerment to persons
or to the environment. Any expenses related to the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration incurred by the
city shall be fully reimbursed by the person deemed by the Director to be responsible. If the amount due is not
paid within a timely manner, as determined by decision of the city, then the charges shall become a special
assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien for the amount of the assessment.
(iii) The city may allow the violator to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the
satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings
are initiated against the violator under this chapter. A violator that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement to the Director
describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any further occurrence
within five (5) days of receipt of the “Emergency Cease and Desist Order.” Nothing in this section shall negate
the right of the city to obtain compliance by suit, including a suit for enforcement pursuant to Texas Local
Government Code chapter 54, as amended.
(d) Construction Stop-Work Order.
(i) Whenever the Director or his/her designees find that any operator of a construction site has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, or any order issued hereunder, the Director may order that a
“Construction Stop-Work Order Regarding Illicit Discharge” be issued to the operator or person responsible,
posted at the construction site, and distributed to all city departments whose decisions affect any activity at
such site. Unless express written exception is made by the city, the “Construction Stop-Work Order Regarding
Illicit Discharge” shall prohibit any further construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection
or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, or any other city authorization
necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the site. Issuance of a
“Construction Stop-Work Order Regarding Illicit Discharge” shall not be a hindrance to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the violator. When a violation or violations of this chapter that have resulted in
a “Construction Stop-Work Order Regarding Illicit Discharge” being issued have been resolved or mitigated to
the satisfaction of the Director or his/her designees, the operator of the construction site may resume work on
the site. The Director will provide written notice to the operator that the conditions that resulted in the
Construction Stop-Work Order Regarding Illicit Discharge have been resolved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/422
(ii) Upon resolution of the violation, the Director shall submit a written commence work operations to the
operator of a construction site. The operator shall be permitted to begin work within the time as designated by
the Director or his/her designees and no further actions shall be taken unless a violation occurs.
§ 158.30 COST OF ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION.
Within thirty (30) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including
administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within ten (10) days. If
the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by the expiration of
the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on
the property for the amount of the assessment. Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the
city by reason of such violation.
§ 158.31 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person
has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the city may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction
restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
§ 158.32 PENALTY.
Any person or corporation that has violated or continues to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or who fails to comply
herewith or with any of the requirements hereof, shall be subject to a maximum fine of not more than $2,000.00 for each day any
such violation shall continue. A Civil penalty may be assessed under chapter 54 of the Texas Local Government Code ranging up to
$10,000.00 per day in addition to the criminal penalties, depending on the circumstances, as provided by State law.
(1) Each violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner or owners of any property or premises, or part
thereof, where anything in violation of this chapter shall be placed, or shall exist, and any architect, engineer, builder,
contractor, agent, person, or corporation employed in connection therewith, and who may have assisted in the commission
of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as herein provided.
(2) The Director or his/her designees will submit a written violation to all persons corporation in association with the
property or premises and separate offenses shall be determined accordingly.
(3) Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy
any violation of this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION SITE STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 158.41 REQUIREMENTS AND CONTROL MEASURES.
Operators of public or private “construction activities” shall be required to select, install, implement, and maintain stormwater
control measures that comply with city's Engineering Design Guidelines and Construction Standards (EDGCS), TPDES Construction
General Permit, TPDES MS4 General Permit, or other ordinances that may apply to construction activities. Construction activities
include, at a minimum, all public and private construction sites. The Operator shall ensure the following minimum requirements are
effectively implemented:
(1) Planning Requirements for Site Development during Construction.
(a) Development of sites one (1) acre or more.
(i) An NPDES or TPDES stormwater pollution prevention plan is currently required by EPA or TCEQ for
all construction projects where one (1) or more acres will be disturbed during development. Developments of
sites that disturb one (1) acre or more within the city's jurisdiction shall prepare an NPDES or TPDES
stormwater pollution prevention plan stat [that] satisfies EPA or TCEQ regulations and the NPDES or TPDES
construction general permit.
a. A copy of the NPDES or TPDES stormwater pollution prevention plan shall be provided to the
City's Engineer.
b. A copy of any notice of intent (NOT) provided to EPA or TCEQ shall be provided to the City
Engineer. Approval of the elements of the NPDES or TPDES stormwater pollution prevention plan is not
required by the City Engineer. However, the City Engineer or to his/her designee(s) of other city
personnel may require correction of any deficiencies in the NPDES or TPDES stormwater pollution
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/422
prevention plan, and may require additional measures in order to meet the minimum requirements of the
pollution control measures section below.
c. A copy of any notice of termination (NOT) submitted to EPA or TCEQ shall be provided to the City
Engineer.
(ii) If the site is one (1) acre or more, but less than one (1) acre and more than one-quarter (1/4) acre will be
disturbed, an NPDES or TPDES stormwater pollution prevention plan is not required, but an erosion and
sedimentation control plan as defined in the definition section, is required, unless the site is a single-lot, singlefamily
residential construction that is not part of a larger development that requires an NPDES or TPDES
permit.
(b) Development of sites less than one (1) acre and more than one-quarter (1/4) acre.
(i) An erosion and sedimentation control plan, as defined in the Engineering Design Guidelines is required
for commercial construction, industrial construction, multifamily residential construction, and development of
a residential subdivision within the city's jurisdictional area where less than one (1) acre but more the onequarter
(1/4) acre will be developed. The area of the development will be based upon the platted lot area or, if
not platted, upon the area of the tract owned by the developer, including all contiguous property by the same
person. Disturbance of a partial area of a tract is not a condition that will cause a change of the category in
development size.
(ii) Submission of a site-specific erosion and sedimentation control plan is not required for a single-lot,
single-family residential construction, unless it is part of a larger development that requires an NPDES or
TPDES permit.
(iii) The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall include any measures as required to comply with the
pollution control measures section below. An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
City Engineer for review before issuance of a building permit or approval to begin development.
(iv) Implementation of the pollution control measures detailed in the plan is required. (Inspection of the
status of the pollution control measures will be performed by city personnel during normal construction
inspection and at other times when construction activities may be conducted).
(v) A certificate of occupancy will not be issued until the City Engineer is satisfied that all temporary and
permanent measures specified by the plan are complete.
(vi) The city shall not accept any public improvements until all temporary and permanent measures
specified by the plan are complete, unless the responsible party has entered into a maintenance agreement with
the city.
(vii) An erosion and sedimentation control plan is not required when a portion of a previously developed
tract of land is redeveloped, unless the redevelopment will result in the conversion of more than one-quarter
(1/4) acre from a porous surface to an impervious surface.
(c) Development of sites one-quarter (1/4) acre or less and single-lot, single-family residential construction. A
site-specific erosion and sedimentation control plan is not required for the development of sites which are onequarter
(1/4) acre in size or less, nor for single-lot, single-family residential construction. However, the responsible
party shall comply with the pollution control measures in [this] section.
(i) In order to obtain a building permit, a responsible party shall provide written acknowledgement that the
responsible party is aware of the pollution control measures of the city and that the responsible party will
comply with these measures during the development of the property.
(ii) In order to obtain a certificate of occupancy, a responsible party shall certify that all necessary
temporary or permanent pollution control measures specified in the pollution control measures section are in
place. If adequate pollution control measures are not in place, the Building Official is authorized to withhold
the certificate of occupancy.
(iii) Prior to requesting acceptance of any public improvements required under subchapter 15.P, Acceptance
of Subdivision as complete, of the Unified Development Code, a responsible party must certify that all
necessary permanent pollution control measures, other than the required stabilization, are in place. If adequate
pollution control measures are not in place, the City Engineer will not accept any improvement required by
subchapter 15 of the Unified Development Code unless the responsible party has entered into a maintenance
agreement with the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/422
(d) For purposes of this section, the entire plat or site shall be considered to be the area being disturbed unless
otherwise specified within the site plan. The responsible party shall take appropriate measures to ensure no
construction related activities disturb any area that is not designated as disturbed on the plat or site plan.
(2) Special Land Use Requirements. Any plans submitted for a building permit for the development of property that
will be used for one of the following uses shall identify the appropriate best management practices, published in the city's
Engineering Design Guidelines and Construction Standards that the responsible party will adopt to prevent pollutants
associated with the use from being discharged into the city's MS4.
(a) Fueling stations.
(b) Vehicle/equipment washing and steam cleaning facilities.
(c) Facilities engaged in harmful liquid materials loading and unloading.
(d) Facilities engaged in container storage in aboveground tanks.
(e) Facilities engaged in container storage of harmful liquids (such as oil, chemicals, and hazardous wastes).
(f) Facilities engaged in outdoor storage of raw materials that are subject to leaching and transport by erosion and
sedimentation, such as gravel, sand, topsoil, compost, sawdust, wood chips, building materials, including lumber,
which are subject to leaching; and concrete and metal products, which are subject to chemical erosion, corrosion,
and leaching.
(3) Pollution Prevention Measures. Design, install, implement, and maintain effective pollution prevention measures to
minimize the discharge of pollutants. At a minimum, such measures shall be designed, installed, implemented and
maintained to:
(a) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from equipment and vehicle washing, wheel washwater, and other
washwaters. Washwaters shall be treated in a sediment basin or alternative control that provides equivalent or better
treatment prior to discharge;
(b) Minimize the exposure of building materials, building products, construction wastes, trash, landscape
materials, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, detergents, sanitary waste and other materials present on the site to
precipitation and to stormwater; and
(c) Minimize the discharge of pollutants from spills and leaks and implement chemical spill and leak prevention
and response procedures.
(4) Prohibited Discharges. The following discharges are prohibited:
(a) Wastewater from washout of concrete vehicles, unless managed by an appropriate control;
(b) Wastewater from washout and cleanout of stucco, paint, form release oils, curing compounds and other
construction materials;
(c) Fuels, oils, or other pollutants used in vehicle and equipment operation and maintenance; and
(d) Soaps or solvents used in vehicle and equipment washing.
§ 158.42 INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT.
All sites requiring a site development or construction permit that discharge to a tributary listed by the state as an impaired water for
sediment or turbidity under the CWA section 303(d), and other sites as determined by the city or permitting authority to be a
significant threat to water quality, shall be subject to inspection by the Director or his/her designees prior to land disturbance, during
active construction, and following active construction, within the requirements as referenced in the Engineering Design Guidelines.
(Ord. 1095-11-12-13, passed 12-13-11)
RATES, CHARGES AND FEES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/422
EXHIBIT A
ORDINANCE NO. 640-01-07-10
AN ORDINANCE APPROVING THE GENERAL SERVICE RATES INCLUDING RATE ADJUSTMENT PROVISIONS AND
MISCELLANEOUS SERVICE CHARGES TO BE CHARGED FOR SALES AND TRANSPORTATION OF NATURAL GAS TO
RESIDENTIAL, COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL CONSUMERS IN THE CITY OF PFLUGERVILLE, TRAVIS COUNTY,
TEXAS, PROVIDING EFFECTIVE DATE THEREFOR, AND PROVIDING FOR THE MANNER IN WHICH SUCH RATES
MAY BE CHANGED, ADJUSTED, AND AMENDED.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PFLUGERVILLE, TEXAS:
SECTION 1. On May 31, 2001, TXU Gas Distribution, a division of TXU Gas Company (“Company”) filed with the Governing
Body of this municipality a Statement of Intent to Change Residential, Commercial and Industrial Rates charged to consumers within
this municipality. Also filed was the Tariff for Gas Service in the South Region Distribution System (“Tariff for Gas Service”) and
the supporting Cost of Service Schedules (“Schedules”). The Tariff for Gas Service includes Rate Schedules 4300 - South Region
Distribution System Cities, 4301 - Residential Service, 4302 - Commercial Service, 4311-4313 - Industrial Sales, 4314 - Industrial
Transportation, 4321 - Industrial Sales and Transportation, 4308-1 through 4308-4 - Rate Adjustment Provisions, and 9001 through
9007 – Miscellaneous Service Charges.
SECTION 2. The maximum general service rates for sales and transportation of natural gas rendered to residential, commercial and
industrial consumers within the city limits of Pflugerville, Texas by TXU Gas Distribution, a division of TXU Gas Company, a Texas
corporation, its successors and assigns, are hereby fixed and approved as set forth in Rate Schedules 4301 - Residential Service, 4302
- Commercial Service, 4311-4313 - Industrial Sales, and 4314 - Industrial Transportation, and 4321 - Industrial Sales and
Transportation included in the Tariff for Gas Service in the South Region Distribution System.
SECTION 3. The Rate Adjustment Provisions set forth in the Tariff for Gas Service as Rate Schedules Adjustment 4308-1 Gas Cost
Adjustment, 4308-2 Tax Adjustment, 4308-3 Weather Normalization Adjustment, and 4308-4 Surcharges are approved.
SECTION 4. The Company shall have the right to collect such reasonable charges as are necessary to conduct its business and to
carry out its reasonable rules and regulations. Such miscellaneous service charges are identified in Rate Schedules 9001 through
9007 of the Tariff for Gas Service and are approved. Services for which no charge is set out may be performed and charged for by the
Company at a level established by the normal forces of competition.
SECTION 5. The aforesaid rate schedules herein approved shall be effective for bills rendered on and after the effective date set
forth in the Statement of Intent, if this ordinance is passed and approved on or before that effective date.
SECTION 6. The rates set forth in this ordinance may be changed and amended by either the City or Company in the manner
provided by law. Service hereunder is subject to the orders of regulatory bodies having jurisdiction, and to the Company's Rules and
Regulations currently on file with the City.
SECTION 7. Unless otherwise noted herein, other than TXU Gas Distribution (a named party), no person or entity has been admitted
as a party to this rate proceeding.
SECTION 8. It is hereby found and determined that said meeting at which this ordinance was passed was open to the public, as
required by Texas law, and that advance public notice of the time, place and purpose of said meeting was given.
PASSED AND APPROVED on the First Reading on this the 26th day of June, A. D., 2001.
PASSED AND APPROVED on the Second Reading on this the 10th day of July, A. D., 2001.
ATTEST:
/s/ Karen Thompson
/s/ G. Scott Winton
City Secretary
Mayor
=================================================================
Stephen J. Houle
Vice President
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/422
June 4, 2001
Honorable Scott Winton
Mayor, City of Pflugerville
P. O. Box 589
Pflugerville, Texas 78691
Dear Mayor Winton:
As you are aware, TXU Gas Distribution recently filed a Statement of Intent to change the rates for local gas distribution service in
the South Region Distribution System, which includes your city. This letter confirms that if your city agrees (1) to accept TXU Gas
Distribution's proposed rate changes, as filed, and pass an ordinance approving the proposed rates, and (2) to forego any right to
participate in an appeal to the Railroad Commission of Texas should the Company file one, the Company will agree as follows:
1. If any other city in the South Region Distribution System negotiates a settlement with TXU Gas Distribution that
results in rates that are less than the proposed rates as filed by the Company with that city, the Company will offer those
same settlement terms (reflected as a percentage reduction of the rates as proposed) to your city, such that no other city in
the South Region Distribution System will receive more favorable rate treatment than that offered to your city. For
example, if City A negotiates a settlement that results in its rates being 10% less than those proposed by the Company,
your city will be offered a 10% reduction in the rates as proposed by the Company and approved in your ordinance;
2. The new rates will not be implemented until after October 3, 2001;
3. Customers in your city will not be surcharged for any rate case expenses associated with this Statement of Intent or
any appeal the Railroad Commission of Texas, should one be filed.
Passage of an ordinance approving the new rates as filed will constitute your city's acceptance of this offer. Of course, if your city
accepts this offer, and the Company does not reach a mutually agreeable settlement with any other city in the South Region
Distribution System that results in rates that are less than the proposed rates as filed, or chooses not to appeal the denial by a city of a
Statement of Intent, rates in your city will be set as proposed in the Statement of Intent and passed in the ordinance, and will not be
adjusted to comport with the results of any appeal, should one occur.
We appreciate your consideration of the Company's proposal. Please feel free to call me if you have any questions.
Sincerely,
/s/ Stephen J. Houle
=================================================================
South Region Distribution System
Pflugerville, Texas Case Summary
May 31, 2001
TXU Gas Distribution's Filing
* Filings are intended to adjust the current rates charged to deliver natural gas to residential, commercial, industrial and
transport customers in Pflugerville and 80 other cities that comprise the South Region Distribution System
Last Rate Filing
* Last rate change in Pflugerville occurred on 9/16/85 based on a case test year ending 12/31/84
* U.S. Department of Labor statistics show that the Consumer Price Index has increased 65.2% since the last rate case
Impact of Rate Requests
South Region System
Pflugerville, Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/422
Residential Revenue $10,221,385 or 14.90% $160,104 or 3.58%
Commercial Revenue $695,549 or 2.26%
($33,118) or -9.41%
Industrial/Transport
Revenue
$1,249,076 or 30.03%
$5 or 0.03%
Service Charges $53,118 or 3.63%
$18,667 or 34.60%
Total Revenue $12,219,128 or 11.21%
$145,658 or 2.98%
Impact on Typical Customer Bills in Pflugerville
* Typical residential customers using 5 MCF per month will realize an increase of approximately $0.97 per month
* Typical commercial customers using 30 MCF per month will realize an increase of approximately ($31.59) per month
Number of Customers in Pflugerville
* 11,123 total customers
>10,960 residential customers
>150 commercial customers
>1 industrial/transport customers
>12 schools
Rationale for Requested Revenue Increase
* From January 1996 through December 2000 TXU Gas Distribution has invested $81.28 million of new capital into
the South Region Distribution System in order to support growth and economic development and maintain the safety and
reliability of the system.
> South Region System net investment has increased $71.0 million or 114%, and is comprised of:
* Economic Growth $41.98 million
* Service Lines & Meters $13.58 million
* Safety/Replacements $9.17 million
* Relocations $6.27 million
> During this same time the Company's labor costs in the South Region Distribution System have declined by 2%
per customer
* Pflugerville's net investment has increased $7,210,665 or 153.67% since January 1, 1996
* South Region Distribution System is currently earning a 3.68% return on invested capital
> The Company is proposing to earn a 9.56% return on invested capital
> In November 2000, the Railroad Commission of Texas authorized a return on invested capital of 9.75% in TXU
Gas Distribution's appeal from the Dallas Distribution System
EXHIBIT B
ORDINANCE NO. 1371-18-11-27
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/422
AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PFLUGERVILLE, TEXAS, AMENDING RATES, CHARGES AND FEES FOR WATER,
WASTEWATER AND SOLID WASTE UTILITY SERVICE; REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES TO THE EXTENT THEY ARE
IN CONFLICT; PROVIDING FOR SEVERABILITY; AND PROVIDING AN EFFECTIVE DATE.
WHEREAS, the Finance and Budget Committee has reviewed the 2018 Water & Wastewater Cost of Service and Rate Design Study
and has made a recommendation that the water and wastewater rates should be amended as presented: and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds municipal water and wastewater rates should be amended to reflect recommendations as
determined by the 2018 Water & Wastewater Cost of Service and Rate Design Study; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds the rates provided in this Ordinance should take effect December 1, 2018 and continue until
modified by Ordinance.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PFLUGERVILLE, TEXAS:
Section 1. Retail Water Rates.
The City will charge every retail utility customer of the city water rates that include the Monthly Base Charge and the Volume
Charge, set forth in (A) and (B) in this Section.
(A) The Monthly Base Charge is as follows:
Meter Size Customer Costs
5/8" $15.70
3/4" $23.55
1" $39.30
1-1/2" $78.50
2" $125.60
3" $251.20
4" $392.50
6" $785.00
8" $1,570.00
Rates for larger size meter subject to separate agreement with the city.
(B) The Volume Charge for all meter sizes is:
Gallons Charge per 1,000 gallons
0–3,000 $3.40
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/422
3,001–10,000 $4.30
10,001–25,000 $5.40
25,001 + $6.80
Section 2. Water Curtailment Rates.
Reserved.
Section 3. Catastrophic Water Leaks.
In the event of a catastrophic water leak by a residential water customer the City may allow a credit to the customer's bill under the
following circumstances. A minimum usage of 40,000 gallons more than the previous month's usage will make the customer eligible
for consideration of a credit to the customer's account. The average of the past twelve months of usage will be used as a base for
crediting 100% of the excess usage billed (amount of credit will be based on the highest rate per 1,000 gallons). The City would
require the customer to submit a written request for a credit with a copy of the bill from a licensed plumber certifying that the leak
has been repaired and a copy of a valid City of Pflugerville Building Permit for the repair. The request must detail location and dates
of the leak. Customers who have been notified of a leak, but have not repaired it within 15 days of notification, will not qualify for
the credit. Customers are eligible for only one credit per account location.
Section 4. Retail Wastewater Rates.
The City will charge every retail utility customer served by the City wastewater rates that include the Monthly Base Charge and the
Volume Charge set forth in (A) and (B) in this section.
(A) The Monthly Base Charge is as follows;
(1) In-City Customers.
Water Meter Size Monthly Base Charge
All meter sizes $23.50
(2) Out-of-City Customers.
Water Meter Size Monthly Base Charge
All meter sizes $28.50
(B) The Volume Charge for all meter sizes is $2.20 per 1,000 gallons.
(C) The quantity of wastewater used to calculate the Volume Charge for wastewater will be determined as follows:
(1) Residential Customers. Each March, the City will determine each customer's water usage during the preceding
November, December, January and February and calculate the average of the 3 lowest water usage months during
that period. The average will be used to calculate the customer's Volume Charges until the next March, when the
average will be recalculated. For customers that do not receive water service from the City, the quantity of
wastewater used to calculate the monthly bill will be determined by calculating the city average usage for residential
customers during the preceding November, December, January and February.
(2) Nonresidential Customers. The City will determine each customer's water usage during the month and that
amount will be used to calculate the customer's Volume Charges. For customers that do not receive water service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/422
from the City, the quantity of wastewater used to calculate the monthly bill will be determined by calculating the
city average usage for residential customers during the preceding November, December, January and February.
Section 5. Wholesale Wastewater Rates.
Wilke Lane Treatment Plant: The City will charge a rate of $26.50 per LUE per month to all wholesale customers served by the
Wilke Lane wastewater treatment plant.
Section 6. Solid Waste Disposal Rates.
The City will charge each customer $15.90 for in-city residents and $17.90 for out-of-city residents $6.12 for extra trash carts and
$2.55 for extra recycle carts, plus applicable taxes for removing residential refuse and for resource recovery services, as described in
Chapter 52 of the City of Pflugerville, Texas Code of Ordinances.
Section 7. Special Charges.
The City will charge each of the following charges for service calls and delinquent bills:
(A) Connect initial utility service (not including tap or impact fees) - $25.00 with enrollment in automatic draft
program or no charge with deposit;
(B) Move existing customer's service from one location to another - $25.00;
(C) Returned payment fee - $30.00;
(D) Disconnect service for Nonpayment of Bill - $25.00;
(E) Reinstate service that was disconnected for Nonpayment of Bill - $25.00; and
(F) Any customer account that is delinquent will incur a 10% per month penalty charge on all accrued and unpaid
charges.
Section 8. Deposits.
Each customer must pay the deposit set forth in this Section, or replenish the deposit if the City draws upon it, when the customer
initially applies for the service or when the customers applies to reinstate service that has been disconnected for nonpayment of a bill.
The amount of the deposit is as follows:
Service Deposit Amount
Solid Waste Only $25.00
Wastewater Only $50.00
Water Only $125.00
Any Combination $125.00
Construction/Fire Hydrant $1,200.00
The customer's deposit will be returned in full if the customer's account has not been delinquent for 12 consecutive months. The
customer's deposit will be returned, less any outstanding balance, within 30 days from the day the customer's account is closed.
Construction/Fire Hydrant meter deposits will be returned, less any outstanding balance, upon receipt of meter.
A customer may enroll in the automatic draft program for a period of not less than one year, in lieu of placing a utility deposit.
Section 9. Severability.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/422
If any provision of this Ordinance is illegal, invalid, or unenforceable under present or future laws, the remainder of this Ordinance
will not be affected and, in lieu of each illegal, invalid, or unenforceable provision, a provision as similar in terms to the illegal,
invalid, or unenforceable provision as is possible and is legal, valid, and enforceable will be added to this Ordinance.
Section 10. Conflicting Ordinances.
All prior ordinances of the City dealing with or applicable to this Ordinance are hereby amended to the extent of any conflict
herewith, and all ordinances or parts thereof conflicting or inconsistent with the provisions of this Ordinance as adopted and
amended herein, are hereby amended to the extent of such conflict. In the event of a conflict or inconsistency between this Ordinance
and any other ordinance of the City, the terms and provisions of this Ordinance shall govern.
Section 11. Effective Date.
This Ordinance will be effective on December 1, 2018.
PASSED AND APPROVED November 27, 2018.
CITY OF PFLUGERVILLE, TEXAS
By: /s/ Victor Gonzales
Victor Gonzales, Mayor
ATTEST:
/s/ Karen Thompson
Karen Thompson, City Secretary
APPROVED AS TO FORM:
/s/ Charles E. Zech
Charles E. Zech, City Attorney
Denton Navarro Rocha Bernal Hyde & Zech, P.C.

9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 1/320
P_lugerville, Texas Uni_ied Development Code
Table Of Contents
Subchapter 1 General Provisions
1.1 Short Title.
1.2 Authority.
1.3 Purpose.
1.4. Administration.
1.5 Reserved
1.6 Compliance.
1.7 Violations.
1.8 Enforcement
1.9 Preserving Rights in Pending Litigation and Violations Under Existing Ordinances.
1.10 Interpretation and Con_lict
1.11 Saving of City Rights and Remedies.
1.13 Severability.
Subchapter 2 Administration.
2.1 City Council.
2.2 Planning and Zoning Commission.
2.3 Board of Adjustment.
2.4. Capital Improvement Advisory Committee.
2.5 Parks and Recreation Commission.
2.6 City Manager
2.7 Administrator
2.8 Planning Director.
2.9 Building Of_icial.
2.10 City Engineer and Development Engineering Director
2.11 City Forester.
2.12 Parks and Recreation Director.
2.13 Development Review Committee.
2.14 Of_icial Zoning District Map.
2.15 Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule; Fee Schedule; Application Requirements; and
Technical Manuals
Subchapter 3 Procedures.
3.1 General.
3.2 Common Review Elements.
3.2.1 Pre-Application Conference (PAC) Procedure.
3.2.2 Application Forms and Fees.
3.3 Public Hearing and Notice
3.4 Comprehensive Plan Amendment Procedures.
3.5 Uni_ied Development Code Text Amendments
3.6 Annexation
3.7 Zoning Procedure
3.7.1 Applicability
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 2/320
3.7.2 Prerequisite for Consideration
3.7.3 Procedure
3.7.4 Creation or Amending a Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
3.7.5 Withdrawal of a zoning/rezoning request
3.8 Speci_ic Use Permits.
3.8.1 Applicability
3.8.2 Process
3.8.3 Consideration
3.8.4 Criteria for Approval
3.8.5 Conditions of Permit
3.8.6 Additional Criteria for Corridor Districts
3.9 Subdivision
3.10 Site Development Permit
3.10.1 Applicability
3.10.2 Submittal Requirements
3.10.3 Content of Site Plan
3.10.4 Process
3.10.5 Permit Expiration
3.10.6 Criteria for Approval
3.10.7 Revisions and Corrections
3.10.8 Inspections and Certi_icate of Occupancy
3.11 Site Disturbance Permit
3.12 R-O-W Permit
3.13 Traf_ic Impact Analysis
3.14 Building Permit, Signs, and Irrigation
3.15 Appeals, Variances, and Special Exceptions
3.15.1 General
3.15.2 Appeals
3.15.3 Variances
3.15.4 Special Exceptions
3.16 Administrative Waivers
3.18 Administrative Interpretation
3.19 Application for Legal Non-Conforming Status
Subchapter 4 Zoning Districts and Use Regulations
4.1 Zoning Districts Established
4.2 Residential Zoning Districts.
4.2.1 Residential Districts De_ined
4.2.2 Residential Districts – Land Use Table
4.2.3 Residential Districts – Land Use Conditions
4.2.4 Residential Districts – Development Regulations
4.3 Non-Residential Zoning Districts
4.3.1 Non-Residential Districts De_ined - Public Facilities, Of_ice, Commercial, and Industrial Districts
4.3.2 Non-Residential Districts Land Use Table - (Public Facilities and Open Space, Of_ice,
Commercial, and Industrial)
4.3.3 Non-Residential Districts Land Use Conditions - (Public Facilities and Open Space, Of_ice,
Commercial, Industrial)
4.3.4 Non-Residential Districts - Development Regulations
4.4 Corridor Districts (CL3, CL4, CL5)
4.4.1 Corridor Districts De_ined
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 3/320
4.4.2 Corridor Districts - Land Use Table
4.4.3 Corridor Districts - Land Use Conditions
4.4.4 Corridor Districts - Development Regulations
4.5 Special Districts and Overlays
4.5.1 Downtown District Overlay
4.5.2 685 Commercial Park Overlay District
4.5.3 Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
4.5.4 Austin Executive Airport Hazard Overlay District
4.6 Accessory Uses and Structures
4.6.1 Accessory Uses
4.6.2 Accessory Buildings/Structures
4.6.3 Accessory Dwelling Units
4.6.4 Home Occupation
4.7 Temporary Uses
4.8 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities (WTF)
4.9 Mobile Food Vendor (MFV)
4.10 Mobile Food Park (MFP)
Subchapter 5 Reserved
Subchapter 6 Reserved
Subchapter 7 Reserved
Subchapter 8 Non-Conforming Uses and Sites.
8.1 General
8.2 Nonconforming Uses
8.3 Nonconforming Lots
8.4 Nonconforming Structures
8.5 Nonconforming Sites
8.6 Residential Exemption from Non-Conforming Status.
Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site Design and Layout Provisions
9.1 Residential Design Standards - Single Family Detached and Duplex/Two-Family Structures
9.2 Residential Design Standards - Single Family Attached Structures (3 or more);Townhomes and
Condominiums
9.3 Residential Design Standards - Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures
9.4 Of_ice, Retail, and Commercial Structures
9.5 Industrial Structures
9.6 Agricultural Structures
9.7 Structured Parking
9.8 Additional Site Development Standards.
Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility and Circulation.
10.1 General
10.2 Site Access and Circulation
10.3 Pedestrian Mobility
10.4 Off Street Parking Requirements.
10.5 Loading and Delivery Requirements
10.6 Queuing Requirements
10.7 Bicycle Facilities
Subchapter 11 Landscaping and Screening Standards.
11.1 Purpose.
11.2 Applicability.
11.3 Minimum Required Landscaping
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 4/320
11.4 General Planting Criteria
11.5 Streetscape Yard Standards
11.6 Building Foundation Landscaping
11.7 Surface Parking Landscaping
11.8 Screening Requirements
11.9 Fence and Wall Standards
11.10 Bufferyard Requirements
11.11 Tree Speci_ications
11.12 Tree Preservation and On-Site Mitigation
11.13 Landscaping Installation and Maintenance
11.14 Permits, Enforcement, and Drought
11.15 Landscape Plan Requirements
11.16 Alternative Landscape Plans
Subchapter 12 Tree Preservation Standards
12.1 Purpose.
12.2 Applicability/Tree Technical Manual Adopted
12.3 Tree Classi_ications
12.4 General Tree Preservation Requirements
12.5 Tree Protection
12.6 Tree Removal
12.7 Protected Tree Removal Exceptions
12.8 Mitigation for Tree Removal
12.9 Prohibited Activities
12.10 Appeals
12.11 Penalty
Subchapter 13 Lighting Standards
13.1 Purpose.
13.2 Applicability
13.3 Lighting Design Requirements
13.4 Non-Conforming Fixtures
13.5 Illumination Requirements
13.6 Speci_ic Lighting Requirements
13.7 Prohibited Light Sources
13.8 Street Lights
13.9 Athletic Field Lighting
13.10 Submittal Requirements
Subchapter 14 Parkland Standards.
14.1 Purpose
14.2 Scope
14.3 Public Parkland Dedication Requirements
14.4 Park Development Fee
14.5 Alternative Compliance
14.6 Payments
14.7 Review Process
14.8 Decision Making; Appeal Process
Subchapter 15 Subdivision Process.
15.1 General
15.2 Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule
15.3 Subdivision Process
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 5/320
15.4 General Platting Procedure
15.5 Preliminary Plan
15.6 Final Plat
15.7 Minor Plat
15.8 Replat.
15.9 Amending Plat
15.10 Vacation Plat
15.11 Construction Plans
15.12 Construction of Public Improvements or Fiscal Security
15.13 Acceptance of Subdivision as Complete
15.14 Final Plat Recordation Procedure
15.15 Subdivision Waiver
15.16 Subdivision Design Standards
15.16.1 Applicability
15.16.2 General
15.16.3 Streets
15.16.4 Alleys
15.16.5 Lots
15.16.6 Blocks
15.16.7 Water
15.16.8 Wastewater
15.16.9 Easements
Subchapter 16 Reserved.
Subchapter 17 Reserved.
Subchapter 18 Reserved.
Subchapter 19 Reserved.
Subchapter 20 De_initions
19.59 Community Garden, Private
Development.
Orchard, Private
Outdoor Amphitheater, Private
Public Park Facilities
Setback, Building Height
Stormwater Detention Facilities
Underground Parking
Vineyard, Private
SUBCHAPTER 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.1 SHORT TITLE
This Chapter 157 of the Code of Ordinances shall be known, and can be cited, as the Uni_ied
Development Code of the City of P_lugerville, Texas. References to “this Chapter”, “the Code” or “the UDC”
within this Chapter shall be interpreted as references to the Uni_ied Development Code of the City of
P_lugerville, Texas, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. All references to this Code and Chapter
include all amendments hereto.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 6/320
1.2 AUTHORITY
Under the authority of Texas Local Government Code Chapters 211 and 212, the City’s Charter and the
Texas Constitution, the City adopts the regulations set out in this Code to control the use of land within
the corporate limits of the City and the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City and its
Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction (ETJ). The site development standards located in Subchapter 9 in this Code,
however, serve as a guide for development in the Extra-Territorial Jurisdiction. This Code is adopted
pursuant to the powers granted the City and is subject to limitations imposed by the Texas Constitution,
the laws of this State, the City Charter and other applicable law.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.3 PURPOSE
The zoning and subdivision regulations and related standards are hereby established in accordance with
the City’s Comprehensive Plan for the purposes of promoting the health, safety, and general welfare of
the present and future residents and guests of the City and promoting safe, orderly, and healthful
development of the community. This Code also regulates site development to achieve objectives of the
City’s Comprehensive Plan and the “SH 45 and SH 130 Corridor Study” that:
A. Create a series of unique places to shop, work and live.
B. Establish a diversi_ied and leak-free tax base.
C. Establish an enhanced, long-term market capture.
D. Utilize smart, healthy and sensible design concepts.
E. Lessen congestion in the streets.
F. Secure safety from _ire, panic and other dangers.
G. Insure adequate light and air.
H. Prevent the overcrowding of land to avoid undue concentration of population.
I. Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, parks, open spaces and other
public requirements.
J. Maintain property values and encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City
consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and the Corridor Plan.
K. Establish a process that effectively and fairly applies the regulations and standards of this Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.4 ADMINISTRATION
A. The general regulations described in this Code apply uniformly to all districts, unless speci_ically
exempted by this Code, State statute or other applicable law.
B. An Administrator is designated in Subchapter 2 of this Code to administer the provisions of this
Code.
C. The Administrator, or any person duly authorized by him/her, has the right to enter upon any
premises at all reasonable times necessary to carry out their duties in the implementation and
enforcement of this Chapter.
1. If such premises are occupied, the Administrator shall _irst present proper credentials and
request entry. If entry is denied, Administrator shall proceed to initiate legal process to
secure entry.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 7/320
2. If such premises are unoccupied, the Administrator shall _irst make a reasonable effort to
locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and
request entry. If consent cannot be secured, Administrator shall proceed to initiate legal
process to secure entry.
3. If a development application has been submitted on behalf of the property owner, and
property owner has signed the development application with the right of entry consent
provision stated thereon, this shall permit City of_icials to enter upon the premises for which
the development application has been submitted without further consent.
D. Many of the standards established in this Code are dependent on the land adjacent to a designated
district. For the purposes of determining the standards required by this Code, the City considers
that:
1. Unincorporated land or land within an adjacent municipality that is not zoned is considered
Agriculture/Development Reserve, regardless of the existing land use.
2. Land within another municipality’s jurisdiction that is zoned is considered to have a zoning
classi_ication that most closely resembles the zoning that would apply to it if the land were in
the City.
3. For properties subject to a non-annexation development agreement pursuant to Chapters
212 and 43 of the Texas Local Government Code, new on-site improvements associated with
the agriculture, timber, or wildlife uses shall be governed by requirements of the
Agricultural/ Development Reserve zoning district and any other on-site improvements shall
be established in the non-annexation development agreement.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.5 RESERVED
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.6 COMPLIANCE
A. The general regulations described in this Code apply uniformly to all land, unless the land is
speci_ically exempted by this Code, State statute or other applicable law.
B. A person shall not use or occupy land, unless such activity conforms to all of the applicable
regulations speci_ied in this Code.
C. A person shall not erect, convert, enlarge, construct, reconstruct, structurally alter or use a building,
or move a building onto a lot or tract, unless such activity complies with all of the applicable
development provisions and requirements of this Code.
D. Within the corporate limits of the City, a person shall not use or occupy a building constructed,
converted or structurally altered after adoption of this Chapter until the Building Of_icial issues a
Certi_icate of Occupancy, which signi_ies compliance with the appropriate zoning district regulations as
well as subdivision and site development regulations, as applicable.
E. All construction and development on land shall comply with the site speci_ic _ire code requirements of
Chapter 150 of the City Code as determined by the Fire Marshal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.7 VIOLATIONS
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 8/320
Any act of commission or omission contrary to the commands or directives of this Code, any breach of
any duty imposed by this Code, or any failure to otherwise comply with any provision of this Code shall
constitute a violation hereof. An offense under this section is subject to general penalty provisions
provided under Chapter 10, Section 10.99 of this Code of Ordinances as a Class C misdemeanor, unless
speci_ically indicated otherwise.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.8 ENFORCEMENT
A. Enforcement Actions. In addition to criminal enforcement actions for violations of this Chapter, or in
lieu thereof, the City or any authorized person may institute any appropriate civil action or
proceedings to penalize, enjoin or prevent violations or threatened violations of this Chapter. In
particular, but without limitation, in the event that any building or structure is erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building, structure or land is used in
violation of this Code, the City or any authorized person may institute any appropriate action or
proceedings to penalize, enjoin or prevent: (1) such unlawful acts and to restrain, correct or abrogate
such violation; (2) the occupancy of the building, structure or land; or (3) any illegal act, conduct,
business or use in or about such premises, including but not limited to all remedies provided in
Chapters 54, 211 and 212 of the Texas Local Government Code. The imposition of any penalty
hereunder shall not preclude the City or any authorized person from instituting any appropriate
criminal or administrative action or proceedings to require compliance with the provisions of this
Chapter and with administrative orders and determinations made hereunder.
B. Administrative Actions.
In addition to the remedies set forth above, the City may enforce compliance with the requirements
of this Chapter by:
1. Refusing to issue street addresses,
2. Withholding building permits or certi_icates of occupancy,
3. Not allowing connection to or disconnection of utility service, or
4. Issuing a stop work order.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.9 PRESERVING RIGHTS IN PENDING LITIGATION
By the adoption of this Code, no currently illegal use shall be deemed to have been made legal.
Depending on the particular circumstances, uses not permitted by this Code may be legal nonconforming
uses, when so recognized according to the provisions of Subchapter 8 of this Code, or illegal uses.
Furthermore, it is the intent and declared purpose of this Code that no offense committed, and no
liability, penalty, or forfeiture, whether civil or criminal, shall be discharged or affected by the adoption of
this Code; but prosecutions and suits for such offenses, liabilities, penalties, or forfeitures may be
instituted or proceeded with for causes presently pending.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.10 INTERPRETATION AND CONFLICT
The provisions of this Code shall be held to be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public
safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. These provisions shall be construed
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 9/320
broadly to promote the purposes for which they were adopted.
The provisions of this Code are not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance,
rule, regulation, statute, code, or other provision of law except as provided in this Code. Where any
provision of this Chapter imposes restrictions different than those imposed by any other law, including
another provision in this Code of Ordinances, the provision which is more restrictive or imposes higher
standards shall control.
In addition, the provisions of this Code are not intended to interfere with, rescind, or invalidate any
easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. However, if this Code imposes a greater
restriction or higher standards, this Code controls.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.11 SAVING OF CITY RIGHTS AND REMEDIES
All rights or remedies of the City are expressly saved as to any and all violations of previous zoning
regulations or amendments thereto of the City that have accrued at the time of the effective date of this
Code; and to such accrued violations, the City and the courts have all the powers that existed prior to the
effective date of this Code; and all existing violations of previous zoning regulations which would
otherwise become nonconforming uses under this Code shall not become legal nonconforming uses
under this Chapter, but shall be violations of this Chapter in the same manner that they were violations
of prior zoning regulations.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
1.13 SEVERABILITY
If any provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code (collectively “provision”), or
the application of same to any person or set of circumstances, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, void, or unenforceable, the validity of the remaining portions of this Code shall not be
affected thereby. It being the intent of the City Council in adopting this Code that no portion thereof, or
provisions or regulations contained herein, shall become inoperative or fail by reason of any
unconstitutionality of any other portion hereof, and all provisions of this Code are declared to be
severable for that purpose. Moreover, it is also the intention of the City Council that in lieu of each
provision, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Chapter, collectively “provision”, that is
found to be illegal, invalid, or unenforceable, a provision be added to this Code which is legal, valid, and
enforceability and is a similar in terms as possible to the provision found to be illegal, invalid or
unenforceable.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 2. ADMINISTRATION
2.1. CITY COUNCIL
2.1.1 General
The City Council shall be responsible for _inal action regarding the text of this Code and the Of_icial
Zoning District Map.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 10/320
2.1.2 Powers and Duties
The City Council has the following powers and duties regarding this Code:
A. Appointments
The City Council appoints and removes members of the Planning and Zoning Commission, Board of
Adjustment, Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, and Capital Improvement Advisory Committee.
B. Fees
The City Council shall determine the Fee Schedule for development services. The Fee Schedule, as
may be amended from time to time, is incorporated by reference into this Code as Appendix A and
shall be contained in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
C. Final Action. The City Council hears and takes _inal action on the following matters:
1. Annexations
2. Comprehensive Plan amendments
3. Uni_ied Development Code text and Of_icial Zoning District Map Amendments
4. Variances to the Sign Code in accordance with Chapter 154 of the City Code
5. Speci_ic Use Permits
6. Impact fees
7. Fee Schedule
8. Capital Improvement Plan (CIP) priorities
9. Acceptance of Parkland Conveyance Dedications
10. Appeals to requests for waivers denied by the Planning and Zoning Commission
11. Heritage Tree removal
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.2 PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Regular meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held once a month, unless there is a
lack of agenda items to justify a meeting. Special meetings may be called at the request of the
chairperson or at the request of the Mayor, City Council, or the Administrator. The Administrator shall
prepare the Planning and Zoning Commission annual meeting schedule and include it in the Uni_ied
Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
2.2.1 Creation
The City Council appoints a Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with Section 8.08 of the City
Charter and Chapter 31 of the City Code.
2.2.2 Composition and Term
The Planning and Zoning Commission consists of seven members as provided by the City Charter,
Section 8.08. Members must meet the requirements of Section 8.02 of the City Charter, entitled
“Membership Quali_ications.” Terms are for two years and subject to the provisions of Section 31.40 of
the City Code.
2.2.3 Rules of Procedure
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 11/320
As provided by Section 8.08 of the City Charter, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall require a
quorum consisting of at least four (4) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission. An af_irmative
vote of a majority of those present is necessary to act on pending questions or matters. The chairperson
is permitted to vote on any question or matter.
2.2.4 Powers and Duties
The Planning and Zoning Commission exercises the following powers and duties regarding this Code:
A. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend a Comprehensive Plan for the physical
development of the City to the City Council for approval.
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall make recommendations for the amendment, extension,
and addition to the approved Comprehensive Plan periodically to address changing socioeconomic
conditions and development within the City.
C. In order to implement the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
1. Receive, review, revise and make recommendations to the City Council on all proposals to
adopt or amend City development regulations including zoning, subdivision, site
development, building code, transportation, utilities, environmental concerns and other
police powers regarding use or development of land within the City; and
2. Ensure that all such proposals conform to the goals and intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
D. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall annually submit a _ive-year Capital Improvements Plan
(CIP) regarding parks, transportation, and utilities to the City Council, at least one hundred twenty
(120) days before the beginning of the budget year. The CIP shall list projects in order of
preference with a recommendation for the year of construction for each project.
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall exercise control over platting, subdivision and site plan
review procedures, as applicable, to ensure consistency with the Comprehensive Plan, or any
individual element of the Comprehensive Plan.
F. At least every two years after the date of the adoption of the Comprehensive Plan, the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall prepare a thorough review, analysis, and evaluation of the
Comprehensive Plan for the City Council.
G. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall perform its duties and obligations under this Code,
including:
1. Consider proposed waivers greater than 20% from the minimum site development standards
and requirements within Subchapters 9, 10 and 11 within all zoning districts.
2. Consider proposed waivers concerning architecture for all structures, including but not
limited to building articulation, exterior building wall standards and roof treatment, as
speci_ied throughout this Chapter.
3. Consider an application for a major site development permit or a referral by the Planning
Director of a minor site development permit, as speci_ied in Chapter 155, Site Development
Code, Subchapter B, Central Business District, also known as the Downtown District Overlay.
4. Consider proposed subdivisions submitted to the City in accordance with the Uni_ied
Development Code.
5. Consider development regulations governing platting and subdividing of land that are
consistent with the state constitution and laws and recommending them to the City Council
for adoption.
6. Consider requests for alternative compliance related to parkland standards per Subchapter
14.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 12/320
7. Consider and recommend an annual annexation plan to the City Council, as applicable.
8. Exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as the City Council shall from
time to time prescribe.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.3. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT
2.3.1 Creation
The City Council appoints the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Section 8.09 of the City Charter
and Chapter 31 of the City Code.
2.3.2 Composition and Term
The Board of Adjustment consists of _ive (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members who serve
two-year terms as provided by Section 8.09 of the City Charter, and who are subject to the provisions of
Section 31.50 of the City Code. Members must meet the requirements of Section 8.02 of the City Charter,
entitled “Membership Quali_ications.” Alternate members may participate in meetings and vote on
matters in the absence of regular members when requested to do so by the City Manager. The City
Council may remove a member for cause set out in a written charge and as determined by the City
Council after a public hearing on the charge.
2.3.3 Rules of Procedure
The presiding of_icer shall call meetings at least quarterly and may administer oaths to witnesses and
compel attendance of witnesses. Cases shall be heard in an open meeting by at least four (4) members
and not more than _ive (5) members. The minutes of meetings are public records of the Board of
Adjustment’s examinations, of_icial actions, and other proceedings and shall re_lect each member’s vote,
absence or failure to vote on each question.
2.3.4 Powers.
The Board of Adjustment exercises the following powers and duties regarding this Code:
A. Hears and decides any appeal that alleges error in an order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Administrator in enforcing zoning regulations of this Code.
B. Hears and decides special exceptions to terms of zoning regulations within this Code when this
Code so requires, provided that exceptions granted are consistent with the general purpose and
intent of the Code and in accordance with any applicable rules contained in the Code.
C. In speci_ic cases, hears and decides requested variances from the terms of zoning regulations of
this Code, provided that the variances are not contrary to the public interest and that, due to
special conditions, literal enforcement of zoning regulations of this Code would result in
unnecessary hardship on the applicant requesting the variance. In authorizing variances, the Board
ensures that the spirit of this Code is observed and substantial justice is done.
D. Hears and decides other matters authorized by this Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.4 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
2.4.1 Creation
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 13/320
The City Council may appoint a Capital Improvement Advisory Committee. All regulations and restrictions
adopted by the Capital Improvement Advisory Committee shall be pursuant to applicable statutory
provisions of the State of Texas for the purpose of providing recommendations and analysis of impact
fees administered by the City.
2.4.2 Composition and Term
The Capital Improvement Advisory Committee shall consist of the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Should no member of the Planning and Zoning Commission be a representative of the real estate,
development, or building industry, City Council shall also appoint a representative from either the real
estate, development, or building industry to serve as an ad hoc voting member of the Capital
Improvement Advisory Committee. Should such ad hoc member not be from the extraterritorial
jurisdiction, City Council shall also appoint a representative from the extraterritorial jurisdiction to serve
as a voting member.
2.4.3 Rules of Procedure
The Capital Improvements Advisory Committee shall follow the rules of procedure established by the
City Council.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.5. PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION
2.5.1 Creation
The City Council appoints the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board in accordance with Section 8.10 of
the City Charter and Chapter 95 of the City Code.
2.5.2 Powers and Duties
The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board exercises the following powers and duties regarding this
Code:
A. Responsible for making recommendations to the City Manager speci_ic to the project in which they
were appointed.
B. Any other matters designated by City Council.
C. Authority as provided in Subchapter 14 of this Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.6 CITY MANAGER
2.6.1 Designation
The City Council shall designate a City Manager.
2.6.2 Responsibilities
Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the City Manager, the City Manager may, to
the extent allowed by the City Charter, delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or
employee of the City whom the City Manager may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation, the term
“City Manager” shall be deemed to include the City Manager’s designee.
2.6.3 Power and Duties
The City Manager shall have the following powers and duties, in addition to other powers and duties
established under this Code of Ordinances and the City Charter:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 14/320
The City Manager may accept easements by separate instrument, where such easements are required in
conjunction with the development review process (e.g., subdivisions, platting, site development, etc.) or
in other circumstances outside this process when deemed administratively necessary. No such easement
shall be considered accepted by the City unless the granting instrument recorded in the public records of
the County Clerk includes a signed acknowledgement by the City Manager accepting the same on behalf
of the City.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.7 ADMINISTRATOR
2.7.1 Designation
The City Manager shall designate an Assistant City Manager for the City as the “Administrator” of this
Code.
2.7.2 Delegation of Authority
Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Administrator, the Administrator may
delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the
Administrator may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation, the term “Administrator” shall be
deemed to include the Administrator’s designee.
2.7.3 Power and Duties
The Administrator shall have the following powers and duties:
A. The Administrator shall administer and enforce the provisions of this Code.
B. The Administrator is responsible for interpreting the provisions of Chapter 155, Subsection B (Site
Development Code for the Central Business District, also known as the Downtown District Overlay),
and this Code. The Administrator shall make written interpretations of the provisions in this Code
when requested, setting forth the reasons and explanation for such interpretations.
C. The Administrator may consider requests to shift, realign, or otherwise move a thoroughfare
alignment established on the City’s of_icial Master Transportation Plan map by up to one thousand
(1,000) feet, provided the Administrator determines that the shift, realignment, or move will not
adversely affect adjacent property owners.
D. The Administrator shall prepare, and update as needed, the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental
Schedule.
2.8 PLANNING DIRECTOR
2.8.1 Designation
The Administrator shall designate and supervise the Planning Director for the City.
2.8.2 Delegation of Authority
Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Planning Director, the Planning Director
may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the
Planning Director may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation, the term “Planning Director” shall
be deemed to include the Planning Director’s designee.
2.8.3 Powers and Duties
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 15/320
The Planning Director shall ensure conformance with all provisions under this Code, act and serve as
staff for each review body provided for within this Code, review and certify that the proposed alteration
or use of land, or the proposed construction or moving of structures, complies with the provisions of
this Code prior to the issuance of a site development permit or _inal approval of a subdivision plat.
The Planning Director also shall review and report or make recommendations to the City Council, the
Planning and Zoning Commission, and the Board of Adjustment regarding the following items, subject to
the conditions as outlined within this Code:
A. Rezoning (Zoning map amendment);
B. Development agreements;
C. Comprehensive Plan amendments;
D. Speci_ic Use Permits;
E. Special Exceptions;
F. Text Amendments to the Code;
G. Variances;
H. Preliminary Plans; and
I. Final Plats.
2.8.4 Final Action
The Planning Director shall review and take _inal action on the following:
A. Site development permit applications not located in the Central Business District (also known as
the Downtown District Overlay).
B. Minor permits in the Central Business District.
C. Waivers as prescribed in Subchapter 3.
D. Minor and amended subdivision plats.
E. Enforcement of the City’s the Tree Technical Manual in the development review process.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.9. BUILDING OFFICIAL
2.9.1 Designation
The Administrator shall designate and supervise the Building Of_icial for the City.
2.9.2 Delegation of Authority
Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the Building Of_icial, the Building Of_icial may
delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the Building
Of_icial may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation, the term “Building Of_icial” shall be deemed to
include the Building Of_icial’s designee.
2.9.3 Powers and Duties
The Building Of_icial shall implement, administer, and oversee the provisions, terms, and conditions of all
building and related codes.
2.9.3 Final Action
The Building Of_icial shall review and take _inal action on the following:
A. Building inspections.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 16/320
B. Building permits.
C. Sign permits in accordance with Chapter 154 of the City Code.
D. Certi_icates of Occupancy.
E. Irrigation permits
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.10 CITY ENGINEER AND DEVELOPMENT ENGINEERING DIRECTOR
2.10.1 Designation
The City Manager shall designate the City Engineer and the Development Engineering Director for the
City.
2.10.2 Delegation of Authority
Where this Code assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the City Engineer or Development
Engineering Director, the City Engineer or Development Engineering Director, as applicable, may
delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or employee of the City whom the City
Engineer or the Development Engineering Director may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation,
the terms “City Engineer” or “Development Engineering Director,” as applicable, shall be deemed to
include the City Engineer’s or Development Engineering Director’s designee.
2.10.3 Powers and Duties
The City Engineer and the Development Engineering Director shall implement, administer, and oversee
the provisions, terms, and conditions of this Code involving engineering standards or considerations, the
City’s Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards, and engineering related elements within
the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
The City Engineer shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the City’s Engineering
Design Manual and Construction Standards, water and wastewater master plans, transportation
and public infrastructure elements of the City’s Comprehensive Plan.
B. Ensure adequate inspection of construction permitted under the terms and conditions of this Code
to con_irm that such construction is carried out in accordance with the approved construction
plans.
C. Review and utilize any acceptable new _lood study data in accordance with the City’s Engineering
Design Manual and Construction Standards.
D. Review and make recommendations to the City Council concerning proposed new or amended
development agreements.
E. Determine and enforce dedication requirements for rights-of-way and easements.
F. Determine and enforce requirements for off-site utility extension and for utility over-sizing.
The Development Engineering Director shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny driveway and median break applications.
B. Review and approve Traf_ic Impact Analyses scoping and reports.
C. Review and approve, approve with conditions, or deny applications for site disturbance, right-ofway,
and construction plan permits.
D. For private development, ensure adequate inspection of construction permitted under the terms
and conditions of this Code to con_irm that such construction is carried out in accordance with the
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 17/320
approved construction plans.
E. Floodplain Administration.
F. Review, approve and utilize any acceptable new _lood study data in accordance with the City’s
Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards.
G. Ensure land development is consistent with applicable components of the water and wastewater
master plans, public infrastructure elements of the City’s Comprehensive Plan, and with future City
capital improvement projects.
2.10.4 Quali_ications
The City Engineer and the Development Engineering Director must be professional engineers licensed by
the State of Texas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.11. CITY FORESTER
2.11.1 Designation
The Administrator shall designate and supervise the City Forester for the City.
2.11.2 Delegation of Authority
Where this Code, or the Tree Technical Manual, assigns a responsibility, power, or duty to the City
Forester, the Planning Director may delegate that responsibility, power, or duty to any other agent or
employee of the City whom the Planning Director may reasonably determine. Upon such delegation, the
term “City Forester” shall be deemed to include such designee.
2.11.3 Powers and Duties
The City Forester shall oversee the City’s urban forestry program and serve as an advisor to
Development Services. The City Forester shall implement, administer, and oversee the provisions, terms,
and conditions of public tree planting, the Public Tree Care Ordinance, and relevant provisions and
procedures for tree preservation and landscaping throughout the development process.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.12 PARKS AND RECREATION DIRECTOR
2.12.1 Designation
The Administrator shall designate and supervise the Parks and Recreation Director for the City.
2.12.2 Responsibilities
The Parks and Recreation Director shall oversee the City’s parkland program and serve as an advisor to
Development Services. The Parks and Recreation Director shall implement, administer, and oversee the
provisions, terms, and conditions of public parkland, relevant provisions and procedures related to
parkland dedication, and conveyance of parkland to the City throughout the development process.
2.12.3 Powers and Duties
The Parks and Recreation Director shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Review and make recommendations to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board and the Planning
and Zoning Commission, as applicable, regarding proposed alternative compliance of parkland
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 18/320
dedication and development standards related to development applications pursuant to
Subchapter 14.
B. Enforce the City’s parkland requirements in the development review process.
C. Enforce the City’s Park Development Manual in the development review process.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.13. DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE
2.13.1 Designation
The Administrator shall designate the Development Review Committee for the City.
2.13.2 Responsibilities
The Development Review Committee shall conduct pre-application conferences and review preapplications,
commercial site plans, subdivision applications, zoning applications, and other development
applications.
2.13.3 Powers and Duties
The Development Review Committee shall have the following powers and duties:
A. Review site development and site disturbance permits.
B. Review subdivision applications, including preliminary plans, _inal plats, replats, amended plats,
minor plats, and vacation plats.
C. Other duties as assigned by the Administrator, including reviewing and making recommendations
related to requests for annexation, change of zoning, speci_ic use permits, and Comprehensive Plan
amendments.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.14. OFFICIAL ZONING DISTRICT MAP
2.14.1 The boundaries of zoning districts set out in this Code are delineated upon the Of_icial Zoning
District Map of the City, which the City Council adopts as part of this Code as fully as if the same were set
forth in this Code in detail.
2.14.2 The Of_icial Zoning District Map shall re_lect all changes in zoning district boundaries and all
changes in zoning designations for properties as approved by the City Council. The Of_icial Zoning
District Map may include an ordinance reference to the most recent zoning amendment. The Of_icial
Zoning District Map shall be maintained by the City’s GIS Division.
2.13.3 The following rules shall be used to determine the location of any zoning district boundary line
shown on the Of_icial Zoning District Map. Where a physical feature on the ground differs from the
representation of such feature on the Of_icial Zoning District Map, the physical feature on the ground
shall control.
A. Where district boundaries are generally shown to follow streets or alleys, the boundary is
considered to follow the centerline of the street or alley.
B. Where district boundaries are generally shown to follow platted lot lines, the boundary is
considered to be the platted lot lines.
C. Where district boundaries are generally shown to follow lines dividing land ownership, the
boundary is considered to be the surveyed line dividing land ownership.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 19/320
D. Where district boundaries are generally shown to follow City limit lines, the boundary is
considered to be the City limit line.
E. Where district boundaries are generally shown to follow railroad lines, waterways, utility lines or
similar features, the boundary is considered to be the centerline of the feature.
F. Where district boundaries are shown as separated from but generally parallel to a street, platted
lot line, the surveyed line dividing land ownership, political boundary, physical feature or other
feature, the boundary is considered to be parallel to the feature and separated by the distance on
the map indicated by the scale of the map.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
2.15 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE SUPPLEMENTAL SCHEDULE; FEE
SCHEDULE; APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS; AND TECHNICAL MANUALS
2.15.1 General. The Administrator shall prepare and update the Uni_ied Development Code
Supplemental Schedule to provide guidance as to the administration of this Code. The Uni_ied
Development Code Supplemental Schedule shall include the following: meeting schedule for the Planning
and Zoning Commission and Board of Adjustment, and information pertaining to the review of
development applications and application content requirements, as required by the Code. The
Administrator may amend the contents of the UDC Supplemental Schedule as determined necessary or
bene_icial to facilitate the administration of this Code.
2.15.2 UDC Appendix A and B.
Of the elements included within the UDC Supplemental Schedule, City Council shall adopt the following by
ordinance:
A. Fee Schedule. A fee schedule establishing the fees to be charged for the processing of permit
applications and other services authorized under this Chapter shall be established by ordinance.
The fee schedule shall be incorporated into this Chapter as Appendix A and may be amended as
part of the City’s annual _iscal budget or at such other times as found warranted by City Council.
B. Application Submittal and Content Requirements. The application submittal and content
requirements shall be incorporated into this Chapter as Appendix B.
2.15.3 Establishment by Ordinance. The City Council shall adopt and update, by ordinance, technical
manuals which provide speci_ic design guidelines and standards for development within the City and ETJ.
Examples of such technical manuals include, but are not limited to:
A. Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards
B. Parks Development Manual; and
C. Tree Technical Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 3. PROCEDURES
3.1. COMMON REVIEW ELEMENTS
3.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this subchapter is to establish application procedures, internal review procedures, public
notice and hearing procedures, and review criteria for the processing of applications and actions that
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 20/320
affect the development and use of property subject to the jurisdiction of the City.
3.1.2 Applicability of Procedures
The following table shows which review procedures, applications and permits apply in the City and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction.
Table 3.1.2 Applicability of Procedures
City Limits
Extraterritorial
Jurisdiction
Land Use & Zoning
Comprehensive Plan Amendment X X
UDC Text Amendment X X
Rezoning (Zoning Amendment) X
Planned Unit Development (PUD) X
Specific Use Permit X
Development Agreement X X
Zoning Verifica_on Le_er X
Subdivision & Platting of Land
Preliminary Plan X X
Construc_on Plan (Public Infrastructure) X X
Final Plats (Minor, Amending) X X
Replat X X
Vaca_on Plat X X
Subdivision Variance X X
Plat Waiver X X
Development Application Process
Site Plans (Private Infrastructure) X
Construc_on Plans (Public Infrastructure) X X
Site Disturbance X
Right-of-Way Permit X
Tree Removal X X
Temporary Use Permit X
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 21/320
Table 3.1.2 Applicability of Procedures
Architectural Review (including Downtown District Overlay) X
Sign Permit X X
Deviation from Code Requirement Processes
Appeal of Administra_ve Decision X X
Administra_ve Excep_on X X
Variance (Zoning) X
Special Excep_on X
Architectural Waiver X
3.1.3 Application Sequence of Processes
A. Applications shall be _iled with the City in the following sequence of processes:
1. Comprehensive Plan Amendment;
2. Zoning;
3. Preliminary Plan;
4. Final Plat;
5. Construction Plan;
6. Site Plan; and
7. Building Permit
B. Proposed land uses or occupancies within the corporate limits shall conform with the
regulations within this Code speci_ied for the district in which the use or occupancy is proposed;
and the appropriate zoning designation shall by established prior to the issuance of any
development permit for the proposed use of occupancy.
C. The submittal of concurrent applications is discouraged. However, concurrent applications may
be allowed as long as the City’s consideration of the applications remain in the application
sequence of processes. Any application submitted concurrently is subject to the approval of all
other related concurrent applications. Denial or disapproval of any concurrently submitted
application shall halt the consideration of any related concurrent applications.
D. City staff review of concurrent applications may be delayed due to the sequence of such
submittals. It is recommended that the applicant delay the submittal of a development
application until such time staff provides the initial review of the preceding development
application in the sequence of application processes.
E. The Planning Director may deny the submittal and review of any concurrent application if: (1)
any concurrent application has not been submitted to and accepted by City staff for review in
the appropriate order of sequence; and (2) at least one round of City staff comments has not
been sent to the applicant.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 22/320
3.2. COMMON REVIEW ELEMENTS
3.2.1. Pre-Application Conference (PAC) Procedure
A. Purpose
Prior to the submission of an application required by this Chapter, the Planning Director may
require a PAC with the Development Review Committee to discuss, in general terms, procedures,
standards, or regulations relating to development. The PAC does not vest any right in a proposed
project, unless otherwise required by law.
B. Mandatory Conference
A PAC shall be required with the Development Review Committee to initiate the application
processes listed below:
1. All subdivision plans;
2. Site plans;
3. Rezonings;
4. Comprehensive Plan amendments;
5. Code text amendments;
6. Planned Unit Development creation and amendments;
7. Speci_ic use permits;
8. Architectural review in Downtown District Overlay; and
9. Special exception and variance requests.
C. Submittal Requirements
In order to schedule a PAC, the Applicant shall submit a request form per the UDC Supplemental
Schedule no less than three (3) business days prior to the requested date. The Planning Director
may require the applicant to submit information ten (10) business days prior to the PAC to allow
the Development Review Committee adequate time to review the proposal and provide direction
and feedback.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.2.2. Application Forms and Fees
The following regulations shall apply to all applications:
A. Forms
Applications required under this Code shall be submitted on forms, with the information and
attachments requested, and in such numbers, as required by the City, including any checklists for
submittals in accordance with Appendix B, further referenced in the UDC Supplemental Schedule.
Additional information may be requested by the Planning Director in order to ensure compliance
with the Uni_ied Development Code (UDC).
B. Electronic Submission Required
All applications shall also be prepared and submitted in an electronic form acceptable to the
Planning Director and compatible with the City’s Geographic Information System (GIS). (e.g., .pdf,
.dwg, etc.)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 23/320
C. Fees
1. Application fees are established in Appendix A of this Chapter and are also found in the
Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule..
2. All required application fees shall be made payable to “The City of P_lugerville.”
3. Once an application has been deemed complete by the Administrator or designee, the
applicant shall not be entitled to a refund.
4. The following fees are to be paid by the applicant and are non-refundable:
a. Application fees, including but not limited to, public hearing noti_ication fees,
technology fees, etc.;
b. Impact fees;
c. Fee in lieu payments (e.g., parkland, park development, sidewalk, etc.); and
d. County recordation fees (required for easements, deeds, plats, and any other similar
document requiring recordation associated with a development application).
D. Application Deadline
All applications shall be completed and submitted to the Planning Director in accordance with a
schedule established within the UDC Supplemental Schedule. An application shall not be
considered of_icially submitted until it has been determined to be complete in accordance with
Subsection 3.2.2 E of this Subchapter.
E. Application Completeness
1. An application shall be considered submitted only after the Administrator has determined it
is complete and provided that it is on the required form, with all required information,
including all exhibits, and is accompanied by the applicable fee. A determination of
application completeness shall be made by the Administrator within _ive (5) business days of
submission of an application and fee. If an application is determined to be incomplete, the
Administrator, or designee shall provide written notice to the applicant providing an
explanation of the application’s de_iciencies.
2. Any application that requires a PAC as required in Section 3.2.1 may not be submitted for
completeness review until the PAC has been held.
3. Determination that an application is complete does not determine or imply that the
application has successfully met all review criteria and is then subject to review and possible
disapproval.
F. Staff Review
1. Once the application has been determined to be complete by the Administrator, the
Development Review Committee shall review the application according to its applicable
review schedule identi_ied in this Subchapter.
2. All applications are allowed three (3) review cycles by staff to ensure adherence to all
development regulations and to address staff comments. For all applications that require
more than three (3) review cycles by staff to ensure adherence of all development
regulations and staff comments have been addressed, all successive review cycles shall
require additional review fees in accordance with Appendix A of the Uni_ied Development
Code and further referenced in the UDC Supplemental Schedule. The Administrator may
approve a fee waiver upon the request of an applicant and a showing by the applicant that
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 24/320
more than three review cycles were due to the complexity of matters being reviewed or fault
of the reviewing staff person and not due to slovenliness or conscious indifference on the
part of the applicant.
G. Expedited Review Cycles
1. Purpose
The intent of expedited review cycles by the City is to allow for relatively small, highly
planned projects to move through the development process in a manner that may allow for
concurrent reviews of multiple development applications related to the same project within
shorter time frames by City staff at the discretion of the Administrator.
2. Applicability
For the development applications listed in this section, the applicant may request expedited
staff review cycles at time of application, for no less than _ive (5) business days and limited to
three (3) review cycles.
a. Preliminary Plans
b. Final Plats
c. Site Plans
d. Site Disturbance
3. Criteria for Consideration
The Administrator may utilize the following in the determination of granting expedited
review cycles:
a. One consolidated PAC to address all proposed development application types for the
related project.
b. Submittal of applications shall follow the “Application Sequence of Processes” outlined
in Section 3.1.3, and may not become out sequence during the review process with
subsequent submittals at any time.
c. Limitations for Concurrent Reviews as identi_ied in Section 3.2.2(G)(4) below and
Section 3.1.3.
d. Site is contained fully within the City of P_lugerville city limits.
e. No legal review required.
f. No Traf_ic Impact Analysis (TIA) or TIA amendment is required.
g. No public hearing notice required.
h. No FEMA _loodplain applications or _lood studies are required.
i. All property entitlements are secured (for example, zoning).
4. Limitation of Concurrent Reviews
If concurrent development applications are in the review process at the same time for a
related project, staff shall not be required to provide staff review reports to the
applicant within the same expedited review time frame for all the development applications
submitted, and that a _ive (5) business day delay in the review cycle may occur between each
concurrent application according to the application sequence of processes listed in Section
3.1.3.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 25/320
5. Process
a. The applicant shall submit a request for a PAC, whereby the applicant shall be required
to submit an electronic copy of the development plan to the Planning Director, or
designee, at least _ive (5) business days prior to the meeting.
b. The applicant shall make a written request to the Planning Director identifying how the
development application(s) meet the criteria for consideration of an expedited review
process, upon the completion of a consolidated PAC with all applicable members of the
Development Review Committee present.
c. The Planning Director, at his/her full discretion with the criteria for consideration as
listed in Section 3.2.2(G)(3) as guidance, shall render a determination within _ive (5)
business days of said request. The Planning Director may place conditions upon
applications permitted to follow the applicable expedited review process.
d. If the development application is permitted to follow the expedited review process, the
applicant may submit the application with the applicable review fees in accordance with
Appendix A of the UDC.
e. Once application is determined to be complete upon submittal, staff shall proceed with
a City staff review of _ive (5) business days, unless otherwise conditioned by the
Planning Director, up to three (3) review cycles.
f. Phone or in-person conferences may be held by the individual staff reviewer(s) with
the applicant after such staff review reports have been provided to the applicant for
each submittal; except as stated in subsection g, immediately below.
g. Prior to the third (3rd) submittal of the development application by the applicant, the
applicant is required to meet with staff to discuss remaining comments. However, a
phone conference may be acceptable at the discretion of the Planning Director.
h. If the third (3rd) submittal by the applicant does not address all of staff’s review
comments, the application shall expire and will be subject to provisions outlined in
Section 3.2.2 (I) below and will no longer qualify for an expedited review process. The
Administrator shall not be obligated to grant additional expedited reviews by City staff
for said expired applications upon reactivation of a development application.
H. Applicant Resubmittals
1. Resubmittals shall be received no later than noon on Mondays, unless otherwise stated
within the Supplemental Schedule.
2. All resubmittals shall include a comment response letter addressing all of staff’s comments.
The letter shall also identify all other applicant initiated changes made to the plat or plan.
3. All resubmittals shall include electronic _iles and hard copies, as applicable, in the amount
speci_ied by staff of all submittal contents.
4. If a resubmittal does not include all required items, the resubmittal shall be considered
incomplete.
I. Expired Applications
1. A permit application shall expire and have no further validity if:
a. No activity has occurred on a development application for a period of 90 days from the
date of City staff’s last formal review comments on the development application, the
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 26/320
development plans associated with the development application, or the resubmittal of
such development application; or
b. The approval on a development application has not been obtained within 180 days
from the date the application and fees were _iled pursuant to the requirements of this
Chapter.
2. In the event that a development application expires pursuant to subsection 1, immediately
above:
a. The applicant shall be required to submit a new Development Application;
b. The applicant shall be required to submit new application fees in an amount equal to
the amount authorized by the Fee Schedule in effect at the time of submission of the
new Development Application; and
c. The project shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this Chapter in effect as of
the date of the submission of the new application.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.3. PUBLIC HEARING AND NOTICE
3.3.1 Provision of Public Notice
A. Summary of Notice Required
Notice shall be required for application review as shown in the following Table 3.3.1 A.
Table 3.3.1 A. Notice
Type of Application Published
Notice
Mailed
Notice
Signage
Posted
Comprehensive Plan Amendment X
UDC Text Amendment X
Annexation In accordance with state statutes
Rezoning (Zoning Amendment) X X X
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District X X X
Speci_ic Use Permit X X X
Replat of Residential Property (Resubdivision) X X
Replat of Commercial Property (Resubdivision) X
Appeal of Administrative Decision X
Variance (Zoning) X X X
Special Exception X X X
X = Notice Required
B. Published Notice
1. Before the 10th day before the scheduled public hearing date before the Planning and
Zoning Commission, notice of the hearing must be: published at least one time in the City’s
of_icial newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the City, which includes the date of the
public hearing, time of the public hearing, location, and a general description of the request
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 27/320
before the Planning and Zoning Commission. As to a replat falling under the purview of Texas
Local Government Code Section 212.015, Before the 15th day before the date of the date of
the scheduled public hearing date before Planning and Zoning Commission, notice of the
hearing must be published at least one time in the City’s of_icial newspaper or a paper of
general circulation in the City, which includes the date of the public hearing, time of the public
hearing, location, and a general description of the request.
2. Before the 15th day before the date of the scheduled public hearing date before the City
Council or Board of Adjustment, notice of the hearing must be published at least one time in
the City’s of_icial newspaper or a paper of general circulation in the City, which includes the
date of the public hearing, time of the public hearing, location, and a general description of
the request.
C. Mailed Notice
1. Generally
A notice of public hearing shall be sent by U.S. mail to owners of record of real property
within a certain distance of the boundary of the property under consideration in accordance
with the following Table 3.3.1 C, as determined by the most recently approved municipal tax
roll information. The notice may be served by its deposit in the municipality, properly
addressed with postage paid, in United States mail prior to the date set for the public hearing
in accordance with the timelines established for the published notice in section 3.3.1(B)
above, or as otherwise required by the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
Table 3.3.1 C Mailed Notice
Type of Application Noti_ication Distance from Subject Property
(Feet)
HOA(s)
Noti_ied
Annexation Noti_ication in accordance with State law
Appeal of Administrative Decision Noti_ication in accordance with State law
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District 500 X
Replat of Residential Property
(Resubdivision) 200
Rezoning (Zoning Amendment) 500 X
Special Exception 200 X
Speci_ic Use Permit 500 X
Variance (Zoning) 200 X
X = Special Notice Required
2. Mailing letters to all homeowner’s associations or neighborhood associations whose
jurisdiction is within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject area. Such homeowner
association or neighborhood association must be registered with the City Planning
Department annually as prescribed in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
3. Special Mailed Notice for Residential and Multi-Family Rezoning
a. Before the 10th day before the hearing date, written notice of each public hearing on a
proposed change in a zoning classi_ication affecting residential or multifamily zoning
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 28/320
shall be sent to each school district in which the property for which the change in
classi_ication is proposed is located.
b. The notice shall be served by its deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in the
United States mail.
4. Special Mailed Notice Required for PUD Modification
a. For purposes of mailed notice, the boundary of a PUD Modification shall be the
boundary of any tract of land for which PUD standards or requirements are proposed
to change due to the modification.
b. In addition to the requirements of paragraph 1 of Section 3.3.1 C., mailed notice shall
also be provided to all owners of property within the entire PUD boundary, not
otherwise notified. The _inancial obligation for such noti_ication shall be the applicant’s
responsibility, and shall be in addition to the standard application amendment fee.
5. Special Mailed Notice Required for Speci_ic Use Permits
a. Before the tenth (10th) day before the hearing date, written notice of each public
hearing on a proposed change in a zoning classi_ication affecting residential or
multifamily zoning shall be sent to each school district in which the property for which
the change in classi_ication is proposed is located.
b. The notice shall be served by its deposit, properly addressed with postage paid, in the
United States mail.
6. Special Mailed Notice Required for Certain Replats
Replats containing any area or lot that, during the preceding five years, was limited by an
interim or permanent zoning classification to residential use for not more than two
residential units per lot or in the preceding plat was limited by deed restrictions to
residential use for not more than two residential units per lot, require mailed notice to all
owners of lots that are part of the original subdivision and located within 200 feet of the
boundary of the property to be replatted, in the same manner as prescribed in this Section
above and in accordance with §212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended.
D. Posted Notice
1. Notice shall be posted in the format and amount determined by the Administrator on every
street right-of-way adjacent to the land under consideration.
2. The applicant shall be responsible for maintaining the sign on a format approved by the
Administrator during the course of the public hearings, until such time staff remove the
signage from the property.
3. Posted notice shall be posted consistent with the timeline(s) established for published notice
per Subsection 3.3.1(B) above.
E. Content of Notice
Published and mailed notices shall contain at least the following specific information:
1. The general location of land that is the subject of the application, including a location map
with the mailed notice only;
2. The legal description or street address;
3. The substance of the application;
4. The time, date, and location of the public hearing;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 29/320
5. Contact information for the City; and
6. A statement that interested parties may appear at the public hearing.
F. Special Hearing Notice Required for Certain Replats
A replat without vacation of the preceding plat must conform to the requirements of Sections
212.014 and 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 30/320
3.3.2 Public Hearing Required
The following table identi_ies the types of applications requiring a public hearing and the review body
responsible for conducting the hearing.
Table. 3.3.2 Summary of Required Public Hearings
Type of Application Planning & Zoning City Council Board of Adjustment
Annexation In accordance with state statutes
Appeal of Administrative Decision X
Comprehensive Plan Amendment X X
Planned Unit Development (PUD) District X X
UDC Text Amendment X X
Rezoning (Zoning Amendment) X X
Replat (Resubdivision) X
Speci_ic Use Permit X X
Special Exception X
Variance (Zoning) X
X = Public Hearing Required
3.3.3 Postponement of Application
An applicant may request to postpone an application at any time prior to the public notice being sent for
publication and mailed to the applicable property owners within the noti_ication area. If the request for
postponement is received after public notice has been sent, the Administrator may approve the request
on a showing of good cause and applicant’s payment of all re-noti_ication fees.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.4. COMPREHENSIVE PLAN AMENDMENT PROCEDURES
3.4.1 Purpose
For the purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the
City, the Comprehensive Plan, speci_ically, the Land Use Plan and the Transportation Master Plan, shall be
amended only based upon changed or changing conditions in a particular area or in the City.
3.4.2 Applicability
If it is determined that a proposed rezoning is not in accordance with the Future Land Use Plan located
within the Master Plan, a comprehensive plan amendment application shall be required to accompany
the application of the applicant initiated rezoning request with the applicable review fees in accordance
with Appendix A, and further referenced in the UDC Supplemental Schedule.
3.4.3 Initiation of Amendment
An amendment may be initiated by:
A. City Council;
B. The Planning and Zoning Commission;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 31/320
C. The Administrator; or
D. Application by the property owner(s).
3.4.4 Procedure
The procedure for the processing of a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall conform to the procedures
for “Uni_ied Development Code Text Amendments” as provided in Section 3.5, except as provided herein.
A. Amendment Application
A complete application for a Comprehensive Plan amendment shall be submitted to the
Administrator as set forth in Subchapter 3 with letter of explanation for the request and any
support information related to the request.
B. Review and Report by Administrator
Once the application is complete, the Administrator shall review the proposed amendment in light
of the remainder of the Comprehensive Plan and conditions in the City, and give a report and
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
C. Review by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review the amendment and recommend approving,
approving with conditions, denying, or determine that the proposed development complies with
the Comprehensive Plan and no amendment is required. The Planning and Zoning Commission will
advise the City Council of its recommendation regarding the requested Comprehensive Plan
amendment, or any element of the Comprehensive Plan. If the Planning and Zoning Commission
determines that no amendment is required, the applicant may proceed with the next step in the
development process with no further action required by the City Council.
D. Review and Action by the City Council
After receiving a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the City Council may
then adopt or reject all or a certain elements of the proposed Comprehensive Plan amendment.
The City Council may also adopt additional elements it deems necessary to ful_ill the goals and
intent of the Comprehensive Plan. The City Council shall act on the Comprehensive Plan, or an
element of the Comprehensive Plan, within 60 days following its submission to the City Council by
the Planning and Zoning Commission. The City Council may: (i) adopt or reject the plan as
submitted by the Planning and Zoning Commission; (ii) adopt or reject the Comprehensive Plan
with changes or amendments; or (iii) direct the Planning and Zoning Commission to further study
or review the Comprehensive Plan, or a portion thereof.
3.4.5 Approval Criteria
A. The City Council shall consider the following approval criteria in an analysis of immediate needs
and consideration of the long-term effects.
1. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is suf_icient
and correct enough to allow adequate review and final action; and
2. The amendment promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe
orderly, and healthful development of the City.
B. In considering amendments to the Comprehensive Plan, the City Council should be guided by the
following:
1. The need for the proposed change;
2. The effect of the proposed change on the need for City services and facilities;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 32/320
3. The compatibility of the proposed change with the existing uses and development patterns of
nearby property and with the character of the neighborhood; and
4. The implications, if any, that the amendment may have for other parts of the Plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.5. UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE TEXT AMENDMENTS
3.5.1 Applicability
Amendments to this Uni_ied Development Code may be made in order to establish and maintain sound,
stable, and desirable development within the jurisdiction of the City, to correct errors in the text or
because of changed or changing conditions in the City. All text amendments shall be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan.
3.5.2 Initiation of Text Amendment.
A text amendment to this UDC may be initiated in one of the following ways:
A. Direction of the City Council
The City Council may initiate a UDC text amendment in one of two ways:
1. City Council, by majority vote, may direct initiation of a UDC text amendment review.
2. City Council, by a super majority vote, may initiate an emergency UDC text amendment.
B. Recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission
The Planning and Zoning Commission, by majority vote, may direct initiation of a UDC text
amendment review.
C. Recommendation by the Planning Director
The Planning Director may make recommendation to the City Manager for the initiation of a UDC
text amendment review.
D. Application by a Citizen or Property Owner
A citizen or property owner may make application for a UDC text amendment. The applicant shall
provide staff with draft text of their proposed UDC text amendment along with supporting
information detailing how the proposed changes meet the criteria outlined in Section 3.5.4.
3.5.3 Review and Approval Process
A. Staff Review
The Planning Director shall prepare a report to be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning
Commission for consideration, including each proposed version of the text amendment and a
recommendation for _inal action.
B. Planning and Zoning Commission Review
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing in accordance with this Code and
shall make a recommendation on the proposed change(s) to the City Council.
C. City Council Final Action
The City Council shall hold a public hearing in accordance with this Code and state law and may
take _inal action on the proposed text amendment. The amendment shall then become effective in
the manner provided by the City Charter or State Law.
3.5.4 Approval Criteria
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 33/320
In determining whether to approve, approve with modi_ications or disapprove a proposed amendment,
the City Council shall consider the following matters:
A. The proposed amendment promotes the health, safety or general welfare of the City and the safe,
orderly, and healthful development of the City.
B. The proposed amendment is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.6. ANNEXATION
Annexation into the city limits shall occur in accordance with the procedures set out in applicable state
statutes, and the City Charter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.7 ZONING PROCEDURE
3.7.1. Applicability
Prior to the submission of any development application, if located within the City limits, staff shall
determine whether the proposed land use is permitted by right, permitted with conditions, permitted by
speci_ic use permit, or prohibited in the subject site’s zoning district. If the proposed land use is
permitted by right or with the prescribed conditions within this Code, the applicant shall be entitled to
proceed to the next development application in the sequence of processes. If the use is not permitted by
right or with conditions, the applicant may consider applying for rezoning, a speci_ic use permit (SUP), or
Planned Unit Development (PUD) where applicable.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.7.2. Prerequisite for Consideration
The proposed rezoning must be consistent with the future land use element of the Comprehensive Plan
or must be accompanied with a request for an amendment to the Comprehensive Plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.7.3. Procedure
A. A request for a zoning amendment may be initiated by:
1. Recommendation of the City Council;
2. Recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission;
3. Recommendation of the City Manager;
4. Recommendation of the Planning Director; or
5. Application by the property owner or authorized agent; and payment of the required fee.
B. A public hearing shall be required before the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with
state law and Section 3.3 of this Subchapter.
C. After the public hearing on the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall make a
recommendation to the City Council with respect to such application.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 34/320
D. After the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation is received, the City Council shall
conduct a public hearing in accordance with state law. The public hearing shall be conducted within
60 days following the date of the Planning and Zoning Commission’s recommendation. If a public
hearing is not held before City Council within the prescribed 60 days, City Council may extend the
60 day period for a maximum of 30 days by resolution of the Council; a maximum of two 30 day
extensions may be granted in this manner, or the application will be considered withdrawn.
E. Within 60 days of the public hearing before the City Council, City Council must either:
1. Approve by ordinance, the requested amendment as submitted;
2. Approve by ordinance, the amendment as recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission;
3. Approve by ordinance, an alternate amendment that is a less intensive use than that which
was submitted;
4. Deny the requested rezoning by record vote; or
5. Extend the 60-day period for a maximum of 30 days by a resolution of the Council; a
maximum of two 30-day extensions may be granted in this manner.
If the City Council fails to approve, deny, or extend the request within 60-days after the public
hearing on the request, or the delay is due in whole or part to applicant’s request for extension(s),
the request is deemed withdrawn and no further action shall be taken without a new zoning
application being submitted.
F. A zoning map amendment to this Code requires the approval by a three-fourths vote of all
members of the City Council if:
1. The Planning and Zoning Commission has recommended to deny the requested amendment;
or
2. A written protest is received by the Administrator against such rezoning or creation and/or
amendment of an PUD District and is signed by the owners of 20 percent or more of either:
a. The area of the lots or land included in such proposed amendment; or
b. The area of the lots or land within 200 feet of the boundary of the subject area,
excluding the land included in such proposed amendment. In computing the percentage
of land area, the area of streets and alleys shall be included.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.7.4. Creating or Amending a Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
A. Application Requirements
1. Complete application form and supplemental requirements provided within Appendix A and
B of the UDC, and further referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental
Schedule; an application shall be submitted with applicable fees and required information
and any additional information requested by the Planning Director. The application shall:
a. Specify the extent to which deviation from otherwise applicable Code
requirements is justified by unique characteristics of the site or other exceptional
circumstances; and
b. Describe steps taken to protect or preserve any natural resource features on the
site, or to incorporate such features as focal points within the proposed
development.
2. Application fee in accordance with Appendix A of the UDC; and
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 35/320
3. A written legal and graphic description of the subject land.
B. Criteria for Consideration
The proposed PUD District application meets the criteria stated in Subchapter 4 and conforms to
the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan and Uni_ied Development Code.
C. Process
The process for a PUD is outlined below. An application for a PUD will be scheduled for action
once staff and the applicant have had the opportunity to review and _inalize the requirements of
the PUD. Dates for public hearings and action will be scheduled once review of the application is
complete. Provisions 3 and 4 within this section shall be repeated until all comments are addressed
or the applicant submits a written request for the proposal to be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
1. A pre-application conference is required to discuss the proposed development and to
determine whether the property and proposal meet the minimum criteria for a PUD at the
proposed location.
2. The applicant submits a completed application in accordance with Section 3.2.2 E. and the
provisions for a PUD outlined in Subchapter 4.
3. The Planning Director will review the request and submit comments to the applicant not later
than 10 business days following the date that the request was submitted.
4. The applicant can revise the proposal based on the Planning Director’s comments.
5. If the PUD District includes residential lots or units, the Planning Director must request a
determination from the Parks and Recreation Director as to whether or not the PUD
application must be presented to the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board for review. In the
event that the Parks and Recreation Director determines a review and recommendation from
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board is required, the matter shall be placed on the next
available meeting date. An application for a PUD District that includes residential lots or units
is not deemed complete to proceed to the Planning and Zoning Commission without a
determination by the Parks and Recreation Director; and, if applicable, a recommendation by
the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board regarding parkland dedication provisions. If the
project is modi_ied at the request of the applicant, staff, or a commission, a reconsideration
from the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board is required if the overall parkland
requirements for land or fee in lieu are affected by the proposed changes.
6. The application will be scheduled for hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission with
appropriate noti_ications, once:
a. All comments from the Planning Director have been addressed; or
b. The applicant submits a written request for the proposal to be reviewed by the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
7. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application following a public
hearing, as prescribed in Section 3.3 and provide a recommendation with any associated
conditions to City Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if the
application meets the requirements outlined in Subchapter 4.
8. The City Council must conduct a public hearing and take action on the proposed creation of a
PUD district according to the procedure established in Section 3.3.
9. If approved, the City staff must amend the Of_icial Zoning Map to indicate the name of the
district that has been approved and include the approved development standards and
accompanying map.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 36/320
10. Land within the PUD district can then be used or developed in conformance with the adopted
standards.
D. Standards
1. The entire area proposed for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) district must be given a
unique name as approved by the Planning Director, which will be used as a reference to the
district if approved.
2. The proposed development shall consist of a parcel or group of parcels which form a single
contiguous land unit with labels for individual tracts.
3. Development standards and accompanying map must be included with the application. See
also Subchapter 4.5.3 for additional PUD requirements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.7.5. Withdrawal of a Zoning/Rezoning Request
An application or amended application for zoning or rezoning may be withdrawn a maximum of two
times in a twelve-month period. After an application for the same property has been withdrawn twice in
a twelve-month period, no further applications for a zoning or rezoning to the same or less restrictive
zoning district will be accepted for a period of twelve months from the date of the second withdrawal,
unless the new application is submitted for a substantially different use or zoning classi_ication (i.e.:
submit a residential zoning request following second withdrawal of commercial zoning request) than
was previously withdrawn on the prior two occasions or the new application complies with the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8. SPECIFIC USE PERMITS
3.8.1 Applicability
An applicant may submit an application for those land uses listed as permitted by speci_ic use permits
(SUP), under the particular zoning districts in Subchapter 4 of this Code.
3.8.2 Process
The process for a SUP is outlined below. An application for a SUP will be scheduled for action once staff
and the applicant have had the opportunity to review and _inalize the requirements of the SUP. Dates for
public hearings and action will be scheduled once review of the application is complete. Sections B and C
may be repeated until all comments are addressed or the applicant submits a written request for the
proposal to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. A PAC is required to discuss the proposed development and to determine whether the property
and proposal meet the criteria for a SUP at the proposed location.
B. Upon application submittal, the Planning Director will review the application and submit comments
to the applicant not later than _ifteen (15) business days following the date that the application was
submitted.
C. The applicant can revise the proposal based on the Administrator’s comments.
D. The application will be scheduled for public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission with
appropriate noti_ications, once:
1. All comments from the Planning Director have been addressed; or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 37/320
2. The applicant submits a written request for the proposal to be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application following a public hearing, as
prescribed in Section 3.3 and provide a recommendation with any associated conditions to City
Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if the application meets the
requirements outlined in Section 3.8.4 and Subchapter 4.
F. The City Council must conduct a public hearing and take action on the proposed creation of a SUP
according to the procedure established in Section 3.3 and criteria outlined in Sections 3.8.3
through 3.8.6.
G. If approved, the City staff must amend the Of_icial Zoning Map to indicate a SUP has been approved.
H. Land within the SUP can then be used or developed in conformance with the adopted standards.
3.8.3 Consideration
The City Council by an af_irmative vote may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected,
and after receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission that address whether
the uses are in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, general objectives of the City and are
subject to such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize
the application, which shall be accompanied by: a proposed Site Plan drawn to scale and showing the
general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking
facilities; size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted;
location and special requirements of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; the type of
visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all
existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of 200 feet. The Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council may require additional information or drawings (such as building
_loor plans), operating data and expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location, function and
characteristics of any building or use proposed.
3.8.4 Criteria for Approval
In recommending that a speci_ic use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine that such proposed use(s) are harmonious and
adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity of the
premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of
streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage,
adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, area or security lighting, heights of
structures and compatibility of buildings. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following criteria in determining the appropriateness of the speci_ic use permit request:
A. Whether the use is harmonious and compatible with its surrounding existing uses or proposed
uses;
B. Whether the activities requested by the applicant are normally associated with the requested use;
C. Whether the nature of the use is reasonable; and
D. Whether any adverse impact on the surrounding area has been mitigated.
3.8.5 Conditions of Permit
In granting a speci_ic use permit, the City Council may impose conditions that the owner or grantee must
comply with before the Building Of_icial may issue a Certi_icate of Occupancy for use of the building on
such property pursuant to such speci_ic use permit and such conditions precedent to the granting of the
certi_icate of occupancy. Any special conditions shall be set forth in the ordinance approving the SUP.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 38/320
The Administrator shall verify compliance with such conditions prior to issuance of the certi_icate of
occupancy.
A. No speci_ic use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the speci_ic use
permit are willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of
the speci_ic use permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings).
B. A building, premises, or land used under a speci_ic use permit may be enlarged, modi_ied,
structurally altered, or otherwise changed provided these changes do not:
1. Increase the height of structures, including antenna support structures;
2. Increase building square footage from its size at the time the original speci_ic use permit was
granted by more than 10 percent;
3. Reduce the distance between a building or noise-generating activity on the property and an
adjacent, off-site residential use. This provision shall not apply if the property and the
residential use are separated by a major thoroughfare depicted on the City’s Transportation
Master Plan; or
4. Reduce the amount of landscape area by more than 10 percent, as indicated in the approved
speci_ic use permit.
5. All other enlargements, modi_ications, structural alterations, or changes shall require the
approval of a speci_ic use permit amendment. Antennas may be placed on a tower with an
existing speci_ic use permit without approval of a speci_ic use permit amendment subject to
approval of a _inal plat and site plan for the property.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any
decision, determination or ruling with respect to the speci_ic land use designated by any speci_ic
use permit.
D. When the City Council authorizes granting of a speci_ic use permit, the Of_icial Zoning District Map
shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and
limited uses, and said amendment is to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved
use and pre_ixed by an “S” designation. Speci_ic use permits granted shall be indicated by
numerical designation on the Zoning District Map.
E. Upon holding a properly noti_ied public hearing in accordance with Section 3.3, the City Council
may amend, change or rescind a speci_ic use permit if:
1. There is a violation and conviction of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provision
of the City code that occurs on the property for which the speci_ic use permit is granted;
2. The building, premises, or land used under a speci_ic use permit is enlarged, modi_ied,
structurally altered, or otherwise signi_icantly changed without approval of an amended
speci_ic use permit for such enlargement, modi_ication, structural alteration or change;
3. Violation of any provision of the terms or conditions of a speci_ic use permit;
4. The speci_ic use permit was obtained by fraud or with deception; or
5. A site development permit has not been secured for the development within twenty-four (24)
months from the date of approval by the City Council. If a site development permit has been
approved, the speci_ic use permit will remain valid until such time the approved site
development permit has expired. Once a site, governed by a SUP, has received a Certi_icate of
Occupancy, the SUP shall remain in full force and effect provided the conditions of the SUP
are satis_ied and maintained.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 39/320
3.8.6 Additional Criteria for Corridor Districts
Additional criteria for speci_ic use permit requests within corridor zoning districts. Speci_ic use permits
may be approved in the SH 130 and SH 45 corridor districts if the requirements for the approval of a
speci_ic use permit, as stated in this subchapter, have been met in addition to the following additional
criteria:
A. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is suf_icient and
correct enough to allow adequate review and _inal action.
B. The application illustrates conformance with the four guiding principles for the SH 130 and SH 45
corridor and consideration of the following desirable characteristics:
1. Retail activity is preferred to be clustered within proximity to the following major
intersections:
a. SH 130 and SH 45,
b. SH 130 and Pecan Street,
c. SH 45 and Heatherwilde Boulevard,
d. SH 130 and P_lugerville Parkway, and
e. FM 685 and P_lugerville Parkway.
2. Structures should orient to public streets and designated trails as noted on the Future Trails
Map referenced in the Comprehensive Plan.
3. The extent of connectivity among proposed and existing right-of-ways is demonstrated.
4. The extent to which uses, such as freestanding pad sites, are clustered at focal points or key
features within a development and relate to other components of the overall development.
Such focal points or key features may include, but are not limited to retention systems,
greenways, dedicated hike/bike facilities, or plazas, parks or other features that create a
gathering place.
5. The application illustrates compliance with the requirements and guidelines of this Chapter.
6. The application exhibits compatibility of the design with surrounding properties and
development patterns.
7. The application exhibits compatibility and coordination between the character of the
streetscape and the planned surrounding built environment.
8. The application exhibits no substantial negative impacts on the historic, cultural or
architectural nature of the site or surrounding area, or successfully mitigates such impacts.
3.8.1. Applicability.
An applicant may submit an application for those land uses listed as permitted by speci_ic use permits
(SUP), under the particular zoning districts in Subchapter 4 of this Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8.2 Process
The process for a SUP is outlined below. An application for a SUP will be scheduled for action once staff
and the applicant have had the opportunity to review and _inalize the requirements of the SUP. Dates for
public hearings and action will be scheduled once review of the application is complete. Sections B and C
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 40/320
may be repeated until all comments are addressed or the applicant submits a written request for the
proposal to be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
A. A PAC is required to discuss the proposed development and to determine whether the property
and proposal meet the criteria for a SUP at the proposed location.
B. Upon application submittal, the Planning Director will review the application and submit comments
to the applicant not later than _ifteen (15) business days following the date that the application was
submitted.
C. The applicant can revise the proposal based on the Administrator’s comments.
D. The application will be scheduled for public hearing by the Planning and Zoning Commission with
appropriate noti_ications, once:
1. All comments from the Planning Director have been addressed; or
2. The applicant submits a written request for the proposal to be reviewed by the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
E. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider the application following a public hearing, as
prescribed in Section 3.3 and provide a recommendation with any associated conditions to City
Council. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine if the application meets the
requirements outlined in Section 3.8.4 and Subchapter 4.
F. The City Council must conduct a public hearing and take action on the proposed creation of a SUP
according to the procedure established in Section 3.3 and criteria outlined in Sections 3.8.3
through 3.8.6.
G. If approved, the City staff must amend the Of_icial Zoning Map to indicate a SUP has been approved.
H. Land within the SUP can then be used or developed in conformance with the adopted standards.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8.3 Consideration
The City Council by an af_irmative vote may, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected,
and after receipt of recommendations from the Planning and Zoning Commission that address whether
the uses are in general conformance with the Comprehensive Plan, general objectives of the City and are
subject to such requirements and safeguards as are necessary to protect adjoining property, authorize
the application, which shall be accompanied by: a proposed Site Plan drawn to scale and showing the
general arrangement of the project, together with essential requirements such as off-street parking
facilities; size, height, construction materials, and locations of buildings and the uses to be permitted;
location and special requirements of signs; means of ingress and egress to public streets; the type of
visual screening such as walls, plantings and fences; and the relationship of the intended use to all
existing properties and land uses in all directions to a minimum distance of 200 feet. The Planning and
Zoning Commission or City Council may require additional information or drawings (such as building
_loor plans), operating data and expert evaluation or testimony concerning the location, function and
characteristics of any building or use proposed.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8.4Criteria for Approval
In recommending that a speci_ic use permit for the premises under consideration be granted, the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine that such proposed use(s) are harmonious and
adaptable to building structures and uses of abutting property and other property in the vicinity of the
premises under consideration, and shall make recommendations as to requirements for the paving of
streets, alleys and sidewalks, means of ingress and egress to public streets, provisions for drainage,
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 41/320
adequate off-street parking, protective screening and open space, area or security lighting, heights of
structures and compatibility of buildings. The Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council shall
consider the following criteria in determining the appropriateness of the speci_ic use permit request:
A. Whether the use is harmonious and compatible with its surrounding existing uses or proposed
uses;
B. Whether the activities requested by the applicant are normally associated with the requested use;
C. Whether the nature of the use is reasonable; and
D. Whether any adverse impact on the surrounding area has been mitigated.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8.5 Conditions of Permit
In granting a speci_ic use permit, the City Council may impose conditions that the owner or grantee must
comply with before the Building Of_icial may issue a Certi_icate of Occupancy for use of the building on
such property pursuant to such speci_ic use permit and such conditions precedent to the granting of the
certi_icate of occupancy. Any special conditions shall be set forth in the ordinance approving the SUP.
The Administrator shall verify compliance with such conditions prior to issuance of the certi_icate of
occupancy.
A. No speci_ic use permit shall be granted unless the applicant, owner and grantee of the speci_ic use
permit are willing to accept and agree to be bound by and comply with the written requirements of
the speci_ic use permit, as attached to the site plan drawing (or drawings).
B. A building, premises, or land used under a speci_ic use permit may be enlarged, modi_ied,
structurally altered, or otherwise changed provided these changes do not:
1. Increase the height of structures, including antenna support structures;
2. Increase building square footage from its size at the time the original speci_ic use permit was
granted by more than 10 percent;
3. Reduce the distance between a building or noise-generating activity on the property and an
adjacent, off-site residential use. This provision shall not apply if the property and the
residential use are separated by a major thoroughfare depicted on the City’s Transportation
Master Plan; or
4. Reduce the amount of landscape area by more than 10 percent, as indicated in the approved
speci_ic use permit.
5. All other enlargements, modi_ications, structural alterations, or changes shall require the
approval of a speci_ic use permit amendment. Antennas may be placed on a tower with an
existing speci_ic use permit without approval of a speci_ic use permit amendment subject to
approval of a _inal plat and site plan for the property.
C. The Board of Adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to hear, review, reverse, or modify any
decision, determination or ruling with respect to the speci_ic land use designated by any speci_ic
use permit.
D. When the City Council authorizes granting of a speci_ic use permit, the Of_icial Zoning District Map
shall be amended according to its legend to indicate that the affected area has conditional and
limited uses, and said amendment is to indicate the appropriate zoning district for the approved
use and pre_ixed by an “S” designation. Speci_ic use permits granted shall be indicated by
numerical designation on the Zoning District Map.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 42/320
E. Upon holding a properly noti_ied public hearing in accordance with Section 3.3, the City Council
may amend, change or rescind a speci_ic use permit if:
1. There is a violation and conviction of any of the provisions of this Chapter or any provision
of the City code that occurs on the property for which the speci_ic use permit is granted;
2. The building, premises, or land used under a speci_ic use permit is enlarged, modi_ied,
structurally altered, or otherwise signi_icantly changed without approval of an amended
speci_ic use permit for such enlargement, modi_ication, structural alteration or change;
3. Violation of any provision of the terms or conditions of a speci_ic use permit;
4. The speci_ic use permit was obtained by fraud or with deception; or
5. A site development permit has not been secured for the development within twenty-four (24)
months from the date of approval by the City Council. If a site development permit has been
approved, the speci_ic use permit will remain valid until such time the approved site
development permit has expired. Once a site, governed by a SUP, has received a Certi_icate of
Occupancy, the SUP shall remain in full force and effect provided the conditions of the SUP
are satis_ied and maintained.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.8.6 Additional Criteria for Corridor Districts
Additional criteria for speci_ic use permit requests within corridor zoning districts. Speci_ic use permits
may be approved in the SH 130 and SH 45 corridor districts if the requirements for the approval of a
speci_ic use permit, as stated in this subchapter, have been met in addition to the following additional
criteria:
A. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is suf_icient and
correct enough to allow adequate review and _inal action.
B. The application illustrates conformance with the four guiding principles for the SH 130 and SH 45
corridor and consideration of the following desirable characteristics:
1. Retail activity is preferred to be clustered within proximity to the following major
intersections:
a. SH 130 and SH 45,
b. SH 130 and Pecan Street,
c. SH 45 and Heatherwilde Boulevard,
d. SH 130 and P_lugerville Parkway, and
e. FM 685 and P_lugerville Parkway.
2. Structures should orient to public streets and designated trails as noted on the Future Trails
Map referenced in the Comprehensive Plan.
3. The extent of connectivity among proposed and existing right-of-ways is demonstrated.
4. The extent to which uses, such as freestanding pad sites, are clustered at focal points or key
features within a development and relate to other components of the overall development.
Such focal points or key features may include, but are not limited to retention systems,
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 43/320
greenways, dedicated hike/bike facilities, or plazas, parks or other features that create a
gathering place.
5. The application illustrates compliance with the requirements and guidelines of this Chapter.
6. The application exhibits compatibility of the design with surrounding properties and
development patterns.
7. The application exhibits compatibility and coordination between the character of the
streetscape and the planned surrounding built environment.
8. The application exhibits no substantial negative impacts on the historic, cultural or
architectural nature of the site or surrounding area, or successfully mitigates such impacts.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.9. SUBDIVISION
Refer to Subchapter 15 for procedures.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10. SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT
3.10.1 Applicability
A. The site development permit review process ensures any future development will occur in a
planned, orderly and attractive manner.
B. No construction or site improvement work may commence until the issuance of a site disturbance
permit or a site development permit.
C. No _ill or spoil may be transported to or from a site without a site development permit, or site
disturbance permit, or construction permit for public improvements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.2 Submittal Requirements
The following items must be submitted for the initial review of all site development applications:
A. Application fee in accordance with Appendix A of the UDC.
B. Copies of the plan in the amount and to the speci_ications indicated in Appendix B of the UDC, as
further referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
C. Complete application form including all information required by the currently approved
application form pursuant to Appendix A and B of the UDC, and further referenced in the Uni_ied
Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
D. Runoff computation for drainage areas in accordance with the City’s Engineering Design Manual,
including drainage calculations, drainage plan and other pertinent information.
E. If the proposed subdivision or any interim phase or combination of phases is expected to generate
2,000 or greater vehicle trips per day on the peak day for the proposed uses within the proposed
subdivision or phase(s), according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’
Trip Generation Manual, a licensed engineer with experience in traf_ic _low analysis, shall prepare,
sign and seal a traf_ic impact analysis (TIA) certifying its completeness and accuracy. A TIA,
including the initial scope, shall meet the minimum requirements outlined in Subchapter 15 and the
Engineering Design Manual, subject to _inal approval by the Development Engineering Director.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 44/320
F. If the proposed site requires driveway access from a state highway, a permit to construct driveway
facilities on highway right-of-way and related permits issued by the Texas Department of
Transportation is required.
G. A warranty deed conveying any required parkland to the City, or payment of a fee in lieu of
dedicating parkland, if applicable, in accordance with Subchapter 14 of the City Code. The applicant
shall utilize the City’s standard deed template, unless otherwise approved by Administrator.
H. An Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan (ESCP) identifying temporary and permanent erosion
control measures prepared per the requirements of Chapter 158.04, Stormwater Pollution Control
Ordinance and the requirements of the Engineering Design Manual shall be included with the site
development plan set.
I. Legal description of the site including name of subdivision, lot and block. Unless otherwise
exempted by Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212, an application for a site development
permit shall only be accepted for legally platted lots conforming to the standards established in this
Code and in other applicable provisions of the City Codes.
J. As part of the application process for a site development permit, the developer shall follow the
procedures for the subdivision process included within Subchapter 15 of this Code and shall not
receive a site development permit unless a _inal plat, with construction plans has been approved or
is concurrently approved for the site.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.3 Content of Site Plan
The required content included within the site plan can be found within Appendix B of the UDC and
further referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.4 Process
A. The applicant for a site development permit shall submit legible copies of a complete application to
the Administrator in the amount and to the speci_ications indicated in Appendix B of the UDC and
further referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
A. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Administrator shall distribute the application to the
proper reviewing authorities, and review the site plan for compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. No later than _ifteen (15) business days following the submittal of a complete application for a site
plan, the Administrator must either present the applicant with comments regarding the review of
the site plan, if there are comments, or approve the plan and issue a site development permit.
C. Upon resubmittal of the updated site development plans, the Administrator must review and
submit comments to the applicant no later than ten (10) business days. The Administrator must
either present the applicant with comments regarding the review of the updated site plan, if there
are comments, or approve the plan and issue a site development permit. This cycle may be
repeated until all comments are addressed unless the application expires due to lack of resubmittal
or progress.
D. The site plan application may be eligible for an expedited review process in accordance with
Section 3.2.2.G. of this Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.5 Permit Expiration
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 45/320
A. A site development permit application shall expire and have no further validity if:
1. No activity has occurred on a development application for a period of ninety (90) days from
the date of City staff’s last formal review comments on the development application, the
development plans associated with the development application, or the resubmittal of such
development application; or
2. The approval of a development application has not been obtained within 180 days from the
date the application and fees were _iled pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter.
B. In the event that a development application expires pursuant to subsection A, immediately above:
1. The applicant shall be required to submit a new development application;
2. The applicant shall be required to submit new application fees in an amount equal to the
amount authorized by the Fee Schedule in effect at the time of submission of the new
development application; and
3. The project shall be subject to the regulatory provisions of this Chapter in effect as of the
date of the submission of the new application.
C. All site development permits are valid for two years from the date the permit is issued.
D. A one-time, 180-day extension may be requested through an application and approved
administratively by the Planning Director if the site development permit remains valid under the
existing codes and ordinances at the time of the request.
E. The Planning Director reserves the right to deny any extension request. If denied, an appeal may
be made to the City Council, within thirty (30) days of such denial.
F. Any additional extensions will require City Council consideration. At no time may an extension
request be granted for more than 180-days.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.6 Criteria for Approval
The Planning Director shall determine whether to grant a site development permit based on the
following criteria:
A. The application is complete and the information contained within the application is suf_icient and
correct enough to allow adequate review and _inal action.
B. The application demonstrates compliance with the requirements and guidelines of this Chapter,
Appendix B of the UDC, Tree Technical Manual, and the Engineering Design Manual.
C. Prior to the pre-construction meeting, a copy of the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3)
and Notice of Intent (NOI) shall be provided.
D. All required development fees, as applicable, are paid prior to the issuance of a site development
permit, including but not limited to, TIA fees, parkland development fee, parkland fee in-lieu, and
sidewalk fee in-lieu.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.7Revisions and Corrections
A. Revisions
1. A revision is a modi_ication to an approved site development permit that substantially alters
the overall design of the originally approved site plan, which may require the re-review of
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 46/320
multiple sheets within the approved site plan including, but not limited to drainage, grading,
landscape plan, building elevations, and photometric plan sheets.
2. A formal application for review of the revision is required to be submitted to the Planning
Director that includes legible copies of a complete application in accordance with the
requirements indicated in Appendix B of the UDC and further referenced in the Uni_ied
Development Code Supplemental Schedule and this section. The revision plan set shall
include the originally approved coversheet with City signatures that has been further
updated to include details of the revision in the revision block, and additional copies of the
coversheet and revised sheets per Planning Director’s request.
3. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall distribute the application
to the proper reviewing authorities, and review the site plan revision for compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
4. No later than ten (10) business days following the submittal of a complete application for a
site plan revision, the Planning Director must either present the applicant with comments
regarding the review of the site plan revision, or if there are no comments, approve the plan
revision by signing the revision block on the cover sheet.
5. A revision may be eligible for an expedited review process in accordance with Section 3.2.2.G.
of this Subchapter.
6. A revision does not extend the life of a site development permit beyond its expiration date or
a previously approved extension.
B. Corrections
1. A correction to a site plan may be initiated by the applicant if a single element related to
engineering, architectural or landscaping design within the site plan was provided in error or
_ield conditions caused the required change.
2. Corrections are accepted if they are considered minor changes that do not require extensive
engineering or planning review. .
3. The correction plan set shall include the originally approved coversheet that has been
updated to include details of the correction in the revision block, and additional copies of the
coversheet and corrected sheets per Administrator’s request.
4. A correction will not receive a separate permit, and does not extend the life of a site
development permit beyond its expiration date and a previously approved extension.
5. Corrections will be turned around as quickly as possible, but no sooner than two (2)
business days.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.10.8 Inspections and Certi_icate of Occupancy
A. Inspections during the installation of the site improvements shall be made by staff to ensure
conformity with the approved site development plans.
B. It is the responsibility of the permittee to request _inal inspections when construction is complete
or nearing completion to ensure that all work is in accordance with the approved site development
plans.
C. Letters of concurrence that all improvements are in place are required to be received from the
applicant’s civil engineer and landscape architect prior to the performance of _inal inspections.
The Engineer’s and Landscape Architect’s concurrence letters shall be signed and sealed by the
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 47/320
Engineer and Landscape Architect of record. If a _inal inspection is performed by the Planning or
Engineering Departments and outstanding items remain to be addressed, re-inspection fees shall
be assessed in accordance with Appendix A of the UDC, prior to re-inspection.
D. The development review committee will notify the building of_icial once it has been determined
that all work is in accordance with the approved site development plans.
E. All site improvements shall be complete and in conformance with the site development permit
prior to issuance of a certi_icate of occupancy by the building of_icial.
F. Electronic record drawings of the site plan shall be provided prior to the issuance of a Certi_icate
of Occupancy, which shall be full size, portable document format (.pdf) copies.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.11 SITE DISTURBANCE PERMIT
3.11.1 Applicability
A. A site or subdivision applicant may request a Site Disturbance Permit prior to the issuance of a
Subdivision Construction Plan Permit or Site Development Permit for early grading and clearing,
but only after a Final Plat has been approved. No other construction or site improvement work
may commence until the issuance of a Site Development Permit or Subdivision Construction Plan
Permit.
B. Per Subchapter 12 of the Uni_ied Development Code and the Tree Technical Manual, tree
protection measures for protected trees shall be implemented throughout the site disturbance
phase. The Administrator reserves the right to deny a Site Disturbance Permit if a subdivision
concept plan or site plan has not been provided to staff to justify the removal of protected trees
without a reasonable explanation, including site design constraints or physical hardships.
C. Fiscal security and tree mitigation shall be provided in accordance with Subchapter 12, Tree
Preservation Standards, of this Chapter.
D. A Site Disturbance Permit shall expire sixty (60) days after approval. The Development
Engineering Director may extend the expiration period an additional sixty (60) days upon receipt
of a written request with an explanation as to the basis for the request. However, if no
construction activity has occurred on the property within sixty (60) days of site disturbance permit
approval, a request for extension shall be denied. Only one extension may be requested. In the
event of permit expiration, a new permit application and payment of fees shall be required.
3.11.2 Submittal Requirements
Refer to Appendix A and B of the UDC or the Supplemental Schedule for submittal requirements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.12 R-O-W PERMIT
All proposed improvements within the public rights-of-way and public easements shall be reviewed
through the right-of-way permitting process established in Chapter 96 of this Code of Ordinances.
3.13 TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS
3.13.1 Applicability
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 48/320
A. If the proposed subdivision or any interim phase or combination of phases is expected to generate
2,000 or greater vehicle trips per day on the peak day for the proposed uses within the proposed
subdivision or phase(s), according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers’
Trip Generation Manual, a licensed engineer with experience in traf_ic _low analysis shall prepare,
sign and seal a traf_ic impact analysis (TIA) certifying its completeness and accuracy. A TIA,
including the initial scope, shall meet the minimum requirements outlined in Subchapter 15 of this
Chapter and the Engineering Design Manual with _inal approval by the Development Engineering
Director.
B. A TIA may be required at the time of a preliminary plan, _inal plat, and site development and shall
be reviewed concurrently with the applicable development application.
3.13.2 Submittal Requirements
Refer to the TIA scoping form and checklist provided within the Supplemental Schedule and the
Engineering Design Manual for submittal and content requirements.
3.14 BUILDING PERMIT, SIGNS, AND IRRIGATION.
3.14.1 Building Permits
In addition to the standards set forth in Chapter 150, Building Regulations of this Code of Ordinances,
the following provisions shall apply to residential building permits in order to ensure compliance with
this Chapter 157, Uni_ied Development Code.
A. In order to ensure compliance with the provisions of Subchapter 9 of this Chapter, all residential
building permit applications shall include written descriptions on the plot plan and architectural
building plan as applicable describing compliance with the following minimum requirements.
Acceptable documentation may include photographs or elevations of the other structures in
question.
B. A subdivision or phase thereof may be reviewed as a whole for conformity with this requirement,
provided that adequate documentation to ensure conformity is submitted with each building
permit application.
C. The Administrator will review the submitted documentation and any previously approved building
permits and make a determination. Where the Administrator _inds that a dwelling for which a
building permit is being requested does not conform to the standards established by Subchapter 9
of this Chapter, the permit shall be denied.
D. For buildings divided into separate tenant spaces, suite numbers shall be assigned by 9-1-1
Addressing prior to an application for building permit or tenant _inish-out, as applicable.
E. A permit for the construction of a building(s) shall not be issued unless:
a. The site that is the subject of the permit is a platted lot, and the plat creating said lot is
properly approved by the City and recorded in the Of_icial Plat Records of Travis and/or
Williamson Counties, Texas, as applicable; and
b. Said lot is included as all of part of a site plan approved by the Administrator and in
compliance with the requirements of this Code, including requirements for provision of
required public improvements, and dedication of drainage easements, dedication of street
and alley rights of way, and other public improvements.
3.14.2 Sign Permits
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 49/320
The process and standards for sign permits shall be in accordance with Chapter 154, Signs of the Code
of Ordinances.
3.14.3 Irrigation
In addition to the irrigation standards established in Chapter 113, Irrigators of this Code of Ordinances,
the following provisions shall apply to residential and commercial development as applicable in
accordance with Subchapter 11, Landscaping and Screening Standards of this Chapter, including the Tree
Technical Manual. In order to ensure compliance with the landscaping and irrigation provisions of
Subchapter 11 of this Chapter and the Tree Technical Manual, the Administrator may require a landscape
plan for residential development to accompany an irrigation permit request.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.15 APPEALS, VARIANCES, AND SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
3.15.1 General
All appeals of an Administrator’s decision, request for variances or special exceptions shall be reviewed
by the Board of Adjustment (Board).
A. Initiation
A request for an appeal, variance, and special exception from the terms of this Chapter may be
made by a property owner of the affected property or their authorized agent.
B. Application
Applications for appeals, variances or special exceptions must comply with the requirements of
Appendix A and B of the UDC, as further referenced in the UDC Supplemental Schedule.
Applications must include all materials determined necessary by the Planning Director.
C. Completeness Determination
Before a public hearing may be scheduled regarding an appeal, variance, or special exception, a
complete application as described in Section 3.2.2, which includes the following items, must be
submitted to the Administrator in accordance with Appendix A and B of the UDC, as further
referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule:
1. Complete application form included in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental
Schedule;
2. Application fee in accordance with Appendix A of the UDC; and
3. In addition to the above listed items, an application for a special exception must be
accompanied by a site plan and elevations of the proposed site.
D. Notice and Hearing
1. The Board of Adjustment shall hold a public hearing for consideration of an appeal, variance
or special exception in accordance with Section 3.3.
2. Written notice of the public hearing for an appeal, variance or special exception shall be
provided as set forth in Section 3.3 of this Code.
3. The applicant may appear at the hearing in person or by agent or attorney.
E. Determination
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 50/320
The Board of Adjustment will make a determination on an appeal, variance or special exception
within 45 days of the public hearing.
1. The Board of Adjustment must grant, deny or grant with conditions, the requested variance
or special exception.
2. For appeals, the Board of Adjustment must either uphold or overturn the action of the
Administrator that is the subject of the appeal.
3. In granting, or granting with conditions, a variance or special exception, the Board of
Adjustment must make _indings regarding how the granted variance or special exception,
complies with the criteria listed in Subsections 3.15.3 or 3.15.4, respectively.
4. The Board of Adjustment must _ile an of_icial written record of action specifying the action it
took on an appeal, request for a variance, or special exception and the reasons therefore
with the Administrator within ten (10) days from the date of its action.
F. Recordation
Recordation of the Board of Adjustment’s decision will be _iled in the appropriate County’s
records.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.15.2 Appeals
A. Appeals to the Board of Adjustment may be made by any person aggrieved or by any of_icer,
department, board or bureau of the City affected by any decision of the Administrator. An appeal
must be _iled within thirty (30) days after the decision has been rendered. The appeal must be _iled
with the Administrator specifying the grounds thereof and paying a _iling fee as prescribed by
Appendix A of the UDC and further referenced in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental
Schedule. The Administrator will immediately transmit to the Board of Adjustment all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. An appeal, properly _iled as herein provided, will stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the Administrator certi_ies to the Board that by reason of facts stated in the
certi_icate, a stay would, in his/her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the proceedings may continue, unless a restraining order is issued by the Board or by a court of
record after notice to the Administrator and on due cause shown.
A. The decision of the Board is _inal unless it is timely appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction in
accordance with Chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code.
D. In exercising its powers, the Board may, in conformity with the provisions of the statutes of the
State of Texas as existing or hereafter amended, reverse or af_irm, wholly or partly, or modify the
order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, make such order, requirement,
decision, or determination as ought to be made, and have all the powers of the Administrator. The
Board has the power to impose reasonable conditions upon any decision that the applicant must
comply with.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.15.3 Variances (Zoning)
A. Applicability
In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211, the Board of
Adjustment (BOA) shall have the authority to hear and grant requests for a zoning variance from
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 51/320
the zoning provisions of the Uni_ied Development Code. A variance to the development standards
of this Code shall be considered an exception to the regulations, rather than a right.
B. Limitations
The Board of Adjustment may not grant a zoning variance when the effect of which would be any
of the following:
1. To alter any procedural requirement established by this Chapter;
2. To allow a use in a district in which it is not permitted, conditionally permitted, or are
speci_ically prohibited;
3. To increase the density of a use above that permitted by the applicable district;
4. To physically extend a nonconforming use of land;
5. To change the zoning district’s boundaries shown on the Of_icial Zoning Map;
6. To grant waivers or subdivision variances of the standards required for plat approval
whereby the Planning and Zoning Commission holds authority;
7. To grant architectural waivers whereby the Planning and Zoning Commission holds
authority;
8. To amend or seek relief from conditional provisions of an ordinance approved by the speci_ic
use permit process; or
9. To grant sign variances, whereby the City Council holds authority.
C. Required Findings
The Board of Adjustment may authorize a variance from the requirements of the zoning provisions
of this Unified Development Code if the variance from the terms of the zoning provisions is not
contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
requirements would result in unnecessary hardship, so the spirit of this Code is preserved, and
substantial justice done. No variance shall be granted unless the Board finds all of the following:
1. Extraordinary Conditions: That there are extraordinary or special conditions affecting the
land involved such that strict application of the provisions of this Unified Development Code
will deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of their land. For example, a Variance might
be justified because of topographic or other special conditions unique to the property itself
and development involved, while it would not be justified due to inconvenience or financial
disadvantage.
2. No Substantial Detriment: That the granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the
public health, safety or welfare or injurious to other property in the area or to the City in
administering this Code.
3. Other Property: That the conditions that create the need for the variance do not generally
apply to other property in the community.
4. Applicant’s Actions: That the conditions that create the need for the variance are not the
result of the applicant’s own actions.
5. Comprehensive Plan: That the granting of the variance would not substantially conflict with
the Comprehensive Plan and the purposes of this Code.
6. Utilization: That because of the conditions that create the need for the variance, the
application of this Code to the particular piece of property would effectively prohibit or
unreasonably restrict the utilization of the property.
7. Insufficient Findings: The following types of possible findings do not constitute suf_icient
grounds for granting a variance:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 52/320
a. That the property cannot be used for its highest and best use.
b. That there is a financial or economic hardship.
c. That there is a self-created hardship by the property owner or their agent.
D. Expiration of Variance
Variance approval shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of BOA approval
unless a building permit has been issued and construction commenced or, if no building
permit is required, a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.15.4 Special Exceptions
A. Applicability
In accordance with the provisions of the Texas Local Government Code Chapter 211, the Board of
Adjustment, in appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards, to make
special exceptions to the terms of the zoning ordinance that are consistent with the general
purpose and intent of the ordinance and in accordance with any applicable rules contained in the
ordinance.
B. Approval for Criteria
The Board of Adjustment may grant the requested special exception in accordance with
Subchapter 8 of this Chapter under speci_ic circumstances therein established.
C. Expiration. A special exception shall expire six (6) months from the date of Board of Adjustment
approval, unless a certificate of occupancy has been issued.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.16 ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVERS
3.16.1 Site Development Waivers
The Planning Director may grant an administrative waiver for a reduction up to twenty percent (20%)
for any numerical standard required per Subchapters 9, Architectural, Site Design, and Layout Provisions
or Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility, and Circulation of this Chapter. The Planning and Zoning Commission
may grant a waiver to the architectural requirements reducing the architectural standards above the
twenty percent (20%) and shall be considered fully discretionary.
3.16.2 Non-conforming Site Waivers
The Administrator may grant an administrative waiver for lawfully non-conforming sites created due to
amendments to the zoning regulations over time. Its purpose is to provide temporary relief to such
properties that would otherwise be required to bring such nonconformities up to City standards prior to
its occupancy, expansion or other improvements to structures on the non-conforming property. The
grant of a non-conforming site administrative waiver shall not confer conforming status to a nonconforming
property; but, rather, provide a mechanism for which improvements shall be achieved over a
speci_ied time-frame, never to exceed 36 months. Such Administrative Waiver would allow the property
to be occupied by a temporary certi_icate of occupancy until such time the City has inspected the site and
determined such site’s compliance with City standards.
A. Criteria for Approval
The Administrator may grant the requested administrative waiver for the continuation or
expansion of a lawfully non-conforming site, with or without conditions, provided the request for
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 53/320
the administrative waiver complies with the following criteria:
1. The land use is permitted within the zoning district;
2. All health and safety regulations have been met;
3. The granting of the administrative waiver prevents an unreasonable _inancial loss;
4. The initial improvements installed prior to the temporary certi_icate of occupancy is a
signi_icant improvement to the non-conforming sites which are evident when viewed from
off-site premises;
5. The granting of the administrative waiver does not negatively impact adjacent properties in
terms of visibility of outdoor storage or other commonly perceived negative impacts of
development on adjacent property;
6. The granting of the administrative waiver is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this
Chapter and of the Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the surrounding
area; and
7. The granting of the administrative waiver is not to be contrary to the spirit and intent of this
Chapter.
B. Expiration
An Administrative Waiver shall expire twelve (12) months from the date of Administrative
approval, unless:
1. A permanent certificate of occupancy has been issued.
2. The Administrator, when approving the Administrative Waiver for non-conforming sites, and
upon a _inding of good cause, approves a longer expiration date, not to exceed thirty-six (36)
months.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.18 ADMINISTRATIVE INTERPRETATION
3.17.1 Applicability
The Administrator shall have authority to make all written interpretations concerning the provisions of
this Code and other development related codes of the City.
3.17.2 Request for Interpretation
A request for interpretation shall be submitted to the Administrator in a form established by the
Administrator and made available to the public. Such request shall only be made during development
review of a pending application or when a code enforcement requirement is in question.
3.17.3 Interpretation by Administrator
The Administrator shall:
A. Review and evaluate the request in light of the text of this Code, the Of_icial Zoning District Map, the
Comprehensive Plan, and any other relevant information;
B. Consult with other staff, as necessary; and
C. Render an opinion to the applicant in writing.
3.17.4 Of_icial Record
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 54/320
The Administrator shall maintain an of_icial record of interpretations. The record of interpretations shall
be available for public inspection during normal business hours.
3.17.5 Appeal
Appeals of written interpretations made by the Administrator shall be _iled, only by a party affected by
the written interpretation, with the Board of Adjustment for appeals of written interpretations of the
Uni_ied Development Code within thirty (30) days of the Administrator’s decision in accordance with the
procedures found in Section 3.13 of this Subchapter. If no appeal is _iled within thirty (30) days, the
written interpretation shall be deemed _inal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
3.19 APPLICATION FOR LEGAL NON-CONFORMING STATUS
In accordance with Subchapter 8 of this Chapter, an applicant may apply for a legal non-conforming
status determination for a land use, structure, lot, and site.
SUBCHAPTER 4. ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS AND
BOUNDARIES.
4.1 ZONING DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
The zoning districts and associated regulations have been created with consideration for the character of
each district, the suitability for the uses identi_ied, and fostering the most appropriate use of the land
throughout the City consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
The City is hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
ZONING DISTRICTS
District Name Prior District
Names
Residential Zoning Districts
Agriculture/Development Reserve A
Single Family Estate SF-E
Single Family Suburban Residential SF-S RS1
Single Family Residential SF-R
Single Family Mixed Use Residential SF-MU SF-U
Two Family Residential 2-F
Multi Family 10 MF-10 MF-S, RM1
Multi Family 20 MF-20 MF-U, RM2
Manufactured Housing MH
Non-Residential Zoning Districts
Public Facilities and Open Space PF
Of_ice O O1 & O2
Neighborhood Service NS
Retail R
General Business 1 GB1
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 55/320
ZONING DISTRICTS
General Business 2 GB2
Campus Industrial CI
Light Industrial LI
General Industrial GI
SH130 and SH45 Corridor Districts
Suburban CL3
Urban CL4
Urban Center CL5
Special Districts and Overlays
Downtown District Overlay DD CBD
685 Commercial Park Overlay District
Planned Unit Development PUD ALUR
Austin Executive Airport Hazard Overlay District
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.2. RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS
The purpose of residential zoning districts is to provide appropriate dwelling choices and diversity based
upon location and function within the City. Residential zoning districts are comprised of A, SF-E, SF-S, SFR,
SF-MU, 2-F, MF-10, MF-20, and MH.
4.2.1 Residential Districts De_ined
Agriculture/Development Reserve (A)
The district identi_ies where an agricultural use may be appropriate,
and may be used as an interim zoning district for land that is
relatively undeveloped, but identi_ied with growth potential in the
Comprehensive Plan. Utilizing the district in an interim period will
assist in ef_icient development while recognizing current conditions.
For properties subject to non-annexation development agreements
pursuant to Section 212.172 and 43.035 of the Texas Local
Government Code, development regulations of this district shall
apply.
Single Family Estate District (SF-E)
The district is intended to address larger lot, single family
development with lots generally greater than one half (½) acre in
size. New single family estate neighborhoods can be established
using this district, however the location should be carefully
considered to reduce sprawl, and ensure compliance with utility
infrastructure master plans.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 56/320
Single Family Suburban Residential District
(SF-S)
The district is intended to include land which is being used, or
intended to be used for low density, single family suburban housing
types. The district is designed to provide suf_icient, suitable
residential neighborhoods, protected from incompatible uses, and
provided with necessary facilities and services.
Single Family Residential District (SF-R)
The district may be used to master plan a large, low density
residential subdivision with an opportunity for a mixture of lot sizes
based on overall acreage. In certain cases, the district may also be
used where an in_ill of single family suburban housing types may be
appropriate.
Single Family Mixed Use Residential District
(SF-MU)
The district is intended to address small lot, single family detached
and single family attached (townhome) housing opportunities at a
low to medium density. This district may be used in areas of 20 acres
or less with direct access to major thoroughfares. Non-residential
uses may be considered if cohesively designed as a mixed use
neighborhood.
Two Family Residential District (2-F)
The district is intended to include land which is used, or intended to
be used for duplex or similar two unit housing types. This district
should be used to establish a low to medium density neighborhood
which may provide a transition to more intense land uses.
Multi-Family-10 District (MF-10)
The district is intended to address opportunities for small, suburban
multi-family developments with up to 10 units per acre. The district
should be used as a transition to more intense land uses including
major thoroughfares.
Multi-Family-20 District (MF-20)
The district provides opportunities for medium to high density
residential, including multi-family and mixed use developments with
up to 20 units per acre. The district should be located adjacent to
major thoroughfares, including major collectors and arterial streets,
and used in commercial areas or as a buffer to more intense land
uses. Incidental non-residential uses providing neighborhood
services to the primary residential use may be considered with
conditions.
Manufactured Housing District (MH)
This district provides for establishing a mobile home park or
subdivision which consists of at least 20 dwelling units not built onsite,
including modular type homes, mobile homes, manufactured
homes or other prefabricated type dwellings. The district should be
used in areas where direct access may be obtained from a collector
level or higher level roadway.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.2.2 Residential Districts – Land Use Table
Land uses identi_ied in Table 4.2.2 with the following designations shall be interpreted according to the
provisions herein. If there is no designation found for a particular use in a speci_ic zoning district, that
use is not allowed within that zoning district. In the event that a use is not listed or classi_ication is
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 57/320
otherwise required, the Administrator shall classify the use as appropriate in accordance with
Subchapter 3.
A. Permitted Uses: Uses noted with a “P” are permitted by right within the given district, provided that
all other requirements applicable to the use within each section are met.
B. Uses Permitted with Conditions: Uses noted with a “C” are permitted by right within the given
district provided that speci_ic conditions are met. Speci_ic conditions applicable to these certain
uses are provided in the corresponding “Land Use Conditions” section of this Subchapter.
C. Uses Requiring a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with an “S” require consideration of impacts
associated with a particular location for the proposed use, in addition to the standards that
otherwise apply to the use under this Subchapter.
D. Uses Permitted with Conditions unless authorized by a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with a
“C/S” are permitted by right within the given district provided that speci_ic conditions are met,
unless authorized by a Speci_ic Use Permit.
Table 4.2.2: Residential Districts - Permitted Uses
Residential Uses A SF-E SF-S SF-R SF-MU 2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH
Accessory Dwelling Unit P P P P C
Assisted Living P P
Condominium C P P P P
Duplex P
Live Work Unit C C
Manufactured Home Dwelling P
Multi-Family P P
Nursing Home/Skilled Nursing (Convalescent) P P
Single Family Attached (2 units) P
Single Family Attached (3 or more units) Townhome P P P
Single Family, Detached P P P C P C C
Non-Residential Uses A SF-E SF-S SF-R SF-MU 2-F MF-10 MF-20 MH
Amenity Center, Private (Primary Use) C C C C C C P P P
Bar/Tavern C2
Brewpub/Wine Bar C1 C2
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park S
Cemetery/Mausoleum C
Day Care Facility C1 C2
Dry Cleaning, Minor C1 C2
Event Center S
Farm, Ranch, Garden, Orchard, or Vineyard P C1 C2
Financial Institution C1 C2
Golf Course and/or Country Club P P S S S
Golf Driving Range P
Government Facilities P P P P P P P P P
Health/Fitness Center C1 C2
Massage Therapy, Licensed C1 C2
Museum/Art Gallery C1 C2
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 58/320
Table 4.2.2: Residential Districts - Permitted Uses
Park or Playground P P P P P P P P P
Personal Services C1 C2
Place of Worship P P P P P P P P P
Restaurant C1 C2
Retail Sales and Services C1 C2
School: Private or Parochial S S S S S S S S S
School: Public Refer to Government Facilities
Stable, Commercial C
Utilities C C C C C1 C C C2 C
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities (WTFs) C/S C/S C/S
1 See 4.2.3 “Non-residential Uses in the SF-MU District” instead of the use name
2 See 4.2.3 “Non-residential Uses in the MF-20 District” instead of the use name
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.2.3 Residential Districts – Land Use Conditions
The uses indicated in the land use Table 4.2.2 with the letter “C” in one or more districts must comply
with the conditions as indicated below. The use is permitted in the subject district(s) provided the use or
site complies with the conditions indicated for the use. Conditions are speci_ied for each use in the
following alphabetical list.
Amenity Center
Must take access from at least one collector or arterial street. The pool and all
buildings must be located at least 100 feet from all residential property lines, except
in the SF-MU district or when part of a mixed-use development at which point the
pool and all buildings shall be located at least 100-feet away from the overall
subdivision development boundary line.
Cemetery/Mausoleum
Must be at least 20 acres in size.
Must take access only from a collector or arterial street. Conditions are not
required for a mausoleum located in conjunction with a place of worship.
Condominium
(Residential)
SF-R District:
A condominium shall be allowed within the SF-R district provided the
condominium component consists of no more than 10% of a preliminary plan.
SF-R District: A condominium component allowed in the SF-R district may
consist of single family detached or single family attached (3 or more) townhome
structures provided they comply with the applicable design standards per structure
type as outlined in Subchapter 9.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 59/320
Live Work Unit
SF-MU District:
Permitted when part of a vertical mixed use development comprised of
residential and non-residential uses;
Shall be limited to the corner of an intersection of two collector or higher
classi_ication roads or major drive aisles, unless an adjacent use is another live
work unit or a non-residential use as permitted herein;
Each live work unit tenant space shall be limited to no more than 5,000 square
feet; At no time shall a drive thru be permitted;
Non-residential uses adjacent to conforming residential use or district other
than SF-MU, MF-10 or MF-20 shall comply with the buffer requirements provided in
Subchapter 11.
MF-20 District:
Permitted when part of a vertical mixed use development comprised of
residential and non-residential uses;
Encouraged to be located at the corner of an intersection of two collector or
higher classi_ication roads or major drive aisles, unless an adjacent use is another
live work unit or a non-residential use as permitted herein;
Each non-residential use or tenant space shall be limited to no more than 5,000
square feet;
At no time shall a drive thru be permitted;
Non-residential uses adjacent to conforming residential use or district shall
comply with the buffer requirements provided in Subchapter 11.
Non-residential Uses
in the SF-MU District:
(Applicable to all uses
identi_ied with a “C”)
SF-MU District:
Shall only be permitted when a component of a mixed use development
comprised of residential and non-residential uses;
Shall be limited to the corner of an intersection of two collector or higher
classi_ication roads or major drive aisles, unless the block is designed with at least
two adjacent vertical mixed use structures;
Each non-residential tenant space shall be limited to no more than 5,000 square
feet;The principal structure associated with a place of worship shall be at least 100
feet from all site boundary lines and take access only from a collector or arterial
street.
At no time shall a drive thru be permitted;
When a non-residential use is adjacent or has a common property or boundary
line with a residential use within the SF-MU district, a minimum 10-ft wide
landscape buffer extending the length of the common property or boundary line
shall be provided. The buffer shall consist of a combination of native landscaping
including shrubs, ornamental grasses, and perennials (15 per 100 linear feet) and
one (1) type C ornamental tree (1 per 20 linear feet) of said common property or
boundary line. The buffer shall also contain a pedestrian gathering space consisting
of a pedestrian pathway, seating, pedestrian scaled lighting, and decorative
hardscape to establish cohesion within the development.
When a non-residential parking area is located next to a residential use, parking
lot screening shall be provided per Subchapter 11.
Non-residential uses are encouraged to be designed as liner buildings with a
complimentary building line as neighboring residential structures.
Off-street parking for a non-residential use shall be provided per Subchapter 10
and is encouraged to be located to the side or rear of the building, away from an
adjacent residential use;
Non-residential uses adjacent to a conforming single family residential use or
district other than SF-MU, MF-10 or MF-20 shall comply with the buffer
requirements provided in Subchapter 11.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 60/320
Non-residential Uses
in the MF-20 District:
(Applicable to all uses
identi_ied with a “C”)
MF-20 District:
Shall only be permitted when a component of a mixed use development
comprised of residential and non-residential uses;
Each use or tenant space shall be limited to no more than 5,000 square feet with
exception of place of worship;
The principal structure associated with a place of worship shall be at least 100
feet from all site boundary lines and take access only from a collector or arterial
street.
At no time shall a drive thru be permitted;
When a non-residential parking area is located next to a residential use, parking
lot screening consisting of evergreen shrubs, ornamental shrubs, 3-ft stone wall,
picket fence or a combination shall be provided.
Off-street parking for a non-residential use shall be provided per Subchapter 10
and located to the side or rear of the building;
Non-residential uses are encouraged to be designed as liner buildings with a
complimentary building line as neighboring structures.
Pedestrian gathering areas and pedestrian pathways shall be provided between
the residential and non-residential uses to establish cohesion within the
development.
Non-residential uses adjacent to conforming single family residential use or
district shall comply with the buffer requirements provided in Subchapter 11.
Single Family,
Detached
SF-R District:
Overall preliminary plan must be at least 10 acres in size;
Between 10 and 50 acres: A minimum of 10% of the lots within the overall
preliminary plan shall have a minimum 9,000 sq ft lot area. At no point shall a lot
have a lot area less than 7,500 square feet;
Greater than 50 acres: A minimum of 25% of the lots within the overall
preliminary plan shall have a minimum 7,500 sq. ft. lot area. A minimum of 10% of
the lots within the overall preliminary plan shall have a minimum 9,000 sq. ft. or
greater lot area. At no point shall a lot have a lot area less than 6,250 square feet.
MF-10 and MF-20
The structural form of a single-family detached unit shall only be permitted if a
component of a “for rent, multi-family development”
The structural form shall comply with the General Regulations for “Condo” in the
respective district Table 4.2.4(A)&(B);
The structural form shall comply with the Design Standards for Single-Family
Detached per the MF-10 and MF-20 district outlined in Subchapter 9.1.
Utilities All facilities must be screened from view from adjacent residential areas and
public right-of-ways with an opaque screen of 8’ masonry fence or masonry wall.
Stable, Commercial Subject to Title 9, Chapter 90
Wireless
Telecommunication
Facilities (WTF):
Refer to Section 4.8
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.2.4 Residential Districts – Development Regulations
A. General Regulations - Agriculture/Conservation, Single Family and Two Family
The following general regulations shall apply for all single-family districts,
Agriculture/Conservation district, and the Two Family district.
Table 4.2.4 A – General Regulations
Zone standards
General Regulations A SF-E SF-S SF-R SF-MU 2-F
Minimum Site Area 3 ac 0.5 ac 9,000
sq ft 10 ac N/A 10 ac
Maximum Site Area N/A N/A N/A N/A
Max 10% of
preliminary
plan
20 ac for a single use
40 ac for multiple uses 10 ac
Minimum Lot Area
3 ac
1/2 ac
9,000
5,000 
2,500  
N/A
6,250
Minimum Lot Width
measured at front
street setback
(Corner lots require
additional 10 feet)
70’ 90' 70’
10-50
ac: 60' N/A 40’ 25' N/A 70’
50+
ac: 50'
Minimum Lot Depth 125’ 140' 125’ 125'
N/A 120’ 100'
N/A 125’
Minimum Front
Street Setback 25’ 25’ 25’ 25' 25'
15'
(20’ when
front
loaded
garage is
proposed)
15'
(20’ when
front
loaded
garage is
proposed)
15'
(20’ when
front
loaded
garage is
proposed)
25’
Minimum Side
Street Setback
(corner lots)
15’ 15’ 15’ 15'
15’ 15' 15'
15' 15’
Minimum Interior
Side Setback 7.5’ 7.5’ 7.5’ 5' 5’ 5' or 0'
0' per unit;
10’
between
structures
5’ for SF
10’ Non-
Resd.
7.5’
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 62/320
Table 4.2.4 A – General Regulations
General Regulations A SF-E SF-S SF-R SF-MU 2-F
Structure Type SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF Condo:
Detach or
Attach
SF Detach
SF
Attached;
Non-
Residential
Condo:
SF Detach,
SF Attach,
Non-
Residential
Duplex
Minimum Interior
Side Setback
(abutting SF-S
zoning or existing
single family
detached unit)
7.5’ 7.5’ 7.5’ 7.5' 7.5’ 7.5'
10'
Resid.
25’
Non-Resid
7.5’ for SF
Detach
10’ for SF
Attach
25’ Non-
Resd.
7.5’
Minimum Rear
Setback 20’ 20’ 20’ 20' 20’ 20' 20' 20’ 20’
Minimum Rear
Setback (abutting
SF-S zoning or
existing single
family detached
unit)
20’ 20’ 20’ 20’ 20’ 20'
20'
Resd.
30’
Non-Resd.
20'
Resd.
30’
Non-Resd.
20’
Maximum Lot
Coverage N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Dwelling
Unit area
1,400
sq ft
1,400
sq ft
1,400
sq ft
1,400
sq ft 1,400 sq ft 1,100 sq
ft 900 sq ft
SF Detach:
1,100 sq ft
SF Attach:
900 sq ft
1,200
sq ft
Maximum Units per
Structure 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (1) 1 (1)
SF Detach:
1 (1)
SF Attach: 6
N/A SF Attach:
6
SF Detach:
N/A
SF Attach:
6
2
Maximum Building
Length N/A N/A N/A N/A 200’ N/A
200’
Non-Resid:
N/A
SF Detach:
N/A
SF Attach:
200’
Non-Resid:
N/A
N/A
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 63/320
Table 4.2.4 A – General Regulations
General Regulations A SF-E SF-S SF-R SF-MU 2-F
Structure Type SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF
Detach
SF Condo:
Detach or
Attach
SF Detach
SF
Attached;
Non-
Residential
Condo:
SF Detach,
SF Attach,
Non-
Residential
Duplex
Single Family
Adjacency
Vegetative
Bufferyard (See
Subchapter 11)
N/A N/A N/A N/A 10’ N/A 10’ 10’ N/A
(1) Allows an Accessory Dwelling Unit as identi_ied within the use conditions
B. General Regulations - Multi Family and Manufactured Housing Districts
The following general regulations shall apply for all multi-family and Manufactured Housing
district(s):
Table 4.2.4 B – General Regulations
General Regulations MF-10 MF-20 MH
Structure Type
MF;
Assisted
Living;
Mixed
Use
SF Attach
Condo:
SF Detach,
SF Attach
MF;
Assisted
Living;
Mixed Use;
All Nonresidential
SF Attach
Condo:
SF Detach,
SF Attach
MH
Minimum Site Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 90,000
sq ft
Maximum Site Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 50 ac
Minimum Lot Area N/A 2,500 sq
ft N/A N/A 2,500 sq
ft N/A
4,500 sq
ft per
dwelling
unit
Minimum Front Street
Setback 15' 15’
15’ from
street (20’
when front
loaded
garage is
proposed)
15' 15’
15’ from
street (20’
when front
loaded
garage is
proposed)
25’
Minimum Side Street
Setback (corner lots) 15’ 25'
N/A 15' 25'
N/A 15'
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 64/320
Minimum Interior Side
Setback 10'
0' per
unit; 10’
between
structures
10’ between
structures 10’
0' per
unit; 10’
between
structures
10’ between
structures
20'
required
between
units
Minimum Interior Side
Setback (abutting SF-E,
SF-S, SF-R zoning or
conforming single family
detached unit)
30' 30'
30' between
structures
and property
line
30' 30'
30' between
structures
and property
line
15’
Minimum Rear Setback 15’
15'
(20’ when
rear
loaded
garage is
proposed)
30' between
SF Attach
(40’ when
rear loaded
garage is
proposed)
15'
15'
(20’ when
rear
loaded
garage is
proposed)
30' between
SF Attach
(40’ when
rear loaded
garage is
proposed)
15’
Minimum Rear Setback
(abutting SF-E, SF-S, SFR
zoning or conforming
single family detached
unit)
30' 30'
30' between
structures
and property
line
30' 30'
30' between
structures
and property
line
20’
(include
“A”
zoning)
Streetscape Yard 15’ 15’ 15’ 15’ 15’ 15’
25’
along
arterial;
15’
along
collector
Single Family Adjacency
Vegetative Bufferyard
(See Subchapter 11)
30’ 30’
30' between
structures
and property
line
30’ 30’
30' between
structures
and property
line
30’
Maximum Lot Coverage 40% N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum Density (units
per acre) 10/acre 10/acre 10/acre 20/acre
20/acre
20/acre 8/acre
Minimum Dwelling Unit
area
600 sq
ft(1) 900 sq ft
SF Detach:
1,100 sq ft
SF Attach:
900 sq ft
600 sq ft(1) 900 sq ft
SF Detach:
1,100 sq ft
SF Attach:
900 sq ft
650 sq ft
Unit Mix Required
Min. 40%
1 Bed /
Studio;
Max 10%
3+ Bed
Max 6
units SF
Attach
Max 6 units
SF Attach
Min. 40% 1
Bed /
Studio; Max
10% 3+
Bed
Max 6
units SF
Attach
Max 6 units
SF Attach N/A
Maximum Building
Length N/A 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ N/A
(1) Dwelling units associated with assisted living or nursing home facilities shall be exempt from this requirement
C. Height Regulations – All residential districts
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 65/320
The following height regulations shall apply to all residential zoning districts:
Table 4.2.4 C. – Height Regulations
Height Regulations
A, SF-E,
SF-S,
SF-R, SFMU,
2-F
MF-10, MF-20 MH
Maximum Principal
Building Height 35’
38’ 24’
Building Height
Setbacks (abutting SF-E,
SF-S, SF-R zoning or
existing conforming
single family detached
unit; not SF-MU)
35’
Buildings exceeding 20’ in height abutting SF-E, SF-S, SF-R zoning or
an existing conforming single family detached unit shall have _ive (5)
feet of additional setback per one (1) foot of additional building height
as measured from the side and rear 30-ft building setback. This
provision is applicable even if the property line is not common.
A single dwelling unit designed in a structural form similar to a
detached single family residence shall be exempt from the
aforementioned additional setback per additional height requirement,
but shall be subject to the applicable setback requirements.
24’
Maximum Accessory
Building Height
No greater than the height of the principal building height and at no point greater than
24’ in height.
Maximum Pole Height
(applicable to small
wind energy systems)
A pole for a small wind energy system shall not exceed the maximum principal building
height per district, with exception in the A and SF-E districts where there is no height
limit provided the pole with appurtenances at their full extent are setback from all lot
lines a distance equal to its total height.
D. Setback Encroachments
1. Driveways and vehicular use areas.
2. Fences and walls in conformance with Subchapter 11.
3. Stairways, balconies, covered porches, mechanical equipment, bay or box windows or other
building extensions approved by the Planning Director that do not intrude more than six (6)
feet into the rear or street setback, provided they remain outside of all easements and out of all
sight triangles.
4. A private, single-family swimming pool may have the edge of water located no closer than _ive
(5) feet to a rear or side property line, provided the pool remains outside of all easements.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 66/320
5. With the exception of the provision listed above every part of a required setback or court shall
be open from its lowest point vertically to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary
projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features, and eaves.
6. Improvements, signs, and landscaping within sight triangles that does not exceed 36 inches in
height.
7. Rain barrels, cisterns and solar panels may be no closer than 2 feet from the property line.
8. Small wind energy systems with all appurtenances shall be setback at least 10 feet from all lot
lines with exception that no part of the system shall be allowed in a required front or side street
yard setback.
9. Accessory buildings may encroach into required setbacks according to Table 4.2.4 D. In no case
shall an accessory building encroach into a drainage or public utility easement.
Table 4.2.4 D. – Accessory Building Setbacks
Primary Use
of Lot Type of Accessory Building
Distance from Boundary
Street Rear Side -
Interior
Side -
Exterior
Residential Unattached Garage 25’ 7.5’ 5’ 15’
Residential Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit 25’ 7.5’ 5’ 15’
Residential Other than Unattached Garage including Storage Sheds 200
Square Feet and Greater 25’ 5’ 5’ 15’
Residential Storage Shed Less Than 200 Square Feet 25’ 0’ 0’ 15’
E. Reference to Development Standards
Unless otherwise indicated, each lot or tract of land shall comply with Chapter 158 Stormwater
Pollution Control Ordinance and all applicable provisions, in their entirety, of the following
subchapters:
1. Site Development Standards: See Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site Design, and Layout
Provisions
2. Parking, Mobility, and Circulation Standards: See Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility, and
Circulation.
3. Landscaping and Screening: See Subchapter 11 Landscaping and Screening Standards
4. Tree Preservation Standards: See Subchapter 12 Tree Preservation Standards
5. Lighting Standards: See Subchapter 13 Exterior Lighting Standards
6. Parkland Standards: See Subchapter 14 Public Parkland Standards and Parks Development
Manual
7. Subdivision: See Subchapter 15 Subdivision Process
8. De_initions: See Subchapter 20 De_initions
9. Engineering Standards: See the Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards
10. Tree Preservation Technical Standards: See Tree Technical Manual
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.3 NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 67/320
The purpose of the non-residential zoning districts is to provide an adequate mix of commercial and
industrial land uses that encourage a mix of employment, shopping and services opportunities. Nonresidential
zoning districts are comprised of are the PF, O, NS, R, GB1, GB2, CI, LI, and GI districts. For
properties located within a Special District and Overlays, such as the Downtown District Overlay, refer to
Section 4.5 for additional land use provisions and development requirements.
4.3.1 Non-Residential Districts De_ined - Public Facilities, Of_ice, Commercial, and
Industrial Districts
Parks
Facilities and
Open Space
(PF)
The Parks Facilities and Open Space (PF) district is established to preserve and enhance public and
private open spaces and to develop and implement parks and recreational opportunities
throughout the city that is responsive the variety of recreational needs of all residents of the
community.
Of_ice (O)
This district is established to create a _lexible district for low intensity of_ice and professional uses
(less than 10,000 square feet of _loor area). The district can be used as a transition district between
more intense uses and residential uses. Permitted uses should be compatible with adjacent
residential areas by limiting heights to one story and utilizing buffers and landscape requirements.
Sites zoned “O” may be built to two stories or in excess of 10,000 square feet if not located adjacent
to any properties zoned SF-S or 2-F.
Neighborhood
Service (NS)
This district is established as a limited retail category intended for use by residents of nearby
neighborhood areas for the purpose of supplying day-to-day needs and personal services.
Establishments should include small, free-standing retail structures, such as convenience stores
and neighborhood oriented personal service establishments. Sites zoned “NS” should be located on
a thoroughfare and generally utilize a site adjacent to one or more logical neighborhood service
areas.
Retail (R)
This district is established to provide locations for various types of general retail trade, business
and service uses for services to one or more neighborhoods. The commercial areas developed
within an R district should utilize to the maximum extent possible the existing landscaping on site
to buffer from adjacent residential uses and be limited to two stories in height. The R district
should be located generally at the intersection of major thoroughfares and convenient to a
residential trade area, with signage compatible with surrounding land use. In the R district, open
storage as de_ined herein is not permitted.
General
Business 1
(GB1)
The General Business 1 (GB1) district is designed to accommodate a full range of retail and of_ice
uses with a city-wide and even regional trade area. These types of commercial uses are conducted
wholly within an enclosed building. The uses in this district have operating characteristics and
traf_ic service requirements compatible with typical of_ice, retail, shopping, and high density
residential environments.
General
Business 2
(GB2)
The General Business 2 (GB2) district is intended to provide a convenient location for small scale
service and commercial related establishments, such as wholesale products, contractor shops, mini
storage, major automotive repair, and similar more intense commercial uses. The uses included in
this district should be located on a collector or higher classi_ication thoroughfare.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 68/320
Campus
Industrial (CI)
This district is intended to include land which is used, or intended to be used, as an employment
center, including but not limited to, land uses such as light industrial, research and development
centers, multi-story of_ices, business services and limited retail services. It is intended to provide
for places to work with the conveniences of services within a centralized area. It should be located
along major arterial streets and may be located along the SH130 and SH45 corridors.
Light
Industrial (LI)
This district is intended to include land which is used, or intended to be used, for light industrial
purposes including, but not limited to research facilities, and specialized processing and
assembling plants. It should be located along major arterial streets or separated from arterial
streets by the GB1 and GB2 districts and should generally not be located on SH 130 or SH 45.
Industrial uses whether in LI or GI may be located within the same area.
General
Industrial (GI)
This district is intended to include land which is used, or intended to be used, for the development
and protection of, manufacturing, and related undertakings which generate a large volume of
traf_ic, can involve multi-shift employment, involve heavy equipment, and/or generate noise, dust,
or light which is not compatible with the other uses in this chapter, and might require large parcels
of land. This district should be located away from residential uses and areas that are suitable for
retail commercial use. They should be relatively large areas to encourage the clustering of similar
uses and avoid the proliferation of GI districts in the City. The district should have adequate access
to arterial streets, but not direct frontage on arterial streets or SH 130 or SH 45.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.3.2 4.3.2 Non-Residential Districts Land Use Table - (Public Facilities and Open
Space, Of_ice, Commercial, and Industrial)
Land uses identi_ied in Table 4.3.2 with the following designations shall be interpreted according to the
provisions herein. If there is no designation found for a particular use in a speci_ic zoning district, that
use is not allowed within that zoning district. In the event that a use is not listed or classi_ication is
otherwise required, the Administrator shall classify the use as appropriate in accordance with
Subchapter 3.
A. Permitted Uses: Uses noted with a “P” are permitted by right within the given district, provided that
all other requirements applicable to the use within each section are met.
B. Uses Permitted with Conditions: Uses noted with a “C” are permitted by right within the given
district provided that speci_ic conditions are met. Speci_ic conditions applicable to these certain
uses are provided in the corresponding “Land Use Conditions” section of this Subchapter.
C. Uses Requiring a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with an “S” require consideration of impacts
associated with a particular location for the proposed use, in addition to the standards that
otherwise apply to the use under this Subchapter.
D. Uses Permitted with Conditions Unless Authorized by a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with a
“C/S” are permitted by right within the given district provided that speci_ic conditions are met,
unless authorized by a speci_ic use permit.
Table 4.3.2: Non-Residential Districts - Permitted Uses
Residential Uses PF O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
Assisted Living P P
Condominium C C
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 69/320
Live Work Unit P P
Multi-Family C C
Nursing Home/Skilled Nursing
(Convalescent) P P
Single Family Attached (3 or more)
Townhome P
Non-Residential Uses PF O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
Amenity Center, Private (Primary Use) C
Animal Establishments, Commercial C C C
Athletic Facilities P P P
Auction Sales P P P P
Automotive Body Repair Shop
(Collision Repair) P P
Automotive Parts Sales, Inside P P P
Automotive Repair and Service P P P
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage P P P P P P
Automobile Sales and Rental P P P
Auto Salvage Yard S
Bail Bond C C
Bar/Tavern P P
Body Art Studio S S P
Brewery/Distillery/Winery, Micro P P P P P
Brewery/Distillery/Winery, Regional P
Brewpub/Wine Bar P P P
Business Services P P P P
Call Center P P P P
Campground or Recreational Vehicle
Park, Private S
Car Wash C C P
Catering Establishment P P P
Cemetery/Mausoleum C P P P
Civic Center P P P P P
Clinic P P P P P
College, University, or Private Boarding
School S P P P
Commercial Recreation and
Entertainment, Indoor C P P
Commercial Recreation and
Entertainment, Outdoor S C C
Commissary P P
Community Garden, Private P
Contractor's Shop P P P
Convention Center P P
Crematorium P P
Non-Residential Uses PF O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 70/320
Data Center C P P P
Day Care Facility P P P
Distribution/Logistics Center S P P
Drive-in/ Thru C C C C C
Dry Cleaning, Major P P P
Dry Cleaning, Minor P P P P P P
Equipment and Machinery Sales and
Rental, Major P P
Equipment and Machinery Sales and
Rental, Minor P P P P P P
Event Center P P
Financial Institution P P P P P
Financial Services Institution,
Alternative C C
Food Processing Establishment, Major P
Food Processing Establishment, Minor P P
Gas Station C C C
Golf Course and/or Country Club P P P P
Golf Driving Range P P P
Government Facilities P P P P P P P P P
Health/Fitness Center P P P S
Hospital P P P P
Hotel/Hotel Residence C C P
Household Appliance Service and
Repair P P P
Industrial Uses, Heavy P
Industrial Uses, Light P P P
Laundromat P P P
Liquor Store (Off-Premise
Consumption) P P
Lounge P P
Machine Shop P P P P
Massage Therapy, Licensed P P P P P
Microwave and Satellite Receiving
Station, Commercial P
Mini-warehouse/public storage P P P
Mobile Food Park C/S C C
Mortuary/Funeral Home P P
Museum/Art Gallery P P P P P
Nursery Indoor/Outdoor Sales C C P
Of_ice: Administrative, Medical, or
Professional P P P P P P P P
Of_ice/Showroom P P P P
Of_ice/Warehouse P P P
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 71/320
Open Storage (Primary Use) S
Orchard, Private S
Outdoor Ampitheater, Private S
Non-Residential Uses PF O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
Park or Playground P P P P P P P
Pawn Shop P P
Personal Services P P P
Place of Worship P P P P P P P P P
Portable Building Sales P P
Print Shop, Major P P P
Print Shop, Minor P P P P
Reception Hall S P P P
Recycling Center P P
Recycling Plant S
Research and Development Center P P P
Non-Residential Uses O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
Restaurant C C C P P
Retail Sales and Service - Single tenant
over 50,000 SF P P P
Retail Sales and Services P P P P P P
School: Private or Parochial P P P P P
School: Public Refer to Government Facilities
Sexually Oriented Business C C
Shooting Range, Indoor P P
Small Engine Repair Shop P P
Stable, Commercial S C
Theatre P P
Trade School P P P P
Transit Facility (Park & Ride) P P
Truck/Trailer Rental C P P
Truck Sales, Heavy Trucks P P
Truck Terminal P
Trucks/Bus/Large Vehicle Repair P P
Utilities C C C C C C C C C
Vehicular Sales and Rental,
Recreational C P P
Vineyard, Private S
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
(WTFs) C/S S C/S C/S C/S C/S C/S
Wrecker/Towing Services C C
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 72/320
4.3.3 Non-Residential Districts Land Use Conditions - (Public Facilities and Open
Space, Of_ice, Commercial, Industrial)
The uses indicated in the land use Table 4.3.2 with the letter “C” in one or more districts must comply
with the conditions as indicated below. The use is permitted in the subject district(s) provided the use or
site complies with the conditions indicated for the use. Conditions are speci_ied for each use in the
following alphabetical list.
Amenity Center,
Private
(Primary Use)
Must take access from a collector, or arterial street.
All amenity center buildings shall have a minimum 30’ building setback from all
adjacent residential property lines.
All outdoor amenity facilities or recreational equipment (e.g., basketball court,
tennis court, pools, pool deck, splash pad, or any other active or programmed
recreational facility) shall be setback a minimum of 100’ from all adjacent
residential property lines.
A trail shall not require a setback.
Shall provide streetscape yard landscaping, building foundation landscaping,
surface parking landscaping, screening, and minimum 30’ bufferyard pursuant to
Subchapter 11.
When residential units along a drive aisle or street are designed to back up to
the amenity center, at least one public access easement containing a minimum 10-ft
trail shall be provided to connect to each street with units backing up to the
amenity center.
Shall be subject to commercial development review standards.
Animal
Establishments,
Commercial
Subject to Title 9, Chapter 90
Bail Bond
Every portion of the boundary of the site in which the use is located (subject
site) is a minimum of seven hundred _ifty (750) feet from the nearest property line
of all of the following uses, measured in a straight line between the nearest points of
one lot to the other lot:
1. Any other bail bond use
2. School, public or private
3. Residential use or district
4. Place of worship
For the purposes of this section, the measurement of the 750-foot distance shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the property line of the subject site to the nearest portion of
the property line of an existing bail bond use, residential use or district, school or
place of worship. In addition, the measurement of the 750-foot distance shall also
include existing bail bond use, residential use or district, school or place of worship
that are located in an adjoining city or unincorporated area and that are within 750-
foot distance of the nearest property line of the subject site.
Car Wash
Vacuums must be located a minimum of 200 feet from the property line of any
adjacent residential use, and
Drive-thru facilities must be located a minimum of 200 feet from the property
line of any residential use, and oriented in such a way as to minimize noise from a
speaker box.
Cemetery/Mausoleum Permitted if in existence prior to 2017
Commercial
Recreation and
Entertainment, Indoor
The discharge of _irearms is prohibited.
Tenant space limited to 5,000 square feet or less of _loor area.
Commercial
Recreation and
Entertainment,
Outdoor
All outdoor activity must be located a minimum of 300 feet from the nearest
property line of an existing conforming low or medium density, single family
residential use.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 73/320
Condominium
(Residential)
R and GB1 District:
Townhome structures may be considered as a condominium if the structures
comply with the general regulations for condo in the SF-MU district Tables 4.2.4(A)
and (C), and the single family attached (3 or more) design standards outlined in
Subchapter 9.2, and only when cohesively integrated as a component of a nonresidential
development consisting of of_ice, restaurant and similar land uses that
serve a neighborhood. At no point shall the residential component consist of more
than 40% of the overall development’s acreage, not to exceed 20 acres.
R and GB1 District:
Residential structures commonly known as single family detached, duplex, or
single family attached (3 or more) townhome complying with the general
regulations for condo in the SF-MU district Tables 4.2.4(A) and (C), or senior living
apartment complying with the general regulations for multifamily in the MF-20
district Tables 4.2.4(B) and (C); must all comply with the applicable design
standards per structure type outlined in Subchapter 9, and are restricted to
residents 55 and over and may be allowed as a condominium when cohesively
integrated as a component of a retirement living village consisting of at least two of
the following: nursing home/skilled nursing, assisted living, hospital, medical of_ice.
Data Center Square footage limited to a maximum of 25,000 square feet.
Drive-in/ Thru
Drive-thru aisles allowed only in the rear of building or on sides of buildings
provided that the service window and any associated speaker box are located at
least 200 feet from any residential District or are screened by another structure
from the residential district.
Dwelling Unit,
Accessory See Section 4.6.3
Financial Services
Institutions,
Alternative
Every portion of the boundary of the site in which the use is located (subject
site) shall be a minimum of seven hundred _ifty (750) feet from the nearest
property line of all of the following uses:
1. Any other alternative _inancial service institution
2. Residential use or district
3. School, public or private
4. Place of worship
For the purposes of this section, the measurement of the 750-foot distance shall
be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from
the nearest portion of the property line of the subject site to the nearest portion of
the property line of an existing alternative _inancial service, residential use or
district, school or place of worship. In addition, the measurement of the 750-foot
distance shall also include existing alternative _inancial service, residential use or
district, school or place of worship that are located in an adjoining city or
unincorporated area and that are within 750-foot distance of the nearest property
line of the subject site.
Gas Stations
Permitted only within 200 feet of the right-of-way lines of intersecting streets;
and
Permitted at a maximum of two corners at an intersection of two arterial streets;
and a maximum of one corner of an intersection with a collector or local street; and
In the Retail (R) district, gas pumps are limited to no more than eight vehicles
obtaining fuel simultaneously; and
Air and vacuum facilities must be a minimum of at least 100 feet from low or
medium density single family residential use.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 74/320
Hotel, Hotel
Residence:
External balconies must be set back at least 200 feet from any residential zoning
district; and
Must provide staff on-site 24 hours a day;
All guest rooms must be accessed through internal hallways, lobby, or courtyard;
and
Must provide at least three amenities from the list below:
1. Indoor/Outdoor Pool
2. Spa/Sauna
3. Weight Room/Fitness Center
4. Playground
5. Sports Court
6. Plaza/Atrium
7. Game Room
8. Jogging Trail
9. Conference Room (1,000 square foot minimum)
10. Full service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35)
Mobile Food Park Subject to Sections 4.9 and 4.10
Multi-Family
Shall not occupy more than 75 percent of the total _loor area of a building up to
10 dwelling units per acre in the R district and up to 20 dwelling units per acre in
the GB1 district.
Shall comply with the Multi-family and Mixed Use Structure design standards
found in Section 9.3 of Subchapter 9.
When multi-family is proposed, the MF-10 regulations found in Table 4.2.4 B,
Table 4.2.4 C, and Table 11.3 C shall apply in the R district; and the
MF-20 regulations found in Table 4.2.4 B, Table 4.2.4 C, and Table 11.3 C shall
apply in the GB1 district.
A building’s ground _loor shall not exceed 50% of residential units, live-work
units and multi-family appurtenances, including required garages, the management
of_ice, and amenity space. The remainder of the ground _loor shall be limited to
commercial uses permitted in the district.
Recycling Plant Shall be screened in accordance with the outdoor storage screening
requirements in Subchapter 11 of the Uni_ied Development Code.
Restaurant Tenant space limited to 5,000 square feet or less of _loor area.
Drive-thru facilities are not permitted.
Sexually Oriented
Business Must comply with the requirements of Chapter 112 of the City Code.
Truck/Trailer Rental
The areas used for sale and interim storage areas must be wholly enclosed
within a structure or otherwise screened from view from adjacent residential areas,
public rights-of-ways, and parkland.
Utilities
All facilities must be screened from view from adjacent residential areas and
public right-of-ways with an opaque screen of 8’ masonry fence and vegetation with
a mature height of 8’ or greater with initial plantings installed in accordance with
Subchapter 11.
Exempt from minimum lot size requirements
Vehicular Sales and
Rental, Recreational
All sales, storage, and display must be enclosed within a structure. No outdoor
storage is permitted.
Wireless
Telecommunication
Facilities (WTF)
Refer to Section 4.8
Exempt from minimum lot size requirements
Wrecker/Towing
Services
Shall be screened in accordance with Subchapter 11. Landscaping and Screening
standards; and
Shall satisfy the accessory use standards for outdoor storage.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.3.4 NON-RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 75/320
The purpose of the non-residential zoning districts is to provide an adequate mix of commercial and
industrial land uses that encourage a mix of employment, shopping and services opportunities. Nonresidential
zoning districts are the PF, O, NS, R, GB1, GB2, CI, LI, and GI.
A. General Regulations and Height Standards - Public Facilities, Of_ice, Commercial, and Industrial
Districts
The following general regulations shall apply for non-residential zoning districts PF, O, NS, R, GB1,
GB2, CI, LI and GI:
Table 4.3.4 – General Regulations & Height Standards
General Regulations PF O NS R GB1 GB2 CI LI GI
Minimum Lot Area N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Lot Width [along
Arterial and Major Collector
Streets]1
200'* 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’ 200’
Minimum Lot Depth N/A* N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Front Street
Setback (Building Setback) 25' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15'
Minimum Front Setback
(Corner Lot) 25' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15'
Minimum Street Setback
(across the street from
single-family residential
zoning)
25' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 30' 50' 100'
Minimum Interior Side
Setback 20' 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 10’ 15' 15' 30'
Minimum Interior Side
Setback2 (abutting singlefamily
residential zoning)
20' 25’ 25’ 25’ 30’ 30’ 50' 50' 100'
Minimum Rear Setback 20' 20’ 20’ 20’ 20’ 25’ 15' 15' 30'
Minimum Rear Setback2
(abutting single-family
residential zoning)
20' 20’ 20’ 25’ 30’ 30' 50' 50' 100'
Streetscape Yard
(25’ Streetscape Yard
applicable along
toll/frontage road
facilities)
25'
(25')
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
15'
(25’)
Streetscape Yard (across
the street from singlefamily
residential zoning)
25' 15' 15' 15' 15' 15' 30' 50' 50'
* For public parkland, see provisions established in Subchapter 14 for size, dimensional and access standards
for parkland.
** Refer to land use conditions in Section 4.3.2.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 76/320
Table 4.3.4 – General Regulations & Height Standards
Single Family Adjacency
Vegetative Bufferyard (See
Subchapter 11)
** 15’ 15’ 15’ 15’ 30’ 30' 50' 50'
Maximum Lot Coverage
(Structure) (does not
include parking structures)
25% 25% 25% 40% 50% 60% 80% 80% 80%
Maximum Impervious
Cover 50% 70% 75% 80% 80% 85% 85% 85% 85%
Maximum Building Height2 25' 25’ 25’ 35' 50' 50' 85' 50' 100'
1Commercial properties may be designed with a minimum 50 feet of frontage if a perpetual joint access easement
or uni_ied development agreement is provided and driveway spacing requirements are met.
2Building Height Setback
(Applicable to Side and
Rear Setbacks abutting
single-family residential
zoning)
N/A N/A N/A
Buildings exceeding 20' in height abutting single-family
residential zoning are required to have additional building
setbacks measured from the Side and rear building setbacks.
(The setback distance is required even if the property line is
not common.) One (1) foot of additional building height for a
commercial or industrial building requires two (2) feet of
additional building setback. One (1) foot of additional building
height for a multi-family mixed use building requires _ive (5)
feet of additional building setback.
* For public parkland, see provisions established in Subchapter 14 for size, dimensional and access standards
for parkland.
** Refer to land use conditions in Section 4.3.2.
B. Setback Encroachments - Of_ice, Commercial, Industrial Districts
1. Accessory buildings may not encroach into required building setbacks.
2. The following are permitted in required building setbacks provided that they comply with all
other standards of this and other applicable codes:
a. Landscaping
b. Vehicular use areas
c. Fences and walls that are not part of a structure
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 77/320
d. Every part of a required setback or court shall be open from its lowest point vertically
to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses,
cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features, and eaves
e. An open _ire escape may project into a required side yard up to one-half the width of
such yard, or up to four feet from the building, whichever encroaches less. Fire escapes
may project up to four (4') feet into a rear yard
f. Improvements, signs, and landscaping within sight triangles that does not exceed 36
inches in height.
g. Rain barrels, cisterns, and solar panels may be no closer than 2’ from the property line
h. Dumpsters may encroach no more than 10’ into the side or rear setback but at no time
may they encroach into the front setback or within a setback adjacent to single family.
C. Reference to Development Standards
Unless otherwise indicated, each lot or tract of land shall comply with Chapter 158 Stormwater
Pollution Control Ordinance and all applicable provisions, in their entirety, of the following
subchapters:
1. Site Development Standards: See Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site Design, and Layout
Provisions
2. Parking, Mobility, and Circulation Standards: See Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility, and
Circulation.
3. Landscaping and Screening: See Subchapter 11 Landscaping and Screening Standards
4. Tree Preservation Standards: See Subchapter 12 Tree Preservation Standards
5. Lighting Standards: See Subchapter 13 Exterior Lighting Standards
6. Parkland Standards: See Subchapter 14 Public Parkland Standards
7. Subdivision: See Subchapter 15 Subdivision Process
8. De_initions: See Subchapter 20 De_initions
9. Engineering Standards: See Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards
10. Tree Preservation Technical Standards: See Tree Technical Manual
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.4 CORRIDOR DISTRICTS
The purpose of the corridor districts is to provide an adequate mix of residential and commercial
industrial land uses that encourage a mix of employment, shopping and services opportunities. Nonresidential
zoning districts are comprised of CL3, CL4 and CL5.
4.4.1 CORRIDOR DISTRICTS DEFINED
Suburban
(Level 3:
CL3)
This district is intended to establish a form that features low density, suburban development primarily
consisting of a mix of residential uses featuring single family homes with limited commercial uses
along major thoroughfares. The scale of development is limited with substantial on-site open space and
vegetation. Uses within the Suburban district may be mixed with an emphasis on creating walkable
neighborhoods near neighborhood centers, civic spaces and public facilities.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 78/320
Urban
(Level 4:
CL4)
This district is intended to create vibrant and walkable neighborhoods and employment centers along
the SH 130 and SH 45 corridors. The scale of structures in the Urban district is greater than found in
the Suburban district and density suf_icient to support a range of housing types. Commercial retail
services play an increased role relative to the Suburban district but remain supportive of surrounding
neighborhoods and employment centers.
Urban
Center
(Level 5:
CL5)
This district is intended to establish dense, dynamic and walkable centers for living, working and
shopping. Urban Centers provide a retail and employment focus supplemented by dense residential
development. Three Urban Centers established upon initial approval of the SH 130 and SH 45 corridor
boundaries occur at major interchanges along the state highways with emphasis upon retail (SH 130
and SH 45), employment (SH 130 and P_luger Lane) and entertainment (SH 130 and Pecan Street).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.4.2 CORRIDOR DISTRICTS - LAND USE TABLE
Land uses identi_ied in Table 4.4.2 with the following designations shall be interpreted according to the
provisions herein. If there is no designation found for a particular use in a speci_ic zoning district, that
use is not allowed within that zoning district. In the event that a use is not listed or classi_ication is
otherwise required, the Administrator shall classify the use as appropriate in accordance with
Subchapter 3.
A. Permitted Uses: Uses noted with a “P” are permitted by right within the given district, provided that
all other requirements applicable to the use within each section are met.
B. Uses Permitted with Conditions: Uses noted with a “C” are permitted by right within the given
district provided that speci_ic conditions are met. Speci_ic conditions applicable to these certain
uses are provided in the corresponding “land use conditions” section of this Subchapter.
C. Uses Requiring a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with an “S” require consideration of impacts
associated with a particular location for the proposed use, in addition to the standards that
otherwise apply to the use under this Subchapter.
D. Uses Permitted with Conditions Unless Authorized by a Speci_ic Use Permit: Uses noted with a
“C/S” are permitted by right within the given district provided that speci_ic conditions are met,
unless authorized by a speci_ic use permit.
Table 4.4.2: Corridor Districts - Permitted Uses
Residential Uses CL3 CL4 CL5
Assisted Living P P P
Condominium C P P
Duplex P
Live Work Unit P P
Multi-Family S S P
Skilled Nursing/Nursing Home (Convalescent) P P P
Single Family Attached (3 or more) Townhome P C
Single Family, Detached P
Non-Residential Uses CL3 CL4 CL5
Animal Establishments, Commercial C C C
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage P P
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 79/320
Automotive Body Repair Shop (Collision Repair) S S
Automotive Repair and Service S S
Bar/Tavern P P
Brewpub/Wine Bar P P
Brewery/Distillery/Winery, Micro P
Call Center P
Catering Establishment C P P
Civic Center P P P
Clinic P P P
College, University, Trade School, or Private Boarding School P P
Commercial Recreation and Entertainment, Indoor C P P
Commercial Recreation and Entertainment, Outdoor S S
Convention Center P P
Day Care Facility P P P
Distribution/Logistics Center S S
Drive-in/ Thru C C
Dry Cleaning, Major P P
Dry Cleaning, Minor P P P
Event Center P P
Financial Institution P P P
Gas Station C C
Government Facilities P P P
Health/Fitness Center C P P
Hospital S S
Hotel/Hotel Residence C C
Industrial Uses (Light) S S
Liquor Store (Off-Premise Consumption) P P
Massage Therapy, Licensed P P P
Mini-warehouse/public storage S
Mobile Food Park S S
Museum/Art Gallery P P
Of_ice/Showroom S S
Of_ice/Warehouse S S
Of_ice: Administrative, Medical, or Professional P P P
Park or Playground P P P
Personal Services P P P
Place of Worship P P P
Print Shop, Major P P
Print Shop, Minor P P P
Non-Residential Uses CL3 CL4 CL5
Research and Development Center S S
Restaurant P P P
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 80/320
Retail Sales and Services P P P
Retail Sales- Single tenant over 50,000 SF P P
School: Private or Parochial P P P
Theatre, Neighborhood P P
Theatre, Regional P P
Transit Terminal (Park & Ride) P P
Utilities C C C
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities (WTF) C/S C/S
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.4.3 CORRIDOR DISTRICTS - LAND USE CONDITIONS
The uses indicated in the Land Use Table Section 4.4.2 with the letter “C” in one or more districts must
comply with the conditions as indicated below. The use is permitted in the subject district(s) provided the
use or site complies with the conditions indicated for the use. Conditions are speci_ied for each use in
the following alphabetical list.
Animal
Establishments,
Commercial
Subject to Title 9, Chapter 90
Amenity Center
Must take access from at least one collector or arterial street; and
The pool and all buildings must be located at least 100 feet from all site boundary
lines.
Catering
Establishment 5,000 square feet or less of _loor area.
Condominium
For “townhome” structures, refer to corridor districts land use conditions for Single
family Attached (3 or more) Townhome within Section 4.4.3.
Where multiple “for sale” units are provided in one structure, refer to Multi-Family
and Mixed Use Structure requirements provided in Table 4.2.4 B., Table 4.2.4 C., and
Section 9.3 of Subchapter 9.
Drive-in/ Thru Subject to the location requirements as outlined in Subchapter 9.
Gas Station
Maximum of two corners of an intersection;
Permitted only within 1,000 feet of SH 130 and SH 45, measured from the nearest
property line of the gas station to the nearest right-of-way line of SH 130 and SH 45;
Maximum of twelve hoses; and
Canopy support columns must be encased in brick or stone complementary to the
principal structure.
Health/Fitness
Center Tenant space limited to 5,000 square feet or less of _loor area.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 81/320
Hotel, Hotel
Residence
External balconies must be set back at least 200 feet from any residential zoning
district;
Must provide staff on-site 24 hours a day;
All guest rooms must be accessed through internal hallways, lobby, or courtyard;
and
Must provide at least three amenities from the list below:-
i. Indoor/Outdoor Pool
ii. Spa/Sauna
iii. Weight Room/Fitness Center
iv. Playground
v. Sports Court
vi. Plaza/Atrium
vii. Game Room
viii. Jogging Trail
ix. Conference Room (1,000 square foot minimum)
x. Full service restaurant (minimum seating capacity of 35)
School, Private or
Parochial: Access from a collector or arterial street.
Single Family
Attached (3 or
more) Townhome
May be considered as individual lots if the structures comply with the general
regulations and height standards for “SF Attach” in the CL3 district found in Table
4.4.4;
May be considered as a condominium if the structures comply with the general
regulations for “condo” in the SF-MU district found in Table 4.2.4 A.;
Shall comply with the Single Family Attached (3 or more) design standards
outlined in Subchapter 9.2;
Shall be cohesively integrated as a component of a non-residential development
consisting of of_ice, restaurant and similar land uses that serve a neighborhood. At no
point shall the residential component consist of more than 40% of the overall
development’s acreage, not to exceed 20 acres.
Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility (WTF)
Refer to Section 4.8
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.4.4 CORRIDOR DISTRICTS – DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
A. General Regulations: The following general regulations shall apply for the corridor zoning districts
CL3, CL4, and CL5:
Table 4.4.4: Corridor Districts – General Regulations & Height Standards
General Regulations
CL3 CL4 CL5
SF
Detach SF Attach MF; Mixed Use; Nonresidential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
Minimum Lot Area 5,000 sq
ft 2,500 sq ft N/A N/A N/A
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 82/320
Table 4.4.4: Corridor Districts – General Regulations & Height Standards
General Regulations
CL3 CL4 CL5
SF
Detach SF Attach MF; Mixed Use; Nonresidential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
Minimum Lot Width
measured at front
street setback (Corner
lots require additional
10 feet)
40’ 25’ N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Lot Depth 120’ 100’ N/A N/A N/A
Minimum Front Street
Setback (Building
Setback)
15’ 15’ 15' 15' 15'
Minimum Side Street
Setback (Corner Lot) 15’ 15’ 15' 15' 15'
Minimum Street
Setback (across the
street from conforming
single-family residential
zoning)
N/A N/A 30' 30' 30'
Minimum Interior Side
Setback
5’ or 0’
on
interior
5’ or 0’ on
interior 5' or 0’ on interior 5' or 0’ on interior 5' or 0’ on interior
Minimum Interior Side
Setback1 (abutting
single-family residential
zoning)
7.5’ 10’ 30' 30' 30'
Minimum Rear Setback 20’ 15’ 20' 10' 10'
Minimum Rear
Setback1 (abutting
single-family residential
zoning)
20’ 20’ 30' 30' 30'
Streetscape Yard
(25’ Streetscape Yard
applicable along
toll/frontage road
facilities)
15’ (25’) 15’ (25’) 15' (25’) 15' 25’) 15' (25’)
Streetscape Yard
(across the street from
single-family residential
zoning)
N/A N/A 30' 30' 30'
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 83/320
Table 4.4.4: Corridor Districts – General Regulations & Height Standards
General Regulations
CL3 CL4 CL5
SF
Detach SF Attach MF; Mixed Use; Nonresidential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
Single Family Adjacency
Vegetative Bufferyard
(See Subchapter 11)
N/A
10’ when
adjacent to
SF-S
25' 30' 30'
Single Family Adjacency
Vegetative Bufferyard
(See Subchapter 11) for
Speci_ic Use Permits
N/A
10’ when
adjacent to
SF-S
50' 50' 50'
Maximum Lot Coverage
(Structure) (does not
include parking
structures)
N/A N/A 40% 85% 85%
Maximum Impervious
Cover (non-residential) N/A N/A 80% 80% 85%
Maximum Impervious
Cover for multifamily
unless greater
percentage is permitted
through the SUP
N/A N/A 60% 60% 60%
Maximum Building
Height1 35’ 35’ 35' 60' (100’2) 85' (120’2)
Minimum Density N/A N/A 6 units/acre 10 units/acre 15 units/acre
Maximum Density N/A N/A 10 units/acre 20 units/acre 25 units/acre
Density Bonus -
Maximum density
(units per acre) if
structured parking is
provided for at least
80% of the minimum
parking required
N/A N/A N/A 60 units/acre 75 units/acre
Minimum Dwelling Unit
Area
1,100 sq.
ft. 900 sq. ft. 450 sq. ft.(1) 450 sq. ft. (1) 450 sq. ft.(1)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 84/320
Table 4.4.4: Corridor Districts – General Regulations & Height Standards
General Regulations
CL3 CL4 CL5
SF
Detach SF Attach MF; Mixed Use; Nonresidential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
MF; Mixed Use;
Non-residential
Multi-Family Dwelling
Unit Mix N/A N/A
Min. 40% 1 Bed /
Studio; Max 10% 3+
Bed
Min. 40% 1 Bed /
Studio; Max 10%
3+ Bed
Min. 40% 1 Bed /
Studio; Max 10%
3+ Bed
Maximum Units per
Structure N/A 6 N/A N/A N/A
Maximum Building
Length N/A 200’ N/A N/A N/A
(1) Dwelling units associated with assisted living or nursing home facilities shall be exempt from this requirement
(2) The maximum height permitted when a minimum of 80% of the required parking is located within a parking structure.
(3)Building Height
Setback (Applicable to
side and rear setbacks
abutting single-family
residential zoning)
N/A N/A
Buildings exceeding 20' in height abutting single-family
residential zoning are required to have additional building
setbacks measured from the side and rear building setbacks.
This provisions is applicable even if the property line is not
common. One (1) foot of additional building height for a
commercial or industrial building requires two (2) feet of
additional building setback. One (1) foot of additional building
height for a multi-family building requires _ive (5) feet of
additional building setback.
B. Setback Encroachments - Corridor Districts
1. Accessory buildings may not encroach into required building setbacks.
2. The following are permitted in required building setbacks provided that they comply with all
other standards of this and other applicable codes:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 85/320
a. Landscaping.
b. Vehicular use areas.
c. Fences and walls.
d. Every part of a required setback or court shall be open from its lowest point
vertically to the sky, unobstructed, except for the ordinary projections of sills, belt
courses, cornices, chimneys, buttresses, ornamental features, and eaves.
e. An open _ire escape may project into a required side yard up to one-half the
width of such yard, or up to four feet from the building, whichever encroaches
less. Fire escapes may project up to four (4') feet into a rear yard.
f. Improvements, signs, and landscaping within sight triangles that does not exceed
36 inches in height.
g. Rain barrels, cisterns, and solar panels may be no closer than 2’ from the
property line
h. Dumpsters may encroach no more than 10’ into the side or rear setback but at
no time may they encroach into the front setback or within a setback adjacent to
single family.
C. Reference to Development Standards
Unless otherwise indicated, each lot or tract of land shall comply with Chapter 158 Stormwater
Pollution Control Ordinance and all applicable provisions, in their entirety, of the following
subchapters:
1. Site Development Standards: See Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site Design, and Layout
Provisions
2. Parking, Mobility, and Circulation Standards: See Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility, and
Circulation.
3. Landscaping and Screening: See Subchapter 11 Landscaping and Screening Standards
4. Tree Preservation Standards: See Subchapter 12 Tree Preservation Standards
5. Lighting Standards: See Subchapter 13 Exterior Lighting Standards
6. Parkland Standards: See Subchapter 14 Public Parkland Standards
7. Subdivision: See Subchapter 15 Subdivision Process
8. De_initions: See Subchapter 20 De_initions
9. Engineering Standards: See Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards
10. Tree Preservation Technical Standards: See Tree Technical Manual
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.5 SPECIAL DISTRICTS AND OVERLAYS
4.5.1 Downtown District and Overlay
A. Downtown District Overlay De_ined
The Downtown District Overlay (DD) is intended to serve multiple purposes, including
preservation and enhancement of the City’s original city site and related areas in order to promote
the historic character, scale, walkability, and economic viability of the area. In addition to the
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 86/320
provisions in this Chapter, site and architectural development standards contained in Chapter 155,
Subchapter B (Site Development Code) of the City Code apply to the overlay district.
B. Land Use Table Applicability: The DD district relies on base zoning districts for uses except where
prohibited according to the following table:
Table 4.5.1 B. Use Applicability Table
Auto Parts Sales, Inside X
Auto Parts Sales, Outside X
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage X
Bar/Tavern S
Body Art Studio S
Car Wash X
Day Care Facility S
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Major X
Heavy Industrial Uses X
Hotel1 S
Light Industrial Uses X
Machine Shop X
Manufactured Home Dwelling X
Mini-Warehouse/Public Storage X
Of_ice/Showroom X
Of_ice/Warehouse/Distribution Center X
Open Storage (Primary Use) X
Portable Building Sales X
Recycling Center X
Recycling Plant X
Retail Sales - Single Tenant over 50,000 SF X
Sexually Oriented Business X
Storage or Wholesale Warehouse X
Trailer/Mobile Home Display and Sales X
Truck Sales, Heavy Trucks X
Truck Terminal X
Truck/Bus Repair X
Vehicular Sales, Rental, Repair and Service S
X = Prohibited; S = Speci_ic Use Permit
1Hotels - Notwithstanding the conditions above in 4.1.5(B), Hotels may be authorized by a Speci_ic Use Permit in the
Downtown District Overlay.
C. Base Districts General Regulations – Applicability
Maximum lot coverage requirements and limitations associated with the base zoning districts are
not applicable to properties within the Downtown District (DD) Overlay
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.5.2 685 Commercial Park Overlay District
A. 685 Commercial Park Overlay District De_ined
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 87/320
The purpose of the 685 Commercial Park Overlay District is to establish development regulations
speci_ically for the 685 Commercial Park subdivision and nearby adjacent tracts in order to create
and enhance visual interest of the SH 130/F.M. 685 roadway while recognizing the existing heavy
commercial and industrial uses.
B. Applicability
Unless otherwise indicated, each section in this Chapter (UDC) is applicable to each lot within the
685 Commercial Park subdivision or tract of land illustrated on the exhibit below.
C. Permitted Uses
Uses in the 685 Commercial Park Overlay District shall be determined by the base zoning district of
the property in accordance with Section 4.3 Non-Residential Zoning Districts.
D. General Regulations
Properties in the 685 Commercial Park Overlay District shall conform to the general regulations of
the base zoning district in which the property is located as stated in Subchapter 4.3 Non
Residential Zoning Districts.
E. Development Requirements: Development Area 1
The uses in the 685 Commercial Park Overlay Development Area 1 shall adhere to development
requirements based on Table 4.5.2. In addition to the aforementioned sections provided in Section
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 88/320
4.5.2 E., Subchapter 11 Landscaping and Screening Standards and Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site
Design and Layout Provisions, shall apply in their entirety to the uses as identi_ied in Table 4.5.2
with “UDC” in the Development Requirements column. All other uses shall follow the requirements
stipulated below in Section 4.5.2 F. Development Requirements: Development Area 2.
Table 4.5.2: Use Based Development Requirements, Development Area 1.
Administrative, Medical, or Professional Of_ice UDC
Auto Parts Sales, Inside UDC
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage UDC
Bar/Tavern UDC
Body Art Studio UDC
Bus Depot UDC
Business Services Development Area 2 Standards
Car Wash UDC
Cemetery/Mausoleum UDC
Civic/Convention Center UDC
Clinic UDC
Club, not bar/tavern UDC
College, University, Trade or Private Boarding School UDC
Commercial Amusements, Indoor UDC
Contractor’s Shop Development Area 2 Standards
Drive-In/thru (accessory) UDC
Dry Cleaning, Major Development Area 2 Standards
Dry Cleaning, Minor UDC
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental, Minor Development Area 2 Standards
Financial Institution UDC
Free-standing monopole cell towers UDC
Gas Station UDC
Golf Course and/or Country Club UDC
Government Facilities UDC
Gymnastics/Dance Studio Development Area 2 Standards
Hospital UDC
Hotel UDC
Household Appliance Service and Repair Development Area 2 Standards
Laundromat Development Area 2 Standards
Massage Therapy, Licensed UDC
Mortuary/Funeral Home UDC
Museum/Art Gallery UDC
Nursery Indoor/Outdoor Sales Development Area 2 Standards
Park or Playground UDC
Pet Store/Kennel/Vet Clinic UDC
Place of Worship UDC
Print Shop, Major Development Area 2 Standards
Print Shop, Minor UDC
Public Swimming Pool UDC
Research and Development Center UDC
Restaurant UDC
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 89/320
Retail Sales and Service UDC
Retail Sales-Single Tenant over 50,000 SF UDC
School, Public, Private, or Parochial UDC
Small Engine Repair Shop Development Area 2 Standards
Trailer Rental Development Area 2 Standards
Utilities UDC
Vehicular Sales, Rental, Repair and Service Development Area 2 Standards
Any land use within this table listed as “UDC” in Development Area 1, the standard development requirements per
the base zoning district applies.
F. Development Requirements: Development Area 2. The following development requirements shall
apply in Development Area 2 and for all uses stipulated as following Development Area 2 in Table
4.5.2.
1. Architectural Design Standards.
a. Masonry is not required.
b. Permitted Materials. The following materials are permitted:
i. Brick, stone, cast stone, rock, marble, granite, glass block or tile.
ii. Stucco or plaster.
iii. Exterior Insulation and Finish System (EIFS). Notwithstanding any other
provision in this code, the use of Exterior Insulated Finishing System (EIFS) is not
permitted below nine feet above _inished grade, and the use of EIFS above nine
feet is limited to high impact EIFS and should be used for architectural details
only.
iv. Metal.
v. Glass with less than 20 percent re_lectance, with the limitation that no more than
50 percent of the total area of the building may be constructed in glass.
vi. Split-face concrete block, poured-in-place concrete, and tilt-wall concrete. Any
concrete products used must have integrated color and be textured or patterned.
Tilt-wall concrete structures must have reveals, punch-outs, or other similar
surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at least 10 percent of each
facade.
c. Prohibited Materials. The following materials are not permitted:
i. Pink and gold glass.
2. Building Design
The following design elements are required as stated in the following table:
Design Element Development Area 2
Roof Pitch Gable and hip roofs must be symmetrically pitched between
1:12 and 8:12.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 90/320
Shed roofs, porch roofs, and arcade roofs subordinate and
attached to the primary structure must be pitched between
1:12 and 6:12.
Roof Top Equipment Screening Parapets must be used to conceal roof top equipment on _lat
roofs.
Permitted Roof Materials Tile, metal or laminated shingles must be the dominant roof
material.
Prohibited Roof Materials and Style
Asphalt shingles, except laminated 320 pound 30-year
architectural grade asphalt shingles or better.
Mansard roofs
Back-lit Awnings used as a mansard roof.
Roof Articulation N/A
Street Facing Facades - Vertical Articulation
(Roo_line Variation) N/A
Street Facing Facades - Horizontal Articulation
(Wall Projection) N/A
Additional Requirements for Street-Facing
Facades N/A
Building Orientation N/A
3. Public Sidewalk Requirements: Sidewalks are not required in Development Area 2.
4. Screening Standards: Screening is not required in Development Area 2.
5. Landscaping: Two trees per platted lot are required in Development Area 2.
6. Irrigation: Hand watering is permitted in Development Area 2 in lieu of any irrigation
requirements.
7. Non-residential Fencing and Wall Standards: Except as required in Subchapter 11
Landscaping and Screening Standards, buffering requirements, fences and walls may not
exceed eight (8) feet in height. In addition, fencing and walls shall not be placed within the
line of sight as determined by the sight triangle. Chain-link fences are permitted within
Development Area 2.
8. Reference to Development Standards: Unless otherwise indicated, each lot or tract of land
within the 685 Commercial Park Overlay District shall comply with Chapter 158 Stormwater
Pollution Control Ordinance and all provisions of the following subchapters, unless otherwise
stated:
a. Subchapter 8 Non-Conformities
b. Subchapter 9 Architectural, Site Design and Layout Provisions
c. Subchapter 10 Parking, Mobility, and Circulation, except for Pedestrian Mobility and
Bicycle Facilities
d. Subchapter 12 Tree Preservation Standards
e. Subchapter 13 Exterior Lighting Standards
f. Subchapter 15 Subdivision Process
g. Subchapter 20 De_initions
h. Engineering Design Manual
i. Tree Technical Manual
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 91/320
4.5.3 Planned Unit Development (PUD) District
A. Planned Unit Development (PUD) De_ined
This district is synonymous with the previous nomenclature “Alternative Land Use Regulation”
(ALUR) and is intended to encourage unique, well planned comprehensive developments. The
applicant or the City may propose varied or different standards that improve development design
or enable a unique development type not otherwise accommodated in the zoning ordinance while
still maintaining compatibility with existing or allowable future uses of adjacent or nearby
properties.
B. General Intent
A Planned Unit Development (PUD) district is intended to establish a development which mixes
land uses and/or utilizes an innovative design that may not be otherwise achievable through
conventional zoning or subdivision regulations. In order to consider a Planned Unit Development
application, a development shall demonstrate compliance with the following:
1. Land with 20 acres or less shall require consent from the City Council prior to an application
being submitted for a Planned Unit Development.
2. Land use(s) shall be generally consistent with the Comprehensive Plan and sensitive to the
surrounding community. Where a mixed use or center is identi_ied, a mix of housing types,
employment opportunities or commercial services shall be integrated to establish a cohesive
development.
3. Adequate infrastructure shall exist, or expansions proposed with the development to
support the proposed land use(s) for each phase of the development.
4. Development standards and a proposed layout of the development shall be provided to
identify how the proposed development will be created. The City Council may consider minor
deviations from conventional zoning or subdivision regulations when other amenities or
development standards are proposed that exceed the minimum requirements for the land
use(s) as otherwise required by the Uni_ied Development Code.
C. Content Requirements
1. Application and Letter of Request: A letter of request shall provide an understanding of why
a Planned Unit Development is needed for the proposed project and generally why a
conventional zoning district is not feasible. At a minimum, the letter of request should identify
the location, acreage, proposed land uses, density, and provide a comparison of any
deviations or enhancements proposed with the development.
2. Regulating Plan: The intended layout of the subdivision as it pertains to proposed uses,
streets or alleys, lots, utilities, public parks, open space and amenities, streetscape and
landscaping, trails, detention, internal circulation, and parking. The plan shall be of suf_icient
detail to enable a preliminary plan to be established. The plan shall be reproducible in black
and white on an 11”x17” paper size.
3. Development Code: Written development regulations or references to existing zoning and
subdivision requirements to be used to establish the proposed development. The regulations
shall re_lect what is shown on the regulating plan and at a minimum include the following
information:
a. General Regulations per use type:
i. Description per use type
ii. Lot size (width, depth, area)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 92/320
iii. Maximum lot coverage
iv. Building setbacks
v. Maximum building/structure height
b. Street Standards:
i. Description of street type
ii. Street and alley cross sections
iii. Landscaping and irrigation within street cross sections
iv. Street and any pedestrian lighting
c. Architectural Requirements
i. Building materials
ii. Architectural design elements (windows, articulation, etc.)
iii. Examples of building elevations
d. Dedicated public parkland and developer improvements with perpetual private
maintenance.
e. Landscaping, Fencing and Open Space Standards
f. Community amenities and development enhancements exceeding minimum
requirements. Examples may include, but are not limited to:
i. Donation of public facilities such as: schools, libraries, police stations, _ire
stations, or other public facilities as approved by the City Council.
ii. An irrigated, private park owned and maintained by a private entity or HOA, with
amenities such as:
1. A wet pond, fountain, or artwork such as a sculpture garden;
2. Playgrounds with commercial grade equipment, picnic/barbeque areas with
commercial grade equipment; or court games (tennis, volleyball or
basketball) that cover at least 1,000 square feet in area;
3. Plazas, courtyards, or community gardens with irrigation systems and
collars to de_ine garden edges which cover at least 1,000 square feet in
area.
iii. Enhanced landscaping and pedestrian spaces within the development:
1. Privately maintained native deciduous tree plantings in accordance with
Subchapter 11, providing shade, color and interest along vehicle and
pedestrian corridors within the development,
2. Use of engineered soils within privately maintained, native landscaped rain
gardens in accordance with local low impact design practices and as
approved by the City Engineer;
3. Addition of pedestrian lighting, low seating walls and benches along
sidewalks and pedestrian spaces in commercial areas;
4. Integration of brick or similar textured or patterned pavers for crosswalks,
within plazas and similar pedestrian spaces in commercial areas;
5. Other items as approved by the Planning Director.
D. Minor PUD Amendments
1. Minor modi_ications or amendments to the PUD development code or regulating plan may be
approved by the Administrator if the following criteria are met:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 93/320
a. The change is necessary because of natural features of the site that were not foreseen
by the applicant or the City prior to approval of the PUD; or
b. The change will not have the effect of signi_icantly reducing any area of landscaping,
open space, natural area or parking; and
c. The change will not have the effect of increasing the residential density of the
development; and
d. The change, including all cumulative additions or expansions, will not increase the
gross _loor area of any non-residential structure by more than 20 percent; and
e. The change will not result in any structure or vehicle circulation being moved
signi_icantly in any direction; and
f. The change will not reduce any approved setback or the height of any structure by
more than 10 percent; and
g. The change will not have the effect of altering the type or maximum size of signage,
reducing amenities or connectivity, or reducing the quality of materials to be used in
construction; and
h. The change does not result in any signi_icant adverse impacts beyond the site.
2. Where administrative approval is not permitted, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
consider a minor amendment to the PUD, through a formal written request identifying the
proposed modi_ication and any minor changes to the regulating plan or development code
necessary to address the proposed change, and only if the following criteria are met:
a. The amendment maintains the design intent or purpose of the PUD ordinance; and
b. The amendment maintains the quality of design or product established by the PUD
ordinance; and
c. The amendment is not materially detrimental to uses or property in the immediate
vicinity of the proposed change.
E. Major PUD Amendments
1. Major changes shall be all those not determined to be a minor amendment and shall be
approved by City Council.
2. Major PUD amendments shall follow the process for establishing a PUD and shall include a
new application with fee, a written request outlining the proposed changes, an updated
regulating plan and development code, and any other documentation necessary to address
the proposed change
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.5.4 Austin Executive Airport Hazard Overlay District
A. Purpose
The purpose of this overlay district is to minimize hazard and public nuisance associated with the
airport, which is found to serve an essential community purpose, by regulating and restricting the
height of structures and objects of natural growth and otherwise regulating the use of property in
the vicinity of the Austin Executive Airport by creating appropriate zones and boundaries. This
district is necessary in the interest of and to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare.
B. De_initions
As used in these regulations, unless the context otherwise requires:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 94/320
Administrative Agency - An agency so designated by each Political Subdivision under Section
241.031 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, to administer and enforce these
regulations in each Political Subdivision’s respective jurisdiction. The Administrative Agency for
purposes of this Section is deemed to be the Administrator provided under Section 2.6 of this
Chapter.
Airport - Austin Executive Airport located in Travis County, Texas, including the ultimate
development of that facility.
Airport Elevation - The established elevation of the highest point on the runway, either existing or
planned, at the airport measured in feet above mean sea level (MSL). The airport elevation of
Austin Executive Airport is 620 feet above mean sea level (MSL).
Airport Hazard - Any structure, tree, or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the
_light of aircraft or obstructs or interferes with the control, tracking, and/or data acquisition in the
landing, takeoff, or _light at an airport or any installation or facility relating to _light, tracking,
and/or data acquisition of the _light craft; is hazardous to, interferes with, or obstructs such
landing, takeoff, or _light of aircraft; or is hazardous to or interferes with tracking and/or data
acquisition pertaining to _light and _light vehicles.
Approach Surface - A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending
outward and upward from each end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach
zone height limitation slope set forth in Section E of these regulations. In plan, the perimeter of the
approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone.
Approach, Conical, Horizontal, and Transitional Zones - These zones are set forth in Section D of
these regulations and are depicted in Figure 1, below:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 95/320
Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment - The joint board of adjustment created by Section I
of these regulations to administer and enforce these regulations in the areas where the Political
Subdivisions’ Board of Adjustments do not have jurisdiction.
Board of Adjustment - A board of adjustment so designated by each Political Subdivision under
Section 241.032 of the Local Government Code, as amended, to administer and enforce these
regulations in each respective Political Subdivision’s jurisdiction. The City’s Board of Adjustment
established under Section 2.3 of this Chapter is designated as the Board of Adjustments for
purposes of this Section, in accordance with Section 3.13 of this Chapter to the extent not in
con_lict with this Section.
Conical Surface - A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal
surface at a slope of twenty (20) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically for a horizontal
distance of four-thousand (4,000) feet.
Hazard to Air Navigation - An obstruction or use of land determined to have a substantial adverse
effect on the safe and ef_icient utilization of navigable airspace.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 96/320
Height - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in these regulations
and shown on the hazard zoning map, the datum shall be height above mean sea level (MSL)
elevation as measured in feet.
Horizontal Surface - A horizontal plane one-hundred _ifty (150) feet above the established airport
elevation which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone.
Nonconforming Use, Structure, or Tree - Any structure, tree, or use of land which is inconsistent
with the provisions of these regulations and which is existing as of the effective date of these
regulations. This de_inition shall only be applicable to this section of the Code.
Nonprecision Instrument Runway - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities or other equipment that provides only horizontal guidance or area
type navigation equipment. This also includes a runway for which a nonprecision instrument
approach procedure has been approved or planned. Planned Runway 13/34 is considered a
nonprecision instrument runway.
Obstruction - Any structure, tree, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a
limiting height set forth in Section E of these regulations or is an airport hazard. This de_inition
shall only be applicable to this section of the Code.
Other than Utility Runway - A runway designed for and intended to be used by propeller driven
aircraft of more than twelve-thousand _ive-hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and
jet powered aircraft. Runway 13/31 at Austin Executive Airport is considered another than utility
runway.
Person - An individual, _irm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association,
or body politic and includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, administrator, executor, guardian, or
another representative.
Precision Instrument Runway - A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure
utilizing air navigation facilities or other equipment which provide both horizontal and vertical
guidance. This also includes a runway for which a precision instrument approach procedure has
been approved or planned. Runway 13/31 at Austin Executive Airport is considered a precision
instrument runway.
Primary Surface - A 7,400-foot-wide surface longitudinally centered on the runway extending the
full length of the ultimate runway con_iguration plus two hundred (200) feet beyond each ultimate
end of the runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the nearest
point on the existing or ultimate runway centerline.
Runway - A de_ined area on the airport prepared for the landing and taking off of aircraft along its
length. The current length of Runway 13/31 at Austin Executive Airport is 6,025 feet. The length of
the ultimate runway con_iguration of Runway 13/31 at Austin Executive Airport is 7,500 feet. The
length of the ultimate parallel 16/34 is 1,550 feet.
Structure - An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by Person including, but
not limited to, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, poles, earth formations, overhead power
lines, and traverse ways. Traverse ways are considered to be the heights set forth in 14 C.F.R. Part
77.23. This de_inition shall only be applicable to this section of the Code.
Transitional Surfaces - Surfaces extending perpendicular to the runway centerline and the
extended runway centerline outward from the edges of the primary surface and the approach
surfaces at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically to where they
intersect the horizontal surface. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 97/320
surface which extend through and beyond the limits of the conical surface extend at a slope of
seven (7) feet horizontally for each one (1) foot vertically for a distance of _ive-thousand (5,000)
feet measured horizontally from either edge of the approach surface and perpendicular to the
extended runway centerline.
Tree - Any type of _lora or an object of natural growth. This de_inition shall only be applicable to
this section of the Code.
C. Administrative Agency
The Administrative Agency of each Political Subdivision shall be responsible for the administration
and enforcement of the regulations prescribed herein.
D. Zones
In order to carry out the provisions of these regulations, there are hereby created and established
certain zones which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, conical surface,
horizontal surface, and transitional surfaces as they apply to the airport. Such surfaces are shown
on the Austin Executive Airport Hazard Zoning Map prepared by KSA Engineers, dated April 2015,
which is incorporated in and made a part of these regulations. An area located in more than one
of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height
limitation. The various zones are hereby established and de_ined as follows:
1. Approach Zones - Approach zones are hereby established beneath the approach surfaces at
each end of Runway 13/31 at the airport for other than utility runway. The approach surface
shall have an inner edge width of 550 feet, which coincides with the width of the primary
surface, at a distance of two-hundred (200) feet beyond each runway end, widening
thereafter uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet beyond
the end of the primary surface. The centerline of the approach surface is the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.
2. Conical Zone - A conical zone is hereby established beneath the conical surface at the airport
which extends outward from the periphery of the horizontal surface for a horizontal
distance of four-thousand (4,000) feet.
3. Horizontal Zone - A horizontal zone is hereby established beneath the horizontal surface at
the airport which is a plane one-hundred _ifty (150) feet above the established airport
elevation, the perimeter of which is constructed by swinging arcs of ten-thousand (10,000)
feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface and connecting the adjacent
arcs by lines tangent to those arcs.
4. Transitional Zones - Transitional zones are hereby established beneath the transitional
surfaces at the airport. Transitional surfaces, symmetrically located on either side of the
runway, have variable widths as shown on the Austin Executive Airport Height and Hazard
Zoning Map prepared by KSA Engineers, dated April 2015, which is incorporated in and
made a part of these regulations. Transitional surfaces extend outward perpendicular to the
runway centerline and the extended runway centerline from the periphery of the primary
surface and the approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal surface. Where the
precision instrument runway approach surface projects through and beyond the conical
surface, there are hereby established transitional zones beginning at the sides of and at the
same elevation as the approach surface and extending for a horizontal distance of _ivethousand
(5,000) feet as measured perpendicular to the extended runway centerline.
5. Austin Executive Airport Height and Hazard Zoning Map prepared by KSA Engineers, dated
April 2015.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 98/320
E. Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in Section H of these regulations, no structure shall be erected,
altered, or replaced and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by these regulations
to a height in excess of the applicable height limitations herein established for such zone except as
provided in Paragraph 5 of this Section. The Airport Hazard Zones described in this section are
depicted on an airport height and hazard zoning sheet on _ile with the Austin Executive Airport.
Of_icial noti_ication will be provided to each political subdivision if changes are made to the of_icial
Height and Hazard map. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the
zones in question as follows:
1. Approach Zones - Slope one (1) foot in height for each 40 feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
point 50,000 feet beyond the end of the primary surface.
2. Conical Zone - Slopes one (1) foot in height for each twenty (20) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one-hundred _ifty (150) feet above
the airport elevation and extending to a height of three- hundred _ifty (350) feet above the
airport elevation, or to a height of 970 feet above mean sea level.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 99/320
3. Horizontal Zone - Established at one-hundred _ifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, or
at a height of 770 feet above mean sea level.
4. Transitional Zones - Slope one (1) foot in height for each seven (7) feet in horizontal distance
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevations as the primary surface and the approach
surfaces.
5. Excepted Height Limitation – None
F. Land Use Regulations
Except as provided in Section G of these regulations, no use may be made of land or water within
any zone established by these regulations in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communications between the airport and aircraft, make it dif_icult for
pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the
airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create potential bird strike hazards such as,
but not limited to, waste, construction, and demolition land_ills, and new large bodies of water
(localized wetland, ponds, and storm water retention ponds greater than or equal to 1 acre), or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft
intending to use the airport. Localized wetlands, ponds, and retention ponds greater than or equal
to 1 acre will be subject to evaluation by Austin Executive Airport to review and if appropriate,
issue a letter of no objection.
G. Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Trees
1. Nonconforming Uses - Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as requiring
changes in or interference with the continuance of any nonconforming use of land. Existing
nonconforming uses are Lake P_lugerville and 1849 Park water storage and irrigation.
2. Nonconforming Structures - Nothing contained in these regulations shall be construed as to
require the removal, lowering, or other change to any existing nonconforming structure
including all phases or elements of a multiphase structure the construction of which was
begun prior to the effective date of these regulations and is diligently prosecuted.
3. Nonconforming Trees - Nothing in these regulations shall be construed as to require the
removal, lowering, or other change to any nonconforming tree. However, any nonconforming
tree which grows to a greater height than it was as of the effective date of these regulations is
subject to the provisions of these regulations as described in Section E herein above.
H. Permits and Variances
1. Permits - Any person who desires to replace, rebuild, substantially change, or repair a
nonconforming structure or replace or replant a nonconforming tree is required to apply for
a permit. No permit shall be granted which would allow the establishment of an airport
hazard or allow a nonconforming structure or tree to exceed its original height or become a
greater hazard to air navigation than it was at the time of the adoption of these regulations.
Applications for a permit shall be submitted to the Administrative Agency which has
jurisdiction over the permit application.
2. Variances - Any person who desires to erect, substantially change, or increase the height of
any structure or establish or allow the growth of any tree which would exceed the height
limitations set forth in Section E of these regulations or change the use of property in such a
way as to create a hazardous condition as described in Section F of these regulations is
required to apply for a variance with the Joint Board of Adjustment or Board of Adjustment,
as applicable. The application for variance must be accompanied by a determination from the
Federal Aviation Administration under 14 C.F.R. Part 77 as to the effect of the proposal on the
operation of air navigation facilities and the safe, ef_icient use of navigable airspace.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 100/320
Variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of
the regulations will result in practical dif_iculty or unnecessary hardship and the granting of
relief would result in substantial justice, not be contrary to the public interest, and be in
accordance with the spirit of these regulations.
3. Requirements and Reasonable Conditions
a. Any permit granted may, at the discretion of the Administrative Agency, impose a
requirement to allow the installation and maintenance of any markers or lights to
indicate to _lyers the presence of an airport hazard.
b. Any variance granted may at the discretion of the Joint Board of Adjustment or Board
of Adjustment, as applicable, impose any reasonable conditions as may be necessary to
accomplish the purpose of these regulations.
I. Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment
1. The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment is hereby created to administer and
enforce these regulations in the areas not within the jurisdiction of the Political Subdivisions’
Board of Adjustments.
2. The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall:
a. hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Administrative Agency in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations;
b. hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of these regulations when the board is
required to do so; and
c. hear and decide speci_ic variances.
3. The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall be comprised of _ive (5) members
and one alternate member appointed by the Political Subdivisions. The terms for the
members shall be two years. The members shall elect a chairman from one of the members.
The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and
procedure in harmony with the provisions of these regulations. Meetings of the Austin
Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such
times as the Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment may determine. The chairman, or
in his/her absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of
witnesses. All hearings of the Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall be public.
The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings
showing the vote of each member upon each question or if any member is absent or fails to
vote, indicating such fact and shall keep records of its examinations and other of_icial actions,
all of which shall immediately be _iled in the of_ice of the Austin Executive Airport Board of
Adjustment or in the of_ice of appropriate Administrative Agency. All such records shall be
public records.
4. The Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall make written _indings of fact and
conclusions of law stating the facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in
determining special exceptions and variances.
5. The concurring vote of four (4) members of the Austin Executive Airport Board of
Adjustment shall be necessary to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it
is required to pass under these regulations, or to affect any variance to these regulations.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 101/320
6. The Political Subdivision appointing a member to the Austin Executive Airport Board of
Adjustment may remove that member for cause on a written charge after a public hearing. A
Political Subdivision shall _ill any vacancy on the board for the unexpired term for a member
assigned to that Political Subdivision.
7. Austin Executive Airport is the of_icial record keeper of all the Austin Executive Airport Board
of Adjustment _iles and minutes.
J. Appeals
1. A person aggrieved or a taxpayer affected by a decision of an Administrative Agency, or a
Political Subdivision or the Joint Airport Zoning Board that believes the decision of an
Administrative Agency is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal the
decision to a Board of Adjustment or the Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment, as
applicable. For the purpose of Sections J and K of these regulations, the Board of Adjustment
and the Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment are collectively referred to as Board of
Adjustment.
2. All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the
Board of Adjustment by _iling a notice of appeal with the Board of Adjustment and the
appropriate Administrative Agency specifying the grounds for the appeal. The Administrative
Agency shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustment all papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed was taken.
3. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed unless the
Administrative Agency certi_ies in writing to the Board of Adjustment that by reason of the
facts stated in the certi_icate, a stay would, in the opinion of the Administrative Agency, cause
imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by
order of the Board of Adjustment on notice to the administrative agency and on due cause
shown.
4. The Board of Adjustment shall _ix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice
and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing, any party may appear in person, by agent, and/or by attorney.
5. The Board of Adjustment may reverse or af_irm, in whole or in part, or modify the
Administrative Agency’s order, requirement, decision, or determination from which an appeal
is taken and make the correct order, requirement, decision, or determination, and for this
purpose the Board of Adjustment has the same authority as the Administrative Agency. The
concurring vote of four (4) members of the Board of Adjustment shall be necessary to
reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Administrative Agency.
6. The Board of Adjustment shall make written _inding of fact and conclusions of law stating the
facts upon which it relied when making its legal conclusions in reversing, af_irming, or
modifying any order, requirement,decision, or determination which comes before it under
the provisions of these regulations.
K. Judicial Review
A person aggrieved or a taxpayer affected by a decision of a Board of Adjustment or a Political
Subdivision or the Joint Airport Zoning Board that believes the decision of a Board of Adjustment
is illegal may present to a court of record a petition stating that the decision of the Board of
Adjustment is illegal and specifying the grounds of the illegality as provided by and in accordance
with the provisions of Section 241.041 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended. This
same right of appeal is extended to each Administrative Agency.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 102/320
L. Enforcement and Remedies
Each Political Subdivision and the Joint Airport Zoning Board may institute in a court of competent
jurisdiction an action to prevent, restrain, correct, or abate any violation of Chapter 241 of the
Local Government Code, these regulations, or any order or ruling made in connection with their
administration or enforcement of these regulations.
M. Con_licting Regulations
Where there exists a con_lict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed herein and
any other regulation applicable to the same area, whether the con_lict be with respect to the height
of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or
requirement shall control.
N. Severability
If any of the provisions of these regulations or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or application of these
regulations which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end,
the provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable.
O. Adherence with State Laws
Any actions brought forth by any person or taxpayer as a result of the administration,
enforcement, or the contesting these regulations will be in accordance with the provisions of
Chapter 241 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and other applicable State laws.
P. Immunity Clause
No elected or non-elected, person, employee, of_icer, member or agent of political subdivision,
Austin Executive Joint Zoning Board and Austin Executive Airport Board of Adjustment shall have
(a) any personal liability with respect to any of the provisions of this Ordinance, Regulation, or (b)
any liability for any consequential damages resulting from the exercise by political subdivision or
Austin Executive Joint Board of any its duties herein.
4.6 ACCESSORY USES AND STRUCTURES
4.6.1 Accessory Uses
Accessory uses are allowed with permitted uses that have already been built or are under construction
and are subject to the following criteria:
A. The use or structure is subordinate to the primary use and serves the primary use or the principal
structure;
B. The accessory use is subordinate in area, extent and purpose to the primary use served;
C. The accessory use contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of the
primary use;
D. The accessory use shall be located within the same zoning district as the primary use; and
E. Accessory uses located in residential districts shall not be used for commercial purposes other
than ancillary to the permitted home occupations.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.6.2 Accessory Buildings/Structures
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 103/320
Accessory Buildings/Structures are allowed in conjunction with principal structures that have already
been built and are subject to the following criteria:
A. General
1. Accessory buildings, with the exception of carports, may encroach into required yards
according to each zoning districts permitted encroachment allowances.
2. No accessory building may be constructed upon a lot until the construction of the principal
structure has been commenced, unless the accessory building is necessary for the material
storage and construction of the principal structure, and only when approved by the Planning
Director.
3. No accessory building may be used unless the principal structure is also being used, as
permitted in 4.6.2(B).
4. No accessory structure shall exceed the height of the principal structure to which it is accessory.
B. Single-Family and Two-Family Residential Uses
1. A lot being used for residential purposes may have no more than one shed, workshop or similar
type of accessory building per dwelling unit. An unattached garage, carport, and/or an
accessory dwelling unit shall be exempt from the per lot accessory building/structure
calculation.
2. Accessory buildings may not exceed twenty-_ive (25%) percent of the gross _loor area of the
_irst _loor of the principal structure, with exception of accessory dwelling units as otherwise
provided within this Subchapter.
3. Carports are permitted in A, SF-E, SF-S, SF-R, SF-MU, 2-F, and MH zoning districts. If permitted by
right or by an architectural waiver, single-family and two-family residential accessory carports
shall comply with the following standards. Carports structurally integrated into the residence’s
initial building plan and architecturally consistent with the principal structure’s design are
permitted, but must also meet the following standards.
a. Shall contain a paved surface underneath and leading to the carport structure.
b. Shall meet all building setbacks applicable to the principal structure.
c. Pre-fabricated metal carports shall not be permitted.
d. Subject property shall not have any covenants, conditions, or restrictions prohibiting
carports. If such property has such restriction, but allows for exceptions if permitted by
the homeowner’s association architectural review, the Planning Director may consider
such request consistent with the provisions stated herein.
e. Shall consist of similar architectural theme and constructed of materials consistent with
the principal structure, including but not limited to support posts and roo_ing materials.
f. The carport shall be generally located to the side or rear of the principal structure. A
carport shall not be located between the principal structure and the public right-of-way,
unless the carport is architecturally integrated into the overall design of the principal
structure, and only when approved by the Planning Director.
C. Multi-family Uses
1. Accessory carports are permitted when structurally integrated in the principal structure or freestanding
structures with similar architectural materials and design of the principal structure.
Metal roo_ing shall be permitted.
2. Accessory structures shall comply with the architectural standards of the district consistent with
the principal structures.
D. Commercial and Industrial Uses
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 104/320
Accessory carports and accessory structures are permitted and shall comply with the canopy
standards applicable to such zoning districts.
E. Agricultural Uses
Applicable to the Agriculture/ Conservation (A) zoning district and land in the City’s ETJ subject to
non-annexation development agreements pursuant to Section 212.172 and Section 43.035 of the
Texas Local Government Code, accessory carports and accessory structures associated with
agricultural land uses are permitted and may consist of metal or wood.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.6.3 Accessory Dwelling Units
A. Attached Dwelling Units:
1. An attached dwelling unit shall be permitted provided the owner of the principal structure
resides in the principal structure.
2. An attached dwelling unit, including a “casita”, shall be architecturally integrated into the
principal structure with an appearance of one cohesive residence, and maintain the principal
structure building setbacks.
3. In order to maintain an appearance of a single residential structure, exterior entrances
should be limited to a common entryway. Where separate entrances are desired, only one
entry point shall face the public street, with the additional entrance architecturally integrated
into the design of the structure so that the door does not face, or its visibility is minimized,
from view from the public street. Additional access from the attached dwelling unit to the
rear yard shall be permitted, provided it is screened from public view.
4. The _loor area of the attached dwelling unit shall not be greater in size than half of the _irst
_loor’s gross _loor living area of the principal structure.
5. A garage for an accessory dwelling unit shall be located adjacent to the principal structure
garage to provide an appearance of a cohesive garage. At no time shall garages be permitted
on opposite sides of the principal structure unit.
6. An attached dwelling unit shall be considered an extension of a single-family detached
structure and therefore shall be subject to the material and design requirements as required
in Subchapter 9.
B. Detached Dwelling Units:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 105/320
1. A detached dwelling unit shall be permitted provided the owner of the principal structure
resides in the principal structure.
2. A detached dwelling unit shall generally be located behind the rear façade of the principal
structure and comply with the accessory building setback encroachments provided in Section
4.2.4 D. of this Subchapter. A detached dwelling unit, including a detached “casita” may be
considered in front of the principal structure if the unit maintains the principal building
setbacks, is architecturally integrated into the design of the principal structure to appear as
one single residential structure, and is integrated as a component of a private courtyard.
3. A minimum 10-ft building separation shall be provided between the principal structure and a
detached dwelling unit as measured from the footprint of each unit, unless each structure is
connected via a “breezeway” or similar connected roo_line. If the minimum building
separation cannot be met, an alternative _ire protection measure approved by the Building
Of_icial may be considered.
4. At no time shall a detached accessory dwelling unit have a separate water or wastewater
meter, or be allowed to be subdivided from the principal lot. A detached accessory dwelling
unit may be assigned a “Unit B” or similar type of assignment for emergency service
purposes.
5. The detached dwelling unit _loor area shall not be greater in size than half of the _irst _loor’s
gross _loor living area of the principal structure.
6. A detached dwelling unit shall be considered an extension of a single-family detached
structure and therefore designed with a cohesive architectural appearance as the principal
structure, including but not limited to material type, material percentages, and general design.
Nothing provided herein shall exempt the detached dwelling unit from complying with the
material requirements provided in Subchapter 9.1 for a single-family detached structure.
C. Accessory Dwelling Unit in Non-Residential Zoning
One accessory dwelling unit shall be permitted in a nonresidential district, except the General
Industrial (GI), only as required for the conduct or support of the operation of the nonresidential
use such as the provision of custodial or security services, management or other essential service.
The dwelling shall be located in the same building as the primary use and shall not be less than
600 square feet
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 106/320
4.6.4 Home Occupation
A home occupation is that accessory use of a dwelling that constitutes all or some portion of the
livelihood of a person or persons living in the dwelling. Home occupations are subject to the following
limitations:
A. The primary business operations must be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit, with exception
that minor fabrication or incidental storage of materials shall be allowed in an accessory building
or workshop.
B. They must employ only members of the immediate family of a resident of the dwelling unit.
C. They may not have a separate exterior entrance for the business
D. The home occupation shall not generate customer related vehicular traf_ic in excess of three
vehicle trips per twenty four (24) hour day in the residential neighborhood.
E. No equipment or materials associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored
where visible from anywhere off the premises.
F. A home occupation shall not be advertised by any signs on the premises, nor shall the street
address of the home occupation be advertised through signs, billboards, television, radio, or
newspapers.
G. In home day cares must not provide care for more than six children, who are not related by blood
or marriage, or legal wards or foster children of the attendant adult. This use is subject to
regulation by the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory Services.
H. The occupation shall not be a hazard to persons or property and may not produce external noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference or waste run-off outside the
dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling unit.
I. A bed and breakfast is subject to the following additional regulations:
1. A bed and breakfast shall be considered an accessory use to a single-family dwelling, in which
no more than two (2) guests of the bed and breakfast may occupy a guest bedroom on the
property overnight.
2. The bed and breakfast shall be on the same site as an occupied building, maintain a
residential appearance, and be the permanent residence of the proprietor.
3. A guest bedroom, not located within the principal building, shall comply with the accessory
dwelling unit requirements provided within this Subchapter.
4. Each bed and breakfast establishment is permitted to a maximum of four (4) total guest
bedrooms and common bathrooms within the principal building and/or accessory dwelling,
excluding one (1) bedroom for the property owner. .
5. One (1) smoke alarm shall be provided in each guest bedroom along with a _ire extinguisher
visible and be accessible to guests. One (1) smoke alarm shall be provided along the
associated hallway leading to the guest bedroom.
6. Cooking facilities such as a stove, counter-top burner, oven, microwave, hotplate, electrical
griddle, toaster oven, or crock pot are not allowed in individual rooms.
J. Prohibited Home Occupations. The following home occupations are prohibited:
1. Barber, beauty, physical training and other personal services;
2. Animal hospitals, stables or kennels;
3. Dance studios, schools;
4. Mortuaries;
5. Private clubs;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 107/320
6. Repair shops;
7. Restaurants;
8. Automobile paint or repair shops;
9. Doctor, dentist, veterinarian or other medically related of_ice; or
10. Rooming/Boarding House.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.6.5 Outdoor Display and Storage
The following requirements apply to all outdoor display and storage in all nonresidential zoning districts.
The following are not subject to these requirements: personal or recreational automotive sales (new or
used), a _lorist, garden shop, landscape nursery or temporary uses as provided in Subsection 4.7.
A. Outdoor Display
Outdoor display is the display of items actively for sale and shall adhere to the following standards:
1. Outdoor display of merchandise shall not occupy any required parking spaces, landscape
area, pedestrian accessibility or _ire lane.
2. Outdoor display shall not extend into public right-of-way or onto adjacent property and must
be kept within 15 feet of the principal structure.
3. Outdoor display shall be displayed in a neat and orderly manner and maintained in a clean,
litter-free manner.
4. Outdoor display may not be located on the roof of any structure.
5. The outdoor display area shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the square footage of the
principal structure or 500 square feet, whichever is less with the following exceptions:
a. Outdoor home accessory sales are exempt from this requirement.
b. Passenger vehicle rental - Outdoor display of passenger vehicles for rent is
exempt from this requirement. This does not include vehicles used for moving.
c. Moving vehicle rental – Rental of vehicles utilized for moving of goods, personal
or commercial, are limited to a maximum of eight (8) parking spaces.
6. All sales of such merchandise shall be consummated indoors, and no cash register or
package-wrapping counter shall be located outdoors.
7. The maximum height of merchandise shall not exceed four (4) feet with the exception of
vehicle rental.
8. Outdoor display is not required to be screened.
9. Automotive parts and accessories shall not remain outdoors for more than 12 consecutive
hours or will otherwise be required to follow the standards for outdoor storage.
B. Outdoor Storage
Outdoor storage is the storage of products or goods on a temporary to permanent basis.
Passenger vehicle rental is exempt from these requirements. All other uses providing outdoor
storage shall adhere to the following standards:
1. Outdoor storage areas are allowed for the purpose of storing goods for a nonresidential
enterprise. All outdoor storage areas shall meet each required district building setback lines.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 108/320
2. The location of outdoor storage areas shall be limited to the side or rear of the primary
structure to which the facility belongs and a minimum 4' from the principal building. At no
point shall materials be located in front of any portion of the principal building.
3. A six (6) foot masonry wall is required to screen outdoor storage when the property is
located adjacent to property zoned more restrictive than the subject site, or when the storage
is visible from a public right of way. This requirement is in addition to the requirements of
Subchapter 11, except where there is con_lict this provision controls.
4. Outdoor storage shall be prohibited on the roofs of structures.
5. The outdoor storage area shall not encroach upon the required off-street parking,
pedestrian access, _ire lanes and maneuvering areas of the site,
6. The outdoor storage area is limited to a maximum 1% of the square footage of the principal
structure or tenant space, whichever is less, within of_ice, retail, commercial zoning districts
and the Campus Industrial (CI) district with the following exceptions:
a. Mini storage facilities which may provide for outside storage of vehicles
(automobiles and recreational vehicles) are limited to a maximum area of 25% of
the square footage of all structures on site, if the aforementioned screening is
provided.
b. Accessory use of vehicle storage is exempt from the limitation on area as long as
all other provisions for outdoor storage are met. For example, trucks utilizing for
moving, _leet vehicles or vehicles receiving auto repair.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.7 TEMPORARY USES
The temporary uses below are allowed which require certain controls in order to ensure compatibility
with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. The particular temporary
uses permitted are:
A. Garage Sales
B. Temporary sales of seasonal products
Temporary sales of seasonal products may be allowed subject to the following provisions:
1. Issuance of permits for temporary outdoor sales of seasonal products shall be limited to
areas with a base zoning of R, GB-1, GB-2, CL-4 and CL-5 or any public or place of worship
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 109/320
property.
2. Proposed operations shall be subject to approval by a temporary permit issued by the
Planning Director with a maximum duration of 45 consecutive days per calendar year with
the exception of shaved ice operations which are limited to 120 days per calendar year.
3. Shade structures, seating, trash receptacles and similar associated appurtenances shall be
provided, but not be located within or cause interference with required parking spaces,
driveways, alleys, _ire lanes, public roads or sidewalks.
4. During hours of operation, the permit holder shall be responsible for providing a trash
receptacle for use by customers and shall ensure the area is kept clear of litter and debris at
all times.
5. A drive thru shall not be permitted.
6. Signage must be provided in accordance with Chapter 154.
7. With exception of white or colored string lights, exterior lighting shall be downcast and
shielded so that the light source is not directly visible to passersby.
8. The operation shall be generally self-suf_icient with regards to water, sewer and electricity.
Temporary connections to potable water and sanitary sewer are prohibited. Electricity shall
be from a generator or an approved electrical outlet via an approved portable cord that is in
conformance with the Electrical Code as adopted by the City.
9. Off street parking must be provided on an improved surface and must not utilize more than 5
percent of the required spaces for any permanent businesses located on site.
10. Health permits and any other applicable county, state or federal permits shall be prominently
displayed at all times.
11. Unless otherwise said within, approval of a temporary permit for said operation shall not
exempt the use or permit holder from all applicable City ordinances including, but not limited
to nuisance, noise, signage, lighting, etc.
12. The application for a temporary use shall also display a true copy of the sales tax permit
required by state law which designates the point of sale. If the City is not the designated
point of sale for sales tax purposes, such information shall be noted on the application.
13. All tents or similar temporary structures that are greater than 10’x10’, 100 square feet or
greater or are enclosed shall be approved by the _ire marshal, prior to erection and
inspected once constructed.
14. When approved by the Planning Director, a temporary permit may be issued for a food
vendor when associated with an approved temporary event. The owner of the property on
which a temporary food vendor is located must apply for and obtain a temporary use permit
prior to the temporary food vendor commencing the preparation or sale of any food on the
property.
15. Sales of Christmas trees may not begin prior to November 15th and must be cleaned and
vacated by January 1st.
16. A general site plan is required with an application showing the following:
a. Adequate parking
b. Site location
c. Improved parking and driveway surfaces and must not interfere with the parking
required for the existing retail or commercial use.
17. This provision does not apply to temporary outdoor services such as mobile blood banks,
mammography screening, eye screening, or similar medical services.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 110/320
C. Religious revival tents
1. All tents or similar temporary structures that are greater than 10’x10’, 100 square feet or
greater or are enclosed shall be approved by the _ire marshal, prior to erection and
inspected once constructed.
2. The location of the tent must be approved by the Planning Department prior to erection.
D. Temporary buildings and equipment for uses incidental to construction
Temporary buildings and equipment for uses incidental to construction work on premises are
permitted in any zone but shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment of construction
work. None shall be located on any public street or public right-of-way at any time during
construction.
E. Temporary facilities for manufacturing concrete or concrete products
Temporary facilities for manufacturing concrete or concrete products may be located in any zoning
districts where they are directly associated with construction in the area. Retail sales of concrete
products shall be prohibited in conjunction with temporary concrete plants. The production site
must be returned to its preconstruction state following completion of the associated project.
F. Farmers’ Markets
Temporary outdoor sales of products in an unre_ined state, by a State Certi_ied farmers’ market
may be operated for a maximum of two days per week and are permitted with the following
provisions:
1. Farmers markets shall be permitted on public properties and civic spaces approved by the
Administrator, and private property within the A, CL4, or CL5 Districts, and
2. Private property in zoning districts within the Downtown District Overlay that allow for retail
sales as a permitted use.
3. The market is not required to be located within a paved parking lot but should be accessible
to a paved parking lot for use by visitors of the market. When located within a paved parking
lot, the market shall not occupy more than 10 percent of the required number of parking
spaces on private property. The market may not be located within drive aisles, _ire lanes or
parking setbacks, and in no case shall the market be located within the public right-of-way.
4. The market must comply with Chapter 154 Signs of the City Code.
5. The market must be approved by the City prior to location or sales.
G. Temporary Residential Sales Of_ices and Model Homes
The following regulations shall apply to the conduct of temporary residential sales of_ices and
model homes within residential zoning districts:
1. Temporary residential sales of_ices and model homes may be located within a residential
district as part of an ongoing residential development; however, they shall only be located on
the periphery of a subdivision or at the entrance to a subdivision.
2. Temporary residential sales of_ices, not otherwise serving as a model home, are not subject
to design standards of this Chapter.
3. Must be either a model home or temporary structure that will operate for a period of time
determined by the operator and the Administrator.
4. Any temporary residential sales of_ice or model home shall be removed or converted to a
use permitted within the district when certi_icates of occupancy have been issued to 95
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 111/320
percent of the associated residential units or when use as a sales of_ice or model home has
ceased whichever is earlier.
5. Model homes for new subdivisions shall only be occupied for residential habitation after all
business activities have ceased and upon sale of the home.
H. Nonpro_it Seasonal Fundraisers
Nonpro_it seasonal fundraisers are intended for local nonpro_it, locally recognized charitable
groups to conduct seasonal fundraisers with the following provisions:
1. This article shall apply to only seasonal or periodic fundraisers conducted by nonpro_it or
charitable institutions. At least eighty (80) percent of the net proceeds from each fundraiser
must go directly to the nonpro_it group or charitable cause represented. Examples of
fundraiser events permitted under this article are pumpkin sales, booster club carwashes,
and public school sponsored concessions.
2. Solicitation in the public right-of-way, including street medians, is prohibited.
3. The sale of used clothing and/or accessories, used furniture, used household and/or
sporting goods is prohibited except for place of worship or school sponsored events located
and managed at the school or place of worship location that is bene_iting from the proceeds.
4. A permit issued by the city building inspection department shall be required for any
nonpro_it charitable fundraiser selling/handling onsite prepared food to ensure the health,
safety and welfare of the volunteers and of the public. These provisions do not apply to the
sale of prepackaged, sealed food(s) (example, Girl Scout cookies). Any sponsor or
organization making application for permit approval to conduct a fundraiser shall submit a
written application for a permit that shall include:
a. The name and address of the applicant.
b. The application shall show satisfactory written proof of the applicant’s authority to
represent the organization or sponsor the applicant represents.
c. The name and address of the sponsor or organization represented by the applicant.
d. The kinds of goods to be sold or services to be offered at the event.
e. The dates and times of the event.
f. The location of the event and the traf_ic access and circulation planned.
g. Evidence that the required conditions of this article have been met.
5. Any fundraiser shall provide evidence to the city, upon request, that the following regulations
have been met:
a. Written permission from the property owner for the dates, times, and activities
approved by the owner to be conducted on the premises.
b. A temporary access barrier is provided when necessary to prohibit pedestrian or
vehicular traf_ic from imposing on any adjacent residential uses and approved by the
_ire marshal.
6. Nonpro_it festivals shall provide the following site facilities for the duration of the event:
a. Adequate, available off-street parking.
b. A safe access driveway and traf_ic circulation plan approved by the Planning
Department.
c. Electrical permits, plumbing permits, sign permits, and other permits as applicable that
are required by code.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 112/320
d. Health permits (food handlers), any other county, state, or federal permits are
prominently displayed.
e. Bathroom facilities for employees/volunteers.
f. Handicapped accessibility compliance when applicable.
I. Commercial Amusement: Commercial Amusement uses/activities may be allowed subject to the
following provisions:
Issuance of permits for temporary commercial amusement shall be limited to areas zoned for retail
or commercial uses or any public or place of worship property.
1. Proposed operations shall be subject to approval by a temporary permit issued by the
Planning Director with a maximum duration of 14 consecutive days per event. A one-time
extension of 14 days may be granted by the Planning Director.
2. Shade structures, seating, trash receptacles and similar associated appurtenances shall not
be located within or cause interference with required parking spaces, driveways, alleys, _ire
lanes, public roads or sidewalks.
3. During hours of operation, the permit holder shall be responsible for providing a trash
receptacle for use by customers and shall ensure the area is kept clear of litter and debris at
all times.
4. Signage must be provided in accordance with Chapter 154.
5. Exterior lighting shall be downcast and shielded so that the light source is not directly visible
to passersby.
6. The operation shall be generally self-suf_icient with regards to water, sewer and electricity.
Temporary connections to potable water and sanitary sewer are prohibited. Electricity shall
be from a generator or an approved electrical outlet via an approved portable cord that is in
conformance with the electrical code as adopted by the City.
7. Off street parking must be provided on an improved surface approved by the Administrator,
and must not utilize the required spaces for any permanent businesses located on site.
8. Health permits and any other applicable county, state or federal permits shall be prominently
displayed at all times.
9. Unless otherwise said within, approval of a temporary permit for said operation shall not
exempt the use or permit holder from all applicable City ordinances including, but not limited
to nuisance, noise, signage, lighting, etc.
10. All tents or similar temporary structures that are greater than 10’x10’, 100 square feet or
greater or are enclosed shall be approved by the _ire marshal, prior to erection and
inspected once constructed.
11. The owner of the property on which a temporary food vendor is located must apply for and
obtain a temporary use permit prior to the temporary food vendor commencing the
preparation or sale of any food on the property.
12. A general site plan is required with an application showing the following:
a. Parking suf_icient for the proposed amusement as well as any existing permanent use
on site
b. Site location and layout
c. Improved parking and driveway surfaces and must not interfere with the parking
required for the existing retail or commercial use.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 113/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.8 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES (WTF)
A. General Conditions of Use
1. Wireless telecommunication facilities (WTF) are limited to freestanding monopoles, selfenclosed
monopoles, stealth and attached WTFs to existing buildings or structures.
2. All WTFs above 75’ shall be structurally designed for the co-location of multiple carrier
antenna arrays.
3. All new construction of WTF monopoles exceeding seventy-_ive (75) feet in height shall be
screened, around the base of the pole and related appurtenances, with a masonry wall of a
height no less than six (6) feet.
4. The new construction of freestanding monopoles and stealth facilities shall follow the site
development and building permit processes.
5. Unless authorized by a speci_ic use permit, all wireless telecommunication facilities in the City
Limits, where permitted by right with land use conditions in the applicable zoning district,
shall conform to the provisions stated herein.
B. Collocations
1. The collocation of antennas on existing, legal non-conforming wireless telecommunication
facilities shall not be considered an expansion of a non-conforming use, structure, or site as
de_ined in Subchapter 6, provided the expansion of the WTF does not increase the height of
the tower for which it is situated.
2. Provided the collocation of antennas does not increase the height of the tower for which it is
situated or require additional structural engineered support at the base of the tower that
substantially change its physical dimensions, the co-location of antennas on existing WTF
towers shall not require a site development permit or building permit.
3. If attached directly to the vertical side(s) of a building or structure other than a monopole,
the attached WTF antennas and related appurtenances shall be painted to blend in with the
structure for which it is attached.
C. Setback and Heights
1. Any WTF equal to or less than _ifty (50) feet in height shall have a minimum setback from the
right-of-way equal to the height of the tower.
2. In General Business 1 (GB1) and General Business 2 (GB2) zoning districts, wireless
telecommunication facilities may not exceed seventy-_ive (75) feet in height and have a
minimum setback from any single-family residentially zoned property line or conforming
single-family use, and arterial and freeway rights-of-way, a minimum distance equal to three
(3x) times the maximum height of the tower, unless otherwise permitted by a speci_ic use
permit.
3. In Agricultural/Conservation (A), General Industrial (GI), Light Industrial (LI), Campus
Industrial (CI), Corridor Urban Level 4 (CL4), and Corridor Urban Center Level 5 (CL5)
zoning districts, WTFs may extend to a height of not more than one hundred _ifty (150) feet
in height, provided the monopole tower is setback from any single-family residentially zoned
property line or conforming single-family use, and arterial and freeway rights-of-way a
minimum distance equal to three (3x) times the maximum height of the tower, unless
otherwise permitted by a speci_ic use permit.
4. Any attached WTF on a roof of an existing building shall not exceed _ifteen (15) feet in height
above the top plate of the building.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 114/320
5. Setbacks from roadways shall be measured from the edge of the right-of-way to the base of
the pole. Setback distances shall not apply to antenna attachments to building rooftops, water
utility tanks or other existing vertical infrastructure.
D. Prohibitions - The following are prohibited or restricted within the City Limits:
1. Interference with City and public safety communication systems and/or area television or
radio broadcast;
2. Lattice towers
3. Advertising signage is prohibited, with the exception of the minimum signage required by the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations or necessary for the operation of
WTF.
4. The use of guy wires are prohibited unless utilized in conjunction with an attached WTF to an
existing building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.9MOBILE FOOD VENDOR (MFV)
A. Mobile Food Vendors (MFV) shall only be permitted in approved Mobile Food Parks (MFP) as
provided within this Subchapter, with exception to the following:
1. Temporary shaved ice establishments, as otherwise permitted within this Subchapter;
2. Temporary vendors permitted by the City of P_lugerville for park concessions or at a
temporary event;
3. Neighborhood “ice cream truck” vendor meeting the following standards:
a. Retail sales of only pre-wrapped or prepackaged ice cream, frozen yogurt, frozen
custard, or similar frozen dessert products.
b. No ice cream truck shall stop for the purpose of making sales for more than 15 minutes
in a single location.
c. An ice cream vendor in a motor vehicle shall pull as far as practicable to the right side
of traf_ic when stopping for the purpose of making sales and shall operate four-way
_lashers when so stopped. In no event shall an ice cream vendor stopped for the
purpose of making sales prevent the passage of other motor vehicles on the rights of
way.
d. Each ice cream vendor shall provide a rubbish receptacle for use of its customers.
Prior to leaving each stop, the operator shall remove any litter left at the stop by
customers.
e. Ice cream vendors may stop for the purpose of making sales only between the hours of
11:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. Monday – Sunday.
f. Use of sound to encourage patronage shall be subject to and comply with noise
requirements outlined in Chapter 94 of the Code of Ordinances. Use of a horn to
encourage patronage shall be prohibited and considered a nuisance.
B. The following shall be applicable to all MFVs:
1. Operators shall have a valid food establishment permit and must be annually permitted
through the City of P_lugerville. They shall operate from a permitted commissary for food
preparation, storage, and disposal.
2. Operators shall comply with all applicable requirements from the City, County, and State
including, but not limited to the Texas Food Establishment Rules, and sales tax requirements.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 115/320
3. A MFV utilizing sound to encourage patronage shall be subject to and comply with noise
requirements outlined in Chapter 94 of the Code of Ordinances. Use of a horn by a MFV
however to encourage patronage shall be prohibited and considered a nuisance.
4. At no time shall a MFV conduct door to door sales. Solicitation for advertising purposes shall
be subject to Chapter 111 of the Code of Ordinances.
5. Nothing written herein shall prevent a MFV from obtaining necessary permits when
participating in a temporary event, and nothing written herein shall supersede another
section of the Code of Ordinances.
6. All MFV vehicles shall clearly identify the business name and a valid contact telephone
number on both sides of the vehicle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
4.10 MOBILE FOOD PARK (MFP)
A Mobile Food Park (MFP) is permitted as outlined in Tables 4.3.2 and 4.4.2, and subject to the following
standards and limitations:
A. Mobile Food Parks Generally
1. A MFP shall be allowed to remain open during times that the Texas Alcohol Beverage Control
permits on-premise sale or service of alcoholic beverages. At no point shall an MFP remain
open for 24-hours.
2. The standards and limitations in this section are in addition to all other applicable standards
within the Code of Ordinances. Any applicable standards not expressly detailed in this section
shall apply.
3. If a MFP is proposed on a site that requires a new utility connection or if a permanent
structure is being constructed, the property must be platted pursuant to Subchapter 15.
4. The commercial design standards in Subchapter 9 of this Code shall apply to any permanent
structure on the site. These standards do not apply to any food truck and/or trailer.
B. Distance Requirements
With exception of the Downtown District, no MFP shall be located within 200 feet of a conforming
single-family residential dwelling unit, or _ifty (50) feet of a restaurant establishment that is
operating out of a permanent structure. The distances shall be measured as a buffer distance from
the proposed MFP property lot lines.
C. Site Dimensional Standards
1. The number of MFV spaces allowed on a site shall be calculated at one (1) vendor space per
1,000 square feet of lot space. The minimum number of vendor spaces shall be two (2). The
maximum number of vendor spaces allowed on any site shall be limited to ten (10), except
that a request may be made to the Planning Director to approve an alternative number of
vendors spaces. Vendor spaces do not need to be occupied at all times, but they must be
shown and designed during the site plan process.
2. Only one (1) MFV is permitted to occupy each vendor space on a site. The maximum number
of MFVs allowed on a site is ten (10), unless the Planning Director approves an alternative
number to coincide with the alternative number of approved vendor spaces.
3. No MFV, permanent structures, or seating areas shall be located within the required building
setbacks of the applicable zoning district.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 116/320
4. There shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet of separation between each individual MFV, and a
minimum of twenty (20) feet of separation between any MFV and a permanent on-site
structure.
5. A MFV shall remain outside of a required _ire lane, be located a minimum of 3’ from any site
_ire hydrant and shall not block access to a Fire Department Connection (FDC).
6. A MFP shall establish suite numbers for each MFV space for locating and record keeping
requirements.
7. No vehicle drive-through services shall be permitted within a MFP.
8. During hours of operation, each MFV shall be responsible for providing a trash receptacle
for use by customers and shall ensure the area is kept clear of litter and debris at all times. A
common dumpster may be provided within the MFP if the dumpster is screened in
accordance with Subchapter 11 and is in an approvable location.
9. Nothing herein shall prohibit a MFP from establishing or utilizing a permanent structure for
indoor seating, entertainment venue, or similar purposes provided the structures comply
with all applicable requirements, including but not limited to building and _ire department
requirements.
10. With exception of the Downtown District, a MFP shall obtain vehicle access from a collector
or arterial street.
D. Site Design Standards
1. A detailed site plan shall be required for the approval of a mobile food park. At a minimum,
the site plan must show the location of, and detail, the following items:
a. Each Mobile Food Vendor with appropriate separation distances;
b. Outdoor grills, fryers, or smoker pad sites;
c. Utility connections, including electric, gas, water, and sewer;
d. On-site lighting;
e. Activity areas, including playground, movie screen, stage or similar areas;
f. Restrooms and hand washing facilities;
g. Designated customer seating areas;
h. ADA access to parking, vendors, and restrooms;
i. Proposed parking areas including on-site and off-site spaces;
j. Fire lanes and apparatus routes;
k. Dumpsters and service vehicle access for waste removal, moving vendor trailers, etc.
2. Access to a MFP shall be through a single, all weather surface driveway directly connected to
a public street, with a maximum driveway width of 35 feet. Where on-site parking is
proposed near a driveway, a minimum throat distance of 50 feet shall be provided unless
otherwise reduced by the City Engineer.
3. All mobile food vendors, outdoor fryers, grills, and smokers shall be placed on an approved
all-weather surface and identi_ied on the site plan.
4. Venues for live music, art performances, movies or similar activities shall be subject to the
provisions provided herein, with the proposed location identi_ied on the site plan.
5. In order to improve safety, individual electrical generators shall be prohibited. All electrical
services necessary to serve a MFV or MFP shall be provided through permanent on-site
connections. Aerial electrical line extensions shall be prohibited.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 117/320
6. A MFP shall be designed with individual electric connections installed at each MFV space.
Individual electric service outlets with lockable connection boxes shall be installed at each
space through approved underground utility line extensions.
7. Where individual propane tanks will be utilized, a valid invoice from a Certi_ied Master
Plumber indicating an annual pressure test has been successfully completed shall be
provided for each MFV. In lieu of individual tanks, a centralized propane tank may be
considered within an MFP if the Planning Director and Fire Department approve the location,
and it is designed to provide individual service to all MFV spaces through underground
extensions.
8. Customer seating shall be provided at a minimum rate of four (4) seats per individual vendor,
and may be grouped within the MFP. Seating areas may be located within a permanent
building or under a shade structure, provided said building or structure meets all minimum
building and _ire code requirements. Where outdoor seating is proposed, the surface shall
consist of turf grass, crushed granite, pavement, mulch, or other improved surface, as
approved by the Planning Director.
9. Use of temporary tents shall require individual approval from the Fire Department.
10. Nothing provided herein shall exempt or preclude compliance with all other provisions of
the Code of Ordinances, International Building Code, or other requirements (e.g. Fire
Department) to protect health, safety and general welfare.
E. Lighting
On-site lighting shall be provided within a MFP and shall be in accordance with Subchapter 13, with
exception that string lights shall be permitted throughout a MFC when a colored or warm white
light is utilized. String lights shall adhere to the UL standards and shall not be placed in a manner
which would establish a safety issue.
F. Parking
1. The required number of off-street parking spaces shall be calculated at a rate of two (2)
parking spaces per Mobile Food Vendor, provided however that an alternate parking plan
may be completed pursuant to Subchapter 10. In the Downtown District, spaces in the right
of way within 200 feet of the site, or surface lots within 400 feet of the site may be used in
obtaining the required spaces. Where right of way parking within 200 feet of the site is not
currently provided, but could be established to meet the minimum required parking spaces
for a MFP, those spaces shall be constructed with the mobile food park.
2. If the MFP site plan identi_ies available space on-site for employees and/or towing vehicles to
park, then the Planning Director may approve a reduced number of required parking spaces.
3. All patron vehicular parking shall be provided on an all-weather surface as approved by the
Planning Director.
G. Signage
1. One (1) monument sign shall be permitted for the entrance to the site. This sign shall comply
with all applicable City requirements.
2. Each mobile food vendor within a MFP may have signs mounted to their vehicle and/or
trailer. All vehicle and trailer signage shall be mounted _lush to the outside surface of the
vehicle.
3. Each mobile food vendor within a MFP may have one (1) “A-frame” sign, not to exceed three
(3) feet in height, immediately adjacent to their vehicle for the purpose of displaying a menu
or special advertisement.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 118/320
4. If the MFP is located within any special zoning district, additional standards may apply
pursuant to the requirements of that zoning district.
H. Restroom facilities
1. Each MFP shall provide facilities to accommodate for a minimum of two (2) restrooms.
Where portable restroom facilities are utilized, said facilities shall be professionally cleaned a
minimum of three times per week. Preference is given to self-contained, portable restroom
facilities constructed within an enclosed cargo trailer or similar. Other temporary portable
restroom facilities may be considered by the Planning Director.
2. The restroom facilities should be equipped with hand washing facilities, or at a minimum,
hand sanitation stations shall be provided at the restroom facility and throughout the MFP.
I. Venues
1. Playgrounds, movie areas, stages for musical or art performances, or similar are encouraged
within a MFP. Said areas shall be oriented away from neighboring uses to reduce noise and
light, and potential nuisance.
2. Nothing stated herein shall exempt the venue from complying with Chapter 94 of the Code of
Ordinances.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 5 RESERVED
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 6 RESERVED
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 7 RESERVED
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 8. NON-CONFORMING USES AND SITES.
8.1 GENERAL
8.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Subchapter is to regulate the cessation, continuation, maintenance, improvement,
modification, replacement and termination of uses, lots, structures, and sites that do not conform to this
Code.
8.1.2 Authority
The provisions of this Chapter are adopted pursuant to Texas Local Government Code Chapters 43, 211
and 212 and the City Charter.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 119/320
8.1.3 Applicability
The provisions of this Subchapter 8 shall be applicable to any use, lot, structure, and site within the City
and ETJ that is not compliant with this Code.
8.1.4 Nonconforming Status
A. The following are types of nonconforming situations for which nonconforming status shall be
determined:
1. Nonconforming Uses;
2. Nonconforming Lots;
3. Nonconforming Structures; and
4. Nonconforming Sites.
B. Determination of Nonconforming Status. The Planning Director shall make determinations of
nonconforming status. The Planning Director's determination may be appealed to the Board of
Adjustment in accordance with Subchapter 3 of this Code.
C. Legal Nonconforming Status
1. A structure, lot, site, or use which was lawfully in existence, constructed, or located on the
effective date of this Code or was legally constructed to meet previous requirements of this
Code and has been in regular and continuous use, but which does not conform to the current
requirements of this Code, shall be granted legal nonconforming status, except as specifically
exempted or prohibited by other sections of this Subchapter. A legal nonconforming
structure, lot, site, or use may remain or continue, subsequent to the effective date of this
Code, provided that such continuance is in accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter
and all other applicable provisions of the City Code.
2. The violation of any of the following provisions may cause the Planning Director to terminate
the legal right to operate such nonconforming structure, lot, site, or use, subject to appeal to
the Board of Adjustment pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code:
a. Constructing, maintaining or operating a use conducted in or associated with a building
or structure erected without a permit from the City
b. Operating a use or occupying a building or structure without a valid certificate of
occupancy from the City;
c. Operating a use in violation of a valid certificate of occupancy;
d. Unlawful expansion of a nonconforming use, lot, site, or structure;
e. Any other violation of this Code as determined by the Planning Director.
8.1.5 PROVIDING A LEGAL NONCONFORMITY
It shall be the property owner's responsibility to provide information and documents to the City
establishing the nonconforming status of the owner's property.
8.1.6 Illegal Nonconforming Status
A structure, lot, site, or use that is in violation of the requirements of this Code and was constructed or
established since the adoption of this Code without the necessary approvals, permits, or authorizations
from the City is considered illegal nonconforming. In addition, a structure, lot, site, or use that was
constructed or established at any time prior to the adoption of this Code that was not in compliance with
the then applicable regulations is considered illegal nonconforming. The owner and/or operator of an
illegal nonconforming structure, lot, site, or use shall be subject to actions and penalties allowed by this
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 120/320
Code and all other applicable City ordinances and shall be required to correct the nonconforming
situation to come into conformance with all applicable standards and regulations of this Code.
8.1.7 Change of Ownership
The lawful change of ownership of property in which there is a nonconforming situation without any
change in the nonconforming situation shall not cause the loss of legal nonconforming status.
8.1.8 Reversal Prohibited
Once a nonconforming use, structure, site, or lot has been changed to conform to the provisions of this
Code or to more nearly conform to the provisions of this Code, the use, structure, site, or lot shall not
thereafter be changed so as to be nonconforming again.
8.1.9 Legal Nonconforming Status for Newly Annexed Territory
After annexation of an area: (1) a person may continue to use the land in the newly annexed area in the
same manner in which the land was used on the date annexation proceedings were instituted if the land
use was legal at the time; or (2) a person may begin to use land in the area in the manner that was
planned for the land before the 90th day before the effective date of the annexation if: (a) on or more
licenses, certi_icates, permits, approval, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were
required by law for the planned land use; and (b) a completed application for the initial authorization
was _iled with the governmental entity before the date of the annexation proceedings were instituted.
The following regulations apply to newly annexed territories:
1. Regulations related to the location of sexually oriented business;
2. Regulations related to preventing imminent destruction of property or injury to persons;
3. Regulations related to public nuisances;
4. Regulations related to _lood control;
5. Regulations related to the storage and use of hazardous substances; and
6. Regulations related to the sale and use of _ireworks.
After the 20th anniversary of the date of the annexation of an area that includes a permanent retail
structure (1) which is more than 5,000 square feet and (2) was authorized under State law to be used
for the indoor seasonal sale of retail goods, a person shall not continue the use of the structure for the
indoor seasonal sale of retail goods.
8.1.10 Exemptions
A. Residential Structures.
Any residential dwelling or dwelling unit that meets the conditions for legal nonconforming status
as set forth in Section 8.1.4 of this Subchapter shall be exempt from any and all of the restrictions,
limitations and conditions contained in Subsections 8.2 and 8.4 and 8.5 of this Subchapter
concerning nonconforming uses and nonconforming buildings. Such nonconforming use shall
continue until the use is abandoned as de_ined by Section 8.1.11 of this Subchapter. If, at any point,
the nonconforming residential use is converted to a commercial use, it may not revert to a
residential use except upon a zoning reclassi_ication, as provided for by Subchapter 3 of this Code.
B. Prior Construction Plans.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of
a building legally under construction or for which a permit for construction had been issued
before the effective date of this Code. Construction may be completed in accordance with the terms
of the permits, so long as those permits were validly issued and remain unrevoked and unexpired.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 121/320
C. Prior Undeveloped Site Plans.
Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the plans and subsequent construction of a
site subject to an approved and valid, but undeveloped, site plan approved before the effective
date of this Code. Construction may commence in accordance with the terms of the site plan and
any required permits, so long as those permits were validly issued and remain unrevoked and
unexpired. If a site plan has expired or, in the case of a phased site plan, the construction of
subsequent phases has not commenced prior to expiration, this exemption shall not be applicable.
D. Prior Approval Granted.
Structures, lots, and sites that are nonconforming due to prior variance, administrative waiver, or
other approval shall not be subject to the provisions of this Subchapter to the extent of such
variance, administrative waiver or other approval, but shall conform to the terms and processes of
their approval.
E. Governmental Acquisition of Property.
A lawful structure, lot, site, or use that is made noncompliant regarding any requirement of this
Code due to the acquisition of property by eminent domain, dedication, or purchase by a city,
county, state, or federal agency shall be deemed legally nonconforming. Such exemption shall apply
only to noncompliance that is a direct result of the acquisition.
F. Accessory Structures for Agricultural Purposes.
The provisions of this Subchapter shall not prevent the repair, restoration, replacement, or
construction of accessory structures necessary for or directly related to agricultural purposes on a
site zoned as Agricultural/Development Reserve (A), including, but not limited to, barns, shelters,
sheds, or other structures. A second dwelling unit in an Agricultural/Development Reserve district
shall not be considered an accessory structure for the purposes of this provision.
8.1.11 Abandonment of a Nonconforming Situation
A. Effect of Abandonment
Abandonment of a legal nonconforming situation shall result in the loss of the existing legal
nonconforming status previously granted. All use of the premises shall cease and any future use of
the premises may only occur as provided for in this Subchapter.
B. Determination of Abandonment
1. A legal nonconforming use shall be considered abandoned after the nonconforming use has
been out of use for a period of six (6) months or more.
2. A legal nonconforming structure shall be considered abandoned after the structure has been
vacant for a period of six (6) months or more.
3. A legal nonconforming site shall be considered abandoned after the site has been vacant for
a period of six (6) months.
4. Occurrence of one or more of the following situations shall be evidence of vacancy or lack of
occupancy for the purposes of determining abandonment, when the intention of the owner
to discontinue the use is apparent:
a. The building, structure, activity or land has been unoccupied or out of use;
b. One or more utility accounts have been discontinued;
c. Utility meters are removed;
d. Taxes are delinquent on the property;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 122/320
e. The site or structure has not been maintained;
f. The unit has not been made available for occupancy;
g. The characteristic equipment and furnishings of a nonconforming use have been
removed from the premises; or
h. A nonconforming use has been replaced by a conforming use.
5. All of the buildings, activities, and operations maintained on a lot are generally to be
considered as a whole for the purposes of determining abandonment. A multi-tenant site,
building or shopping center shall be considered occupied for the purposes of this
Subchapter, provided it remains at least 30% occupied. The failure to rent one space in a
nonconforming building or on a nonconforming site shall not result in a loss of the right to
rent space thereafter so long as the building or site as a whole is continuously maintained
and at least 30% of the units remain rented.
6. The time period for determining abandonment shall exclude any period of discontinuance of
use caused by government actions impeding access to the premises without any contributing
cause by the owner of the legal nonconforming use, site, or structure.
8.1.12 Variance Not Precluded
Nothing within this Subchapter precludes the application for, or approval, of a variance meeting the
standards for such under Subchapter 3 of this Code.
8.1.13 Application of Legal Nonconforming Use, Structure, Lot, or Site
The owner of a commercial or industrial nonconforming use, structure, lot, or site shall register such
nonconforming use, structure, lot or site with the City by _iling an application for registration of legal
nonconforming status. The application shall contain the following items.
A. General
The application may be made by, or on behalf of, the owner by any person, _irm, corporation or
other entity which has a legal or equitable interest in the nonconforming use, site, lot, or structure.
Applications shall include a disclosure of the complete ownership of the land and/or structure and
shall be in such form and require the furnishing of such information and representation as are
needed to show the following:
1. That the use, structure, lot, or site was lawfully established prior to the effective date of this
Code.
2. That the use, structure, lot or site has been continuously maintained since it was established.
3. That the use, structure, lot, or site has not been abandoned.
B. Denial of Legal Nonconforming Status
The Planning Director may deny any application if it appears that the documents relied thereon are
not valid, or that the documents produced do not show the existence of a prior nonconformity in
accordance with the criteria set forth in subsection A., immediately above. The applicant may
appeal this determination to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with Subchapter 3 of this
Code.
C. Amendment of Legal Nonconformity Certi_icate
At any time after the City certi_ies a legal nonconformity, upon application to the Planning
Department and with the written consent of the owner affected thereby, a Legal Nonconformity
Certi_icate may be amended to indicate changes in ownership. A copy of each certi_icate shall be
returned to the owner and a copy _iled among the records of the Planning Department. The
Planning Director shall accept and _ile all tendered certi_icates within the permitted time period
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 123/320
outlined within Section 8.1.13 D, but the acceptance of such certi_icates shall not constitute an
authorization to operate an unlawful use or structure. The _iling of a false application with the
department shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
D. Time Period for Registering Nonconformities
The owner of a use, structure, lot, or site which is rendered nonconforming as a result of the
adoption of this Code shall have one (1) year from the effective date of this Code to register such
nonconformity. The owner of a use, structure or site which is rendered nonconforming as a result
of a city-initiated rezoning project or in newly annexed territory, subsequent to the adoption of this
Code is permitted one (1) year after the effective date of the rezoning to register such
nonconformity. Provided, however, that after the time periods prescribed above, nonconforming
rights may be established only upon submission by the owner of suf_icient evidence for the
Planning Director to _ind that the nonconformity existed prior to the date of rezoning and was in
legal compliance with all applicable laws.
E. When Registration Not Required
It is not required to register a use, structure or site that is made nonconforming by any
governmental action other than annexation or rezoning, including condemnation.
F. Vesting
It is the responsibility of the applicant to inform the Administrator if vesting is claimed in
accordance with Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code. The Administrator may attempt
to inform the applicant if a situation is able to vest to a previously adopted Uni_ied Development
Code. Notwithstanding anything in this Code to the contrary, vesting shall be determined in
accordance with Chapter 245 of the Texas Local Government Code and other applicable law.
8.1.14 Termination of Nonconforming Situation
The right to operate or maintain a legal nonconforming situation may be terminated by the
Administrator in accordance with the provisions of this Subchapter. The determination by the
Administrator may be appealed to the Board of Adjustment in accordance with the provisions
of Subchapter 3 of this Code.
Any appeal of the termination by the Board of Adjustment of nonconforming rights under this
Subchapter shall be made to a court of competent jurisdiction within 10 days of receipt of written notice
of the termination by the Board of Adjustment.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
8.2 NONCONFORMING USES
8.2.1 Nonconforming Uses Generally
A. A nonconforming use is one that is not permitted within the zoning district assigned to the
property upon which the use is located.
B. In addition, a use located in a zoning district in which it could lawfully locate with the approval of a
speci_ic use permit but lacking such a permit or a use allowed with land use conditions per
Subchapter 4 that does not conform to such conditions shall also be considered nonconforming.
C. Nonconforming uses lawfully existing and located on the property on the effective date of this
Code shall be considered legal nonconforming uses.
8.2.2 Elimination of Nonconforming Use Status
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 124/320
The owner of a nonconforming use may employ the following mechanisms in an attempt to eliminate the
nonconformity:
A. Replace the nonconforming use with a conforming use;
B. Rezone to a district where the use is permitted by right;
C. Obtain a speci_ic use permit, provided the use is listed as one that would be allowed in the zoning
district with a speci_ic use permit;
D. Comply with the applicable land use conditions, provided that the primary land use is listed as one
that is allowed in the zoning district subject to conditions set forth in Subchapter 4; or
E. Obtain a special exception from the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, if
the special exception is allowed by this Code and would make the use legal non-conforming.
8.2.3 Change of Use
A. A nonconforming use may be replaced by the same use provided that use has not been
abandoned. A change of use occurs when the current use of a site or structure is replaced with a
use that is not listed as the same use in the land use tables in Subchapter 4.
B. The Board of Adjustment may approve the change of a nonconforming use to a new
nonconforming use as a special exception pursuant to Subchapter 3 and this section of the Code.
1. In order to approve a special exception under this section the Board of Adjustment must _ind
that the degree of negative impact of the proposed nonconforming use to the surrounding
area is less than the degree of negative impact of the existing nonconforming use.
Speci_ically, the Board of Adjustment must _ind all of the following:
a. The noise that will be generated by the proposed use shall be less than the noise
generated by the existing nonconforming use.
b. If the nonconforming use is in a residential district with the exception of
multifamily zoning, the traf_ic generated by the proposed nonconforming use
shall be less than the traf_ic generated by the existing nonconforming use.
c. The light pollution generated by the proposed nonconforming use shall be less
than or equal to the light pollution generated by the existing nonconforming use.
d. The proposed nonconforming use is more compatible with the existing and
future use of land in the surrounding area than is the existing nonconforming
use.
2. In order to better assure that the degree of negative impact of the proposed non-conforming
use to the surrounding area is less than the degree of negative impact of the existing nonconforming
use the Board of Adjustment may impose the following requirements:
a. Set hours and day of operation;
b. Limit the square footage occupied;
c. Specify minimum/maximum off-street parking required;
d. Specify requirements to reduce noise and light pollution; and
e. Require nonconforming site design elements to be brought into compliance with
this Code.
3. In granting a special exception under this section, the Board of Adjustment shall issue an
order memorializing its _inding and requirements. The order shall be non-severable.
C. In no event may a change of use occur that would allow a use that would increase the degree or
intensity of nonconformity or result in the expansion of any existing nonconforming situation or
the creation of any new nonconforming situation.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 125/320
8.2.4 Abandonment of Nonconforming Use
In the event a nonconforming use is determined to be abandoned, the structure or site shall thereafter
only be occupied in accordance with the provisions of this Code. See Section 8.1.11 of this Subchapter
for the time frame for the determination of abandonment.
8.2.5 Expansion of a Nonconforming Use
A. A legal nonconforming use shall not be expanded, enlarged, or increased.
B. A legal nonconforming use shall be considered enlarged, expanded, or increased if there is:
1. An increase square footage of the building housing the nonconforming use;
2. An expansion of the square footage occupied by a nonconforming use within an existing
building;
3. Occupation of a greater portion of the tract on which the use is located;
4. Construction of additional buildings associated with the nonconforming use; or
5. An increase the scope, volume, or intensity of the use in a signi_icant way.
8.2.6 Destruction or Damage of Structure Housing Nonconforming Use
A. Natural or Accidental Causes
1. Whenever the structure in which a legal nonconforming use is housed, operated, or
maintained is damaged or destroyed by natural or accidental causes to the extent of more
than _ifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the structure on the date of the damage,
the right to operate such nonconforming use shall cease unless a special exception is granted
by the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code.
2. In the event that a structure in which a legal nonconforming use is housed, operated, or
maintained is partially damaged or destroyed by natural or accidental causes, such that the
damage does not exceed _ifty percent (50%) of the appraised value of the structure on the
date of the damage, the nonconforming use shall be allowed to continue and the structure
may be repaired or restored upon issuance of a building permit by the Building Of_icial.
3. Permitting for any allowed reconstruction of the structure must thereafter commence within
six (6) months of the damaging event and reconstruction shall be completed, as determined
by issuance of a certificate of occupancy, within one (1) year of the event. The timeframes
herein may be extended for good cause as proven to the Planning Director, provided there is
no adverse effect on the community.
4. A structure restored under this section must be restored or reconstructed so as to have no
greater gross floor area, building footprint or height as the damaged or destroyed structure
and shall be constructed in accordance with the current architectural standards of the
respective zoning for which the use located. The property owner has the burden of proof to
establish the dimensions of the structure immediately prior to the damage or destruction.
5. The value of the structure and the percent value lost due to any destruction shall be
determined according to the appraised value.
B. Intentional Destruction
A legal nonconforming use terminates when the structure housing the nonconforming use is
destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or his agent.
8.2.7 Nonconforming Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
Additional telecommunications antennae and necessary equipment may be attached to a preexisting
nonconforming telecommunications tower provided the addition causes no expansion of the footprint or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 126/320
height of the tower and meets the requirements of Subchapter 4 of this Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
8.3 NONCONFORMING LOTS
8.3.1 Nonconforming Lots Generally
A nonconforming lot is a lot of record that does not meet the minimum area or dimensional
requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. Those nonconforming lots lawfully existing
on the effective date or applicability of this Code or subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered
legal nonconforming lots.
8.3.2 Use of a Legal Nonconforming Lot
A legal nonconforming lot may continue to exist indefinitely and may be developed and used as if it were
a conforming lot, provided the proposed use is permitted and all development standards of the
applicable zoning district of this Code are met. This provision does not preclude a landowner from
seeking a variance or other exception from zoning requirements under other sections of this Code.
8.3.3 Elimination of Nonconforming Lot Status
The owner of a nonconforming lot may employ the following mechanisms in an attempt to eliminate the
nonconformity.
A. Combine the lot with an adjacent property to conform to current standards;
B. Apply for a subdivision waiver, pursuant to Subchapter 15 of this Code, to allow the lot as is; or
C. Rezone to a district where the lot would conform.
8.3.4 No New Division
No new division of any legal nonconforming lot or parcel shall be made that (1) increases the level of
existing nonconformity; (2) leaves any lot, parcel, or remnant with width or area below the requirements
stated in this Code; or (3) creates any new nonconforming situation.
8.3.5 Illegal Nonconforming Lot
It is a violation of this Subchapter to create or subdivide a nonconforming lot.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
8.4 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
8.4.1 Nonconforming Structures Generally
A nonconforming structure is one that does not meet the setbacks, height limitations, material
requirements, or architectural articulation as required by this Code. Those nonconforming structures
lawfully constructed and existing on the effective date of this Code shall be considered legal
nonconforming structures. For the purposes of this section, the term structure means anything
constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something located on the ground, except
signs, and includes buildings, telecommunications towers, utility improvements and sheds. These
provisions shall be applicable to all structures regardless of whether they are deemed principal or
accessory. Nonconforming signs are governed pursuant to Chapter 154 of the Code of Ordinances.
8.4.2 Elimination of Nonconforming Structure Status
The owner of a nonconforming structure may employ the following mechanisms in an attempt to
eliminate the nonconformity.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 127/320
A. Modify the structure to conform to current standards;
B. Apply for a variance, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, to allow the structure as built; or
C. Rezone to a district where the structure would conform.
8.4.3 Repair and Maintenance
A legally nonconforming structure shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable codes in effect
when the building was constructed or as deemed necessary by the Building Of_icial for the general safety
and welfare of the occupant and the public. The repairs required by the Building Of_icial shall not be
construed as to allow an addition to or expansion of a nonconforming structure. Except as otherwise
expressly provided for in this Subchapter, no repair or maintenance may result in the expansion of any
existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity.
8.4.4 Unsafe Situations
A. Nothing in this Subchapter shall be construed to prohibit the strengthening or repair of any part of
any nonconforming structure declared unsafe by the Building Of_icial, unless such repairs exceed
_ifty percent (50%) of the value of the structure. In such case the right to operate, occupy or
maintain such structure may be terminated by action of the Board of Adjustment and such
structure shall be demolished. The value of the structure and the percent value lost due to any
destruction shall be determined by the most recent appraisal value.
B. Nothing in this Subchapter shall be construed to permit the continued use of a building or
structure found to be in violation of building, basic life safety, or health codes of the City. The right
to continue any nonconformity shall be subject to all applicable housing, building, health, and
other life safety codes.
8.4.5 Abandonment of a Nonconforming Structure
In the event a nonconforming structure is determined to be abandoned, the structure shall be modified
to conform to all applicable requirements of this Code. A variance may be granted by the Board of
Adjustment pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, or an architectural waiver granted by the
Administrator if it is determined that conformance with all requirements of this Code will cause the
expansion or creation of another nonconformity, or where it is determined that all provisions of this
Code cannot be reasonably met. Refer to Section 8.1.11 of this Subchapter for the time frame for the
determination of abandonment.
8.4.6 Interior Alterations to a Legal Nonconforming Structure
Interior remodeling of a legally nonconforming structure is allowed and will not result in loss of legal
nonconforming status regardless of the cost or extent of the interior remodel, as long as no exterior
remodeling is involved. If exterior alteration in conjunction with interior remodeling is involved, loss of
legal nonconforming status will be determined pursuant to the provisions set forth in this Subchapter
related to such alteration.
8.4.7 Movement of a Nonconforming Structure
A nonconforming building or structure must not be moved in whole or in part to any other location on
the lot, or on any other lot, unless every portion of such building or structure is made to conform to all
the regulations of the district, except as authorized by a variance or architectural waiver pursuant to
Subchapter 3 of this Code.
8.4.8 Expansion of a Nonconforming Structure
A. A legal nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged up to _ifty percent (50%) of its size,
provided the use is permitted by right within the respective district, the expansion is in accordance
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 128/320
with the architectural and building height requirements, and there are no further encroachments
into the required building setbacks established in Subchapter 4. If the expansion is equal to or less
than two hundred (200) square feet, the Planning Director may allow for a deviation in
architectural building materials in order to maintain architectural consistency.
B. A legal nonconforming structure may be expanded or enlarged in excess of _ifty percent (50%) of
its size provided that all provisions of this Code shall be applicable to the existing structure or
structures as well as any new construction on the lot or parcel. For the existing structure, where it
is determined that all provisions of this Code cannot be reasonably met or conformance with all
requirements of this Code will cause the expansion or creation of another nonconformity, the
applicant may request approval of a variance by the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Subchapter
3 of this Code. Any expansion or enlargement under this section is subject to applicable setback
requirements in place at the time of the expansion or enlargement, regardless of encroachment of
the existing legal nonconforming structure into the applicable setback area.
C. For purposes of determining the expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming structure, the
square footage of all previous expansions under this section shall be cumulative and the square
footage of the original structure shall be the original size for purposes of the calculation.
D. All expansion or enlargement of structures under this section shall be in compliance with all
applicable regulations of the zoning district in which such structure is located. In no event may the
expansion or enlargement result in the increase of any existing nonconformity or the creation of
any new nonconformity.
8.4.9 Destruction or Damage of a Nonconforming Structure
A. Natural or Accidental Causes
1. A legal nonconforming structure, which is damaged or destroyed by natural or accidental
causes, may only be reconstructed as it was before such happening within the timelines
herein.
2. Permitting for reconstruction of such structure must thereafter commence within six (6)
months of the damaging event and reconstruction shall be completed, as determined by
issuance of a certificate of occupancy, within one (1) year of the damaging event. The
timeframes herein may be extended for good cause as proven to the Planning Director,
provided there is no adverse effect on the community.
3. A structure restored under this section must be restored or reconstructed so as to have no
greater gross floor area, building footprint, or height as the damaged or destroyed structure.
B. Intentional Destruction
A nonconforming structure which is damaged or destroyed by the intentional act of the owner or
his agent may not be restored or reconstructed as it was before such happening.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
8.5 NONCONFORMING SITES
8.5.1 Nonconforming Sites Generally
A nonconforming site is one where one or more existing site improvements, including but not limited to
parking areas, sidewalks and landscaping, do not conform to one or more of the regulations of this Code
applicable to the property. Those nonconforming sites lawfully existing on the effective date of this
Code shall be considered legal nonconforming sites.
8.5.2 Elimination of Nonconforming Site Status
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 129/320
The owner of a nonconforming site may employ the following mechanisms in an attempt to eliminate the
nonconformity.
A. Modify the site to conform to current standards;
B. Apply for a variance, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, to allow the site to remain as built;
C. Apply for an administrative waiver, where applicable; or
D. Rezone to a district where the site would conform.
8.5.3 Repair and Maintenance
A legally nonconforming site shall be maintained in accordance with the codes in effect when the site was
constructed or as deemed necessary by the Planning Director for the general safety and welfare of the
occupant and the public. Any repairs or maintenance required by the Planning Director shall not be
construed as to allow an addition to or expansion of a nonconforming site. Except as otherwise provided
for in this Subchapter; no repair or maintenance may result in the expansion of any existing
nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity. Maintenance of a site includes maintenance of
landscaping, pavement, lighting, and detention ponds.
8.5.4 Continuation of a Legal Nonconforming Site
A change in the tenant of a legal nonconforming site may cause the site to lose its legal nonconforming
status based on the following provisions. For the continuation of the existing legal nonconforming site,
where it is determined that all provisions of this Code cannot be reasonably met or conformance with all
requirements of this Code will cause the expansion or creation of another nonconformity, the applicant
may request an administrative waiver from the Planning Director. The applicant may appeal the Planning
Director’s determination by requesting a variance from the Board of Adjustment or administrative
waiver pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, where applicable.
A. Tenant with Same Use
A change in tenant of a legal nonconforming site to a tenant with the same use, as listed in the land
use tables in Chapter 4, is permitted without any required changes to the nonconforming site;
provided the restrictions below are met.
1. The use shall not increase the amount of impervious cover, the amount of outside storage, or
the amount of space for outdoor business operations previously existing,
2. The average daily vehicle trips generated by the new use shall be less than or equal to the
previous use.
3. The use shall not produce more noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare, or smoke than the
previous use.
4. The site shall be maintained and in conformance with any site plan or regulations in effect
when the site was established or last improved. This includes the replacement of any dead
plants or trees, the restriping of parking spaces, and the repaving of deteriorated pavement.
5. The use shall meet all limitations or requirements of Chapter 4 for such use without
alteration to the site.
2. Tenant with Similar or Less Intense Use
A change in tenant of a legal nonconforming site to a tenant with a similar or less intense use as the
previous tenant may be allowed without any required changes to a nonconforming site; provided
the restrictions below are met.
1. The new use shall have a parking requirement less than or equal to the previous use.
2. The new use shall not increase the amount of outside storage or activities previously existing.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 130/320
3. The average daily vehicle trips generated by the new use shall be less than or equal to the
previous use.
4. The new use shall not produce more noise, vibration, dust, odor, fumes, glare, or smoke than
the previous use.
5. The site shall be maintained and in conformance with any site plan or regulations in effect
when the site was established or last improved. This includes, but is not limited to, the
replacement of any dead plants or trees, the re-striping of parking spaces, and the repaving
of deteriorated pavement.
6. The new use shall meet all limitations or requirements of Chapter 4 for such use without
alteration to the site.
C. Tenant with More Intense Use
Any change in tenant that does not meet the provisions of the preceding categories shall be
determined to be a change in use. A change in tenant of a legal nonconforming site to a tenant with
a different use as the previous tenant shall be governed under the provisions of Section 8.5.5
Abandonment of a Non-conforming Site in terms of the required site improvements prior to a
certi_icate of occupancy.
8.5.5 Abandonment of a Nonconforming Site
In the event a nonconforming site is determined to be abandoned, the site shall be altered to conform to
all applicable requirements of this Code, as outlined below, upon re-occupancy. However, a variance may
be granted by the Board of Adjustment, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, if it is determined that
conformance with all requirements of this Code will cause the expansion or creation of another
nonconformity or where it is determined that all provisions of this Code cannot be reasonably met. Refer
to Section 8.1.11 of this Chapter for the time frame for the determination of abandonment.
A. Parking and Parking Lot Design
An abandoned site shall be altered to provide parking numbers and parking lot design in
conformance with the following.
1. All required parking spaces for the subject use must be provided. Construction of additional
required parking spaces shall be in conformance with Subchapter 10 of this Code. If the
additional spaces required cannot be met on site, the applicant may request the requirement
be met off-site pursuant to Subchapter 10 of this Code.
2. All deteriorated pavement, as determined by the City Engineer, must be repaved in
accordance with this Code, and the Engineering Design Manual, as applicable.
3. All existing parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be re-striped to be in conformance
with the dimensional requirements of Subchapter 10 of this Code.
4. Those nonconforming parking spaces that have direct access to public right-of-way shall be
removed and those spaces replaced elsewhere on the site if those spaces are necessary to
meet the minimum parking requirements. This provision does not apply to any on-street
parking spaces otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
B. Driveways
An abandoned site containing driveways not conforming to the number, spacing, or width
requirements of this Code shall be altered to be in conformance with such. Nothing herein shall be
construed as to require the removal of all driveway access to a property.
C. Landscaping
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 131/320
An abandoned site shall be altered to conform to all applicable streetscape yard landscaping,
bufferyards, and screening requirements of Subchapter 11 of this Code. Any area on site that is
available for landscaping shall be so utilized to meet these requirements. When the City grants
permission, the owner or operator of the site may also use areas within the public right-of-way to
satisfy landscape planting requirements provided that such landscaping does not con_lict with
existing or proposed utilities. Where landscaping in accordance with the provisions of Subchapter
11 of this Code cannot be reasonably met, the applicant may request the Planning Director
consider an alternative plan that meets the intent of the requirements.
D. Land Use Conditions of Subchapter 4
The abandoned site shall be altered to conform to all applicable land use conditions established in
Subchapter 4 of this Code for the new use.
E. Sidewalks
An abandoned site that does not have sidewalks in conformance with Subchapter 10 of this Code
shall be altered to include such.
F. Incidental Site Features
All incidental nonconforming site features including fences, dumpster enclosures, and exterior
lighting must be altered to conform to the provisions of this Code.
8.5.6 Process for Review of Required Improvements
Site improvements that are required to meet the provisions of this Code shall be reviewed pursuant to
the site development process detailed in Subchapter 3 of this Code.
8.5.7 Expansion of a Nonconforming Site
A. Providing that all new site improvements are constructed and installed in accordance with the
provisions of this Code, a legal nonconforming site may only be expanded or enlarged upon
approval of a waiver by the Administrator pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code, except if
required by City ordinance, State law or federal law.
B. For the expansion or enlargement of the existing legal nonconforming site, where it is determined
that all provisions of this Code cannot be reasonably met or conformance with all requirements of
this Code will cause the expansion or creation of another nonconformity, the applicant may
request approval of a waiver by the Administrator, pursuant to Subchapter 3 of this Code.
C. A legal nonconforming site shall be considered enlarged or expanded by the following:
1. Occupying a greater portion of the tract;
2. Construction of additional buildings; or
3. Construction of any additional improvements on a portion of the tract that was not
previously developed.
D. For purposes of determining the expansion or enlargement of a nonconforming site, the square
footage of all previous expansions under this section shall be cumulative and the square footage of
the original site shall be the initial size for purposes of the calculation.
E. All expansion or enlargement of sites under this section must be in compliance with all applicable
regulations of this Code. In no event may the expansion or enlargement result in the increase of
any existing nonconformity or the creation of any new nonconformity.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
8.6. RESIDENTIAL EXEMPTION FROM NON-CONFORMING STATUS.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 132/320
Any residential dwelling or dwelling unit which meets the conditions for nonconforming status as set
forth in subsection 8.1. of this Subchapter shall be exempt from any and all of the restrictions, limitations
and conditions contained in Subsection 8.2, 8.3, 8.4 and 8.5 of this Subchapter concerning
nonconforming uses and/or nonconforming buildings.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 9. ARCHITECTURAL, SITE DESIGN & LAYOUT
PROVISIONS
The purpose of site development requirements are to provide speci_ic standards for the design,
articulation, amenities, and materials required for structures based on the type of use proposed and/or
the zoning district in which they are constructed.
9.1. RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS – SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED AND
DUPLEX/TWO-FAMILY STRUCTURES
9.1.1 Applicability
The architectural standards in this section are applicable to all detached residential structures that have
a form of a single-family detached, duplex, or two-family residential structure, regardless of zoning
district, and unless otherwise exempted per Local Government Code Section 211.016.
Development standards speci_ically addressed in existing Planned Unit Developments (PUD) formerly
known as Alternative Land Use Regulations (ALUR), or development agreements, adopted prior to the
adoption date of this Subchapter shall prevail, unless not otherwise speci_ied.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.1.2 Materials Required
A. Materials Required for the A, SF-E, SF-S, SF-R Zoning Districts:
1. The outside wall area of the _irst story of any dwelling unit shall have a minimum of 75 percent
masonry construction consisting of brick, ledge stone, _ield stone, stucco, or any other native
type of stone veneer. The front and both sides of any such dwelling shall be 100 percent
masonry construction, with the exception of a covered entryway, boxed windows and bay
windows, which may be of wood or cementitious material as approved by the Administrator.
Additionally, dormers, gable ends and facade walls above the _irst _loor may be made of
cementitious material (as approved by the Administrator), provided it is installed as horizontal
lap siding or vertical board-and-batten.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 133/320
2. The front and side walls of an addition to the _irst story of a dwelling unit shall have a
percentage of masonry construction equivalent to that of the front and side walls of the
existing dwelling: provided, however, that the side wall of an addition to the rear of the
residential dwelling unit is not required to have an equivalent percentage of masonry
construction to that of the nearest existing side wall if an inset is created that is two feet or
more. If the inset is two feet or less, and when an inset in the side wall occurs on the back
corner of the residential dwelling unit, the wall projecting from the back wall and parallel
with the side wall shall consist of masonry.
B. Materials Required for the SF-MU, 2-F, MF-10, MF-20 and Corridor Zoning Districts:
1. One hundred (100%) percent masonry is required on all facades with the exception of the
secondary and accent materials. All dwellings shall incorporate the masonry building
materials listed in Table 9.1.2. The percent calculations shall be based on total exterior walls,
excluding openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.1.2 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay brick
Natural stone
Cultured stone, cast stone or natural stone panels
100% (unless secondary or
accent materials are utilized
then the primary masonry
materials may be reduced to
minimum of 60%)
Secondary Masonry
Stucco (Stucco may be considered a primary masonry material if the
architectural design includes 100% tile roo_ing)
Architecturally _inished poured concrete
Cementitious material installed as horizontal lap siding or vertical
board-and-batten (as approved by the Administrator)
Maximum 40%
Accent Materials
Wood
Corrugated metal or other types of metal as approved by the
Administrator
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 20%
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 134/320
9.1.3 Architectural Details for A, SF-E, SF-S, SF-R SF-MU, 2-F, MF-10, MF-20 and Corridor Zoning
Districts, detached residential uses
A. General Criteria
1. Covered rear patios or decks of a minimum of one-hundred square feet (100 SF) are
required on all _loor plans.
2. All windows and doors not bordered by masonry shall have trim.
3. Trim, door and window design elements are encouraged on all sides and on all stories of the
dwelling in order to provide continuity throughout the structure.
4. Second-story window and door locations are encouraged to be offset from dwelling to
dwelling to protect privacy.
5. Front doors and windows shall be provided along the primary façade and oriented to face
the public street.
6. Dwellings are encouraged to be aligned on an east-west axis so that the long side of the
building faces north and south while the short ends face east and west. When the long sides
of a building face south or west, windows located along those sides are encouraged to be
externally shaded through the use of extended roof overhangs, building projections, window
recesses or similar structural means to assist in minimizing summer solar admission and
improving passive cooling. Buildings are encouraged to be designed to maximize photovoltaic
potential.
B. Elevation Differentiation
A proposed dwelling unit within two lots on the same or opposite side of the street shall differ
from another dwelling unit in at least three (3) of the six (6) criteria listed below, unless the
dwelling units differ with respect to the number of full stories, in which case one (1) criterion from
the list below in addition to the number of full stories shall be different.
1. Building materials
2. Building material color
3. The proposed dwelling unit is served by a different type or size garage as set forth in
subsections a. through d. below.
a. Front-load garage;
b. Side entry garage;
c. Detached garage;
d. Angled garage
4. The proposed dwelling unit differs in the number of full stories as set forth in subsections a.
or b. below:
a. Single story; or
b. Two story
5. The proposed dwelling unit has a different roof type as set forth in subsections a. through d.
below.
a. Gable;
b. Hip;
c. Combination of both;
d. Roof types a, b or c with the longest ridge rotated 90 degrees
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 135/320
6. The proposed dwelling unit has variation in the articulation of the front facade as set forth in
a. through c. below.
a. Garage setback from the front facade of at least four feet;
b. Covered, open walled porch of at least six (6) feet in depth extending at least one-third
of the entire width of the front facade; or
c. Other articulation of the front facade at least four feet in depth, extending at least onethird
of the width of the front facade
9.1.4 Dwellings on Arterial and Collector Roadways
A. General Criteria
1. Single-family detached, duplex and two-family dwellings should be designed to back up to an
arterial or major collector roadway. Where a dwelling is proposed to front onto or face an
arterial or major collector street, the garage shall be located behind the front façade with
vehicular access from a rear alley or private drive. An alternative means to prevent vehicles
from backing onto the roadways may also be considered by the Planning Director.
2. Where dwelling units back up to arterial or collector streets or open spaces, the roo_line
shall be broken up with at least one of the following:
a. Multiple parallel roof elevations where the main ridge constitutes no more than 25
percent of the roo_line;
b. Directional changes of roo_line where the main direction constitutes no more than 50
percent of the roo_line; or
c. Dormers or other building projections
B. Perimeter fencing for a residential subdivision with dwellings backing up to an arterial or collector
roadway may be provided if in accordance with the fencing requirements outlined in Subchapter
11, and when located within the landscape lots required by Subchapter 15.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.2. RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS- SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED (3 OR
MORE); TOWNHOME & CONDOMINIUM
9.2.1 Applicability
In addition to the conditions provided in Subchapter 4, the architectural standards in this section are
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 136/320
applicable to all zoning districts where single-family attached residential structures with three (3) or
more attached units are permitted, and in any other district where residential structures are allowed
with conditions or designed in a form commonly known as a “townhome” or “row house” with not less
than three (3) and no more than six (6) attached units.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.2.2 Materials Required
All single-family attached residential dwellings with three (3) or more dwelling units shall be designed as
a “row house” and are encouraged to utilize at least two (2) masonry building materials listed below in
Table 9.2.2. One hundred percent (100%) masonry is required on all facades with the exception of the
permitted accent materials. The percent calculations shall be based on total exterior walls, excluding
openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.2.2 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay Brick
Natural Stone
Cultured stone, cast stone or natural stone panels
100% (unless secondary or
accent materials are utilized
then the primary masonry
materials may be reduced to a
minimum of 60%)
Secondary Masonry
Stucco
Architecturally _inished poured concrete
Cementitious material installed as horizontal lap siding or vertical
board-and-batten (as approved by the Administrator)
Maximum 40%
Accent Materials
Wood
Corrugated metal or other types of metal as approved by the
Administrator
Other materials as approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 20%
9.2.3 Architectural Details
All single family attached products shall be subject to the design elements listed below. The term
“primary façade” shall apply to all facades facing a public street, public or private park, or any major
drive aisle.
Table 9.2.3 Single Family Attached (3 or more) Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Roof Pitch
Pitch roof – minimum 6:12
Flat roof – require parapet screening
Shed roof, porch roof and arcade roofs – minimum 2:12
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 137/320
Table 9.2.3 Single Family Attached (3 or more) Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Permitted Roof Materials
Asphalt shingles
Standing seam metal
Tile
Roof Articulation (excluding _lat
roofs)
2 Elements from the following:
2 roof materials
Masonry chimneys
Dormers along public facades (1/20’)
Eaves that overhang a minimum of 24” with a minimum fascia depth
of 8"Three or more roof slope planes per primary façade
Building Articulation
(applicable to each unit per
building)
Primary façades of each dwelling unit shall be designed to have at least one
vertical and horizontal wall projection or recess to provide variation and
interest throughout the building. Projections or recesses shall be designed with
at least one foot of relief and should be used to create shade and cast shadows
on the façade.
Transparency (windows and
doors)
The primary facade shall have at least 3 full size windows. Windows should be
designed to be operable and allow for cross ventilation.
Window and Door Treatment Trim shall be provided to accent all windows and doors appropriate to style of
structure.
Window Articulation
(applicable to overall building,
not per unit)
All primary façades of a building containing a dwelling unit entry shall include
at least one of the following window articulation elements per building:
Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony (accessible for single units)
minimum 2’ deep
Trellis
Shed roof awning
20” projection
Bay window
Bow window
Transom windows
Arched windows
Gable windows
Shutters
Decorative stone or brick band
Façade Repetition
Each dwelling unit within a single structure shall be designed to have distinct
architectural characteristics which visually separate it from the other dwelling
units in the structure and may include differing materials.
Top Floor Articulation When a _lat roof is utilized, a distinctive _inish, consisting of a cornice, banding
or other architectural termination shall be provided.
Building and Entry Orientation
All buildings shall be oriented so that each dwelling unit shall have its main
pedestrian entrance fronting onto a public street, a common open space with a
landscaped courtyard, or a private street if part of a condominium project. All
buildings and units near an arterial or collector level public street shall be
oriented and have the primary facade front and face the public street. At no
time shall dwelling units front a parking lot. A pedestrian pathway shall
connect all building entrances to a public sidewalk.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 138/320
Table 9.2.3 Single Family Attached (3 or more) Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Solar Orientation and Passive
Cooling
Buildings are encouraged to be aligned on an east-west axis so that the long
side of the building faces north and south while the short ends face east to
west. When the long sides of a building face south or west, windows located
along those sides are encouraged to be externally shaded through the use of
extended roof overhangs, building projections, window recesses or similar
structural means to assist in minimizing summer solar admission and
improving passive cooling. Buildings are encouraged to be designed to
maximize photovoltaic potential.
Entry Articulation
Entry shall be covered or inset with distinct architectural detail such as: a
covered, open walled porch, portico, arcade, or other similar element. Covered,
open walled porches shall have at least six (6) feet in depth extending at least
one-third of the entire width of the front façade of the dwelling unit.
9.2.4 Parking and Garage Requirements
Parking shall be provided in accordance with Subchapter 10 and garages shall be designed to the
following requirements:
Table 9.2.4 Parking and Garage Requirements
Design Element Standard
Garage Required (minimum) 1, 12’x20’ (inside dimensions) garage parking space shall be provided per unit.
Garage Location
A garage shall not front a public right of way, or be located within a buffer (if
required) except that:
Dwelling units located along the perimeter of a subdivision may have a garage
face a public right-of-way (front loaded) provided the garage does not face a
collector or arterial road, the garage does not extend past the front façade of
the dwelling unit, the garage door(s) maintains an architectural theme of the
unit, and the garage door(s) do not constitute more than 40% of the primary
facade of a dwelling unit. A dwelling unit within the same development, located
across a local street, and facing an aforementioned front loaded dwelling unit,
may also be front loaded.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 139/320
Table 9.2.4 Parking and Garage Requirements
Design Element Standard
Garage Materials All shall have same materials and mix as the primary residential structure
façade.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.3. RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS - MULTI-FAMILY AND MIXED USE
STRUCTURES
9.3.1 Applicability
The architectural standards in this section are applicable to all multi-family structures, mixed use
structures and live work units in R, GB-1, MF-10, MF-20, CL3, CL4 and CL5.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.3.2 Materials Required.
One hundred percent (100%) masonry is required on all facades with the exception of the permitted
secondary and accent materials as outlined in Table 9.3.2. All multi-family and mixed use structures shall
incorporate at least two (2) of the primary masonry building materials listed below in Table 9.3.2 with
the allowable percentages of such materials. The percent calculations shall be based on total exterior
walls, excluding openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.3.2 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay Brick
Natural Stone
Cultured stone, cast stone or natural stone panels
100% (unless secondary or accent
materials are utilized then the
primary masonry materials may
be reduced to a minimum of 40%)
Secondary Masonry
Stucco
Architecturally _inished poured concrete
Maximum 60%
Accent Materials
Cementitious material installed as horizontal lap siding or vertical
board-and-batten (as approved by the Administrator)
EIFS1
Architecturally _inished concrete block
Corrugated metal or other types of metal (as approved by the
Administrator)
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 20%
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 140/320
9.3.3 Architectural Details
The following design elements are required as stated in the table. The term “primary façade” shall apply
to all facades facing a public street, public or private park, and any main drive aisle.
Table 9.3.3 Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Solar Orientation and Passive
Cooling
Buildings are encouraged to be aligned on an east-west axis so that the long
side of the building faces north and south while the short ends face east to west.
When the long sides of a building face south or west, windows located along
those sides are encouraged to be externally shaded through the use of extended
roof overhangs, building projections, window recesses or similar structural
means to assist in minimizing summer solar admission and improving passive
cooling. Buildings are encouraged to be designed to maximize photovoltaic
potential.
Roof Pitch
Pitch roof – minimum 6:12
Flat roof – require parapet screening
Shed roof, porch roof and arcade roofs – minimum 2:12
Permitted Roof Materials
30 year asphalt shingles
Standing seam metal
Tile
Roof Articulation (excluding _lat
roofs)
2 Elements from the following:
2 roof materials
Masonry chimneys
Dormers along public facades (1/20’)
Eaves that overhang a minimum of 24” with a minimum fascia depth
of 8"Three or more roof slope planes per primary façade
Vertical Articulation
No more than 50 linear (horizontally) feet without a minimum 5’ vertical offset
Horizontal Articulation
No more than 50 linear (horizontally) feet without a minimum 5’ horizontal
offset
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 141/320
Table 9.3.3 Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Transparency (windows and
doors)
Each residential _loor on a primary façade shall contain 25% doors and
windows.
Each non-residential _loor on a primary façade shall contain 50% doors and
windows.
Window and Door Treatment Trim shall be provided to accent all windows and doors appropriate to style of
structure
Window Articulation
25% of the primary facade windows shall include one of the following:
Veranda, terrace, porch or balcony (accessible for single units)
minimum 4’ deep
Trellis
Shed roof awning
20” projection
Bay window
Bow window
Transom windows
Arched windows
Gable windows
Oval or round windows
Shutters
Decorative stone or brick band
Façade Repetition All buildings shall be designed to have distinct characteristics every 30’.
Top Floor Articulation
When a _lat roof is utilized, a distinctive _inish, consisting of a cornice, banding
or other architectural termination shall be provided.
Building Orientation All buildings containing ground _loor or second story residential dwelling units,
located along the perimeter of the development and/or adjacent to public right
of way, shall have the primary façade front and face the public right-of-way.
All other buildings shall be designed as liner buildings located adjacent to and
fronting the public right of way, primary internal drive aisles, or wrapped
around a structured parking garage. Buildings shall not be oriented toward a
surface parking lot with more than one row of parking along an internal drive
aisle without perimeter liner buildings, and only as approved by the
Administrator.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 142/320
Table 9.3.3 Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Primary Entry Location
Pedestrian building entrances shall be directly accessible from a public
sidewalk or a common open space with a landscaped courtyard.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 143/320
Table 9.3.3 Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures Architectural Details
Design Element Standard
Entry Articulation
Mixed use structures shall have a minimum 6’ inset for the width of the entry
(minimum 8’ wide).
All ground _loor entries shall be covered with distinct architectural detail such
as: porch, portico, arcade, awning, or other similar shading element.
Building Access
Multi-family units shall be accessed by way of a centralized indoor corridor
except:
Exterior stairwells may be considered if they are oriented toward a central
landscaped courtyard and/or screened via evergreen landscaping from any
public street or required bufferyard. The stairwell structure shall be
architecturally integrated into the building with appropriately sized cutouts to
allow for visibility, ventilation, and protection from natural elements.
9.3.4 Parking and Garage Requirements
Surface parking and garages shall be in accordance with Subchapter 10 and the following table:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 144/320
Table 9.3.4 Parking and Garage Requirements
Design Element Standard
Garage Required
Multi-family uses shall provide 1, 12’x20’ (inside dimensions) garage parking
space per 2 units, except when structured parking is provided in accordance
with Section 9.7. Vertical mixed use structures shall be exempt from the garage
requirement.
Garage Integration
50% of the required garage spaces for Multi-Family structures shall be
integrated into primary residential structures.
Garage Materials All shall have same materials and mix as facades of the primary residential
structure.
Surface Parking and Additional
Garage Parking Location
Parking lots shall not be permitted between a structure and a required buffer.
Structures containing the remaining required garage spaces not integrated into
the primary structure may be permitted between a structure and a required
buffer.
9.3.5 Pedestrian Access Requirements
Pedestrian connectivity shall be provided in accordance with the following table.
Table 9.3.5 Pedestrian Access Requirements
Design Element Standard
Interior Pedestrian Access and
Off-Site Connectivity
Minimum 4’ sidewalks required from all parking and public areas to entryways
of all units.
When provided, perimeter fencing along a public right-of-way shall include one
pedestrian gate accessible for every two buildings. The pedestrian gate may be
a controlled access gate for the tenants to utilize.
A pedestrian pathway with a minimum 4-ft width shall connect all pedestrian
building entrances to the pedestrian gates and to the public sidewalk.
9.3.6 Amenities
All multi-family and mixed use developments shall require at least one private amenity, selected from the
list below, for every _ifty (50) or more dwelling units. The amenities shall be located on a private open
space or landscape lot and shall be owned and maintained by the property owner. These developments
may receive up to 25% credit towards the Park Development Fee for private amenities in accordance
with Subchapter 14. Public Parkland Standards and the Parks Development Manual.
Table 9.3.6 Amenities for Multi-Family and Mixed Use Structures
Number of Dwelling Units Minimum Number of Amenities
0-49 0
50-99 1
100-149 2
150-199 3
200-249 4
250 or more 5
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 145/320
Amenity
Playground equipment meeting minimum guidelines by the Commercial Park Advisory Council and National
Playground Safety Institute with a covered shade structure
Dog park (not smaller than 2,500 sq ft) with minimum depth of twenty-_ive (25) feet, fenced in accordance with
Subchapter 11, and containing a pet drinking fountain
Covered picnic area to contain no fewer than two (2) tables with seating and two (2) grills
Swimming pool
Splash pad
Tennis or racquetball court
Basketball court
Volleyball court
Community garden or orchard with irrigation (minimum 800 sq ft)
Gazebo, band stand or outdoor amphitheater
Amenity center with social room for resident use
Private _itness facility
Kitchen available for resident use
Billiards or similar
Theater or similar media room
As approved by the Administrator
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.4. OFFICE, RETAIL, AND COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES
9.4.1 Applicability.
The architectural standards in this section are applicable to all non-residential with the exception of
industrial structures in O, NS, R, GB-1, GB-2, CL3, CL4, and CL5 zoning districts.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.4.2 Materials Required
All buildings shall incorporate the building materials listed below in Table 9.4.2 with the allowable
percentages of such materials. One hundred percent (100%) masonry is required on all facades with the
exception of the permitted secondary and accent materials. The percent calculations shall be based on
total exterior walls, excluding openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.4.2 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay brick
Natural stone
Manufactured stone with a natural appearance (does not include
concrete masonry unit (CMU))
100% (unless secondary or
accent materials are utilized
then the primary masonry
materials may be reduced to a
minimum of 40%)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 146/320
Table 9.4.2 Building Materials
Secondary Masonry
Concrete panels1
Stucco
Maximum 60%
Accent Materials
Architectural concrete block/concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) – High Impact2
Cementitious material (approved by the Administrator) installed as
horizontal lap siding
Metal panels as approved by the Administrator
Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements, and ornaments)
Glass block
Tile
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 15%
1 Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete panels shall have integrated color and have varied textures and
patterns at least every 100 linear feet along primary façades. Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete
structures shall incorporate other permitted primary masonry materials. Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast
concrete structures shall have reveals, punch-outs, patterns, textures or other similar surface characteristics to
enhance the facade on at least 10 percent of each facade.
2 EIFS shall not be permitted below nine (9) feet above _inished grade unless utilized for decorative architectural
accent.
9.4.3 Architectural Details
A. Architectural Elements
All buildings shall be designed to incorporate no less than four (4) of the architectural elements
from the list below. Buildings or multitenant buildings over 50,000 square feet shall include no less
than _ive (5) of the referenced architectural elements. Buildings or multitenant buildings over
100,000 square feet shall include no less than six (6) of the referenced architectural elements:
1. Canopies, awnings, or porticos;
2. Arcades;
3. Pitched roof forms;
4. Arches;
5. Display windows;
6. Architectural details (such as tile work and moldings) integrated into the building facade;
7. Articulated ground _loor levels or base;
8. Articulated cornice line;
9. A minimum of two building materials constituting a minimum of 15% of the total exterior
walls, differentiated by texture, color, or material and may be a combination of primary and
secondary masonry materials and accent materials; and
10. Other architectural features approved by the Administrator or designee.
B. Common Development
All buildings within a common development shall have similar architectural styles and materials.
This shall include all buildings situated on lots included within an approved preliminary plan.
C. Facade Finish
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 147/320
All nonresidential buildings shall be architecturally _inished on all four sides with same materials,
detailing, and features.
D. Articulation Standards
Any primary façade shall include projections or recesses and vertical variations in the roof line in
accordance with the horizontal and vertical articulation requirements set forth below.
1. Horizontal Articulation
a. A building facade may not extend for a distance greater than three times its average
height without a perpendicular offset of at least ten percent of such building height.
b. The total length of all façade walls in a single plane may not exceed 60 percent of the
total façade length.
c. Regardless of façade length, all primary facades shall have at least one horizontal offset
of the required percentage.
2. Vertical Articulation
a. A horizontal wall may not extend for a distance greater than three times its height
without a change in elevation of at least 15 percent of such height.
b. The total length of all vertical elevation changes in the roo_line shall be no less than 20
percent and no more than 40 percent of the total facade length.
c. Regardless of the façade length, all primary facades shall have at least one vertical
elevation change.
d. Flat roofs with a parapet wall are permitted, provided the roo_line meets the vertical
articulation requirements.
E. Building Entrance Standards
1. Any front building entrance shall be set back from a drive aisle a minimum distance of 15
feet.
2. Single-use or multitenant buildings over 50,000 square feet in size shall provide clearly
de_ined, highly visible customer or employee entrances with the integration of awnings or
similar architectural features.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 148/320
3. New or renovated commercial buildings shall have outdoor plazas, courtyards, or other
pedestrian spaces at their main entrances.
a. Minimum size of pedestrian space shall be one (1) square foot of space per 100 square
feet of building _loor area or a minimum of 100 square feet of pedestrian space;
whichever is greater.
b. All pedestrian spaces shall incorporate at least four (4) of the following:
i. Decorative landscape planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape areas.
ii. Pedestrian scale lighting, bollard, or other accent lighting.
iii. Special paving, such as colored/stained and sealed concrete, stamped concrete,
brick or other unit paver.
iv. Public art with a valuation of at least .05% of the total construction cost.
v. Seating such as benches, tables with attached seats, or low seating walls.
vi. Architectural water structures, features, or fountains.
vii. Other amenity approved by the Planning Director.
F. Canopy Standards
The following provisions apply to canopies associated with an ATM canopy, gas station canopy,
drive-thru canopy, carport, and other similar auto oriented canopies.
1. Canopies shall be constructed of roof building material consistent with that of the principal
building.
2. Canopies shall have pitched roofs, unless attached to the principal building utilizing a parapet
roof type.
3. Canopy columns shall be fully encased with primary masonry material that is complimentary
to that used on the principal building, including brick and stone.
4. The canopy band face shall be color consistent with the principal structure’s exterior
building materials and shall not be backlit or used as signage except that the business name
may be displayed on the canopy band.
5. Canopies shall be no higher than the principal building. In no case shall the canopy height
exceed 20 feet.
G. Drive-Thru
Drive-thru facilities shall be located to the side or rear of the structure, unless site constraints limit
such orientation, as determined by the Planning Director.
H. Overhead Doors
1. Overhead doors shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a conforming residential lot.
2. Overhead doors shall be oriented to the side or rear of the structure and not front or face a
public right-of-way or public street with the following exceptions:
a. An automotive use with a maximum of four (4) single, service bays may orient toward a
public street only when structural awnings of at least 3’ 10” are provided over the
extent of the overhead doors, or equivalent structural projections are provided in front
of the overhead doors to reduce the visual impact of the service bays from the street.
b. A roll up, garage type door installed in a restaurant or bar may be permitted to face a
public street if it is architecturally integrated into the building and provides a
pedestrian connection with a covered outdoor patio area.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 149/320
c. When physical site constraints prevent such orientation, the Planning Director may
consider alternatives when screened in accordance with Subchapter 11.
I. Loading Docks
1. Loading docks shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a conforming residential lot.
2. Loading docks shall be oriented to the side or rear of buildings, and oriented to not front the
public right-of-way, not be visible or face a public street, main drive aisle, or patron parking
lot.
3. Screening shall be in accordance with Subchapter 11.
4. When physical site constraints prevent such orientation, the Planning Director may consider
alternatives when screened in accordance with Subchapter 11.
J. Service Court
1. When multiple of_ices, commercial and industrial uses are planned, loading docks and
delivery receivable areas shall be consolidated into common service courts located to the
side or rear of the buildings.
2. The access point into the service court shall be minimized in width in order to substantially
screen the service court from a public street, main drive aisle or patron parking area, but
allow for necessary vehicle maneuverability.
3. Service courts shall be screened in accordance with Subchapter 11.
K. Roof Treatment
1. In the O, NS and R Districts, roof overhangs and pitched roofs shall be incorporated into all
building designs to achieve a roof form that is compatible with residential architecture.
However, buildings large footprints located more than 200 feet from a single-family
residential district, where applying a pitched roof would be impractical, may have a _lat roof
only if a parapet is used. Pitched roofs shall have a minimum pitch of 4:12. Long
unarticulated roofs are not permitted.
2. Parapets shall be used to conceal roof-mounted mechanical equipment on _lat roofs on all
sides.
3. Where overhanging eaves are used, overhangs shall be no less than two (2) feet beyond the
overhanging walls.
a. Gable and hip roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and 8:12.
b. Shed roofs, porch roofs, and arcade roofs subordinate and attached to the primary
structure, shall be pitched between 2:12 and 6:12.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 150/320
4. Roof Type and Material Standards. Tile, metal or asphalt shingles (laminated 320 pound 30-
year architectural grade asphalt shingles or better) shall be the dominant roof material. Any
other roo_ing material not stated shall not be permitted unless approved by the Planning
Director.
L. Architectural Waiver
The Administrator or the Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a waiver for a reduction in
the architectural standards in this section in accordance with Subchapter 3.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.5. INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES
9.5.1 Applicability
The architectural standards in this section are applicable to all industrial structures in CI, LI and GI
zoning districts or any Speci_ic Use Permit for industrial uses granted in CL4 or CL5 zoning districts.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.5.2 Materials Required
A. Material requirements for the CI, CL4, and CL5 Zoning Districts
All buildings in CI zoning or industrial buildings granted by Speci_ic Use Permit in CL4 and CL5
zoning districts shall incorporate the building materials listed in Table 9.5.2 below with the
allowable percentages of such materials. One hundred percent (100%) masonry is required on all
facades with the exception of the permitted secondary and accent materials. The percent
calculations shall be based on the total exterior walls, excluding openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.5.2 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay brick
Natural stone
Manufactured stone with a natural appearance (does not include
concrete masonry unit (CMU)
100% (unless secondary or
accent materials are utilized
then the primary masonry
materials may be reduced to a
minimum of 15%)
Secondary Masonry
Concrete panels1
Stucco
Maximum 85%
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 151/320
Table 9.5.2 Building Materials
Accent Materials
Architectural concrete block/concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) – High Impact2
Cementitious material (approved by the Administrator) installed as
horizontal lap siding
Metal panels as approved by the Administrator
Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements, and ornaments)
Glass block
Tile
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure.
Maximum 15%
1 Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete panels shall have integrated color and have varied textures or
patterns. Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete structures shall incorporate permitted masonry
materials on all the exterior walls. Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete structures shall have reveals,
punch-outs, or other similar surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at least 25 percent of each primary
facade.
2 EIFS shall not be permitted below nine (9) feet above _inished grade unless utilized for decorative architectural
features.
B. Materials Required in LI and GI zoning
All buildings located in the Light Industrial (LI) and General Industrial (GI) zoning districts shall
incorporate the building materials listed in Table 9.5.3 with the allowable percentages of such
materials. Metal buildings are permitted with a minimum of 25% primary masonry materials
provided on all primary facades. Exterior building walls fronting on a major collector or arterial
roadway, or visible from a residential district shall consist of 100 percent (100%) masonry, 25% of
which shall consist of primary masonry materials. All other exterior building walls visible from a
public right-of-way shall consist of 25% primary masonry. The percent calculations shall be based
on exterior wall area on each facade, excluding openings for windows and doors.
Table 9.5.3 Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay brick
Natural stone
Manufactured stone with a natural appearance (does not include
concrete masonry unit (CMU)
100% (unless secondary or
accent materials are utilized
then the primary masonry
materials may be reduced to a
minimum of 25%)
Secondary Building Materials
Concrete panels1 (masonry)
Stucco (masonry)
Architectural concrete block/concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Metal panels
Maximum 75%
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 152/320
Table 9.5.3 Building Materials
Accent Materials
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) – High Impact2
Cementitious material (approved by the Administrator) installed as lap
siding
Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements, and ornaments)
Glass block
Tile
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 15%
1 Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete panels shall have integrated color and be textured or patterned.
Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete structures shall incorporate permitted primary masonry
materials. Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete structures shall have reveals, punch-outs, or other
similar surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at least 25 percent of each primary facade.
2 EIFS shall not be permitted below nine (9) feet above _inished grade unless utilized for decorative architectural
accent.
9.5.3 Architectural Details
A. Architectural Elements
All buildings shall be designed to incorporate no less than four of the architectural elements from
the list below. Buildings or multi-tenant buildings over 50,000 square feet shall include a minimum
of _ive of the referenced architectural elements. Buildings or multitenant buildings over 100,000
square feet shall include a minimum of six of the referenced architectural elements:
1. Canopies, awnings, or porticos;
2. Arcades;
3. Pitched roof forms;
4. Arches;
5. Pedestrian space per Section 9.5.3 E;
6. Minimum of 10% fenestration on primary facades;
7. Architectural details (such as tile work and moldings) integrated into the building
facade;
8. Articulated ground _loor levels or base;
9. Articulated cornice line;
10. Integrated planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape and sitting areas;
11. A minimum of two building materials constituting a minimum of 15% of the total
exterior walls, differentiated by texture, color, or material and may be a combination of
primary and secondary masonry materials and accent materials; and
12. Other architectural features approved by the Administrator or designee.
B. Common Development
All buildings within a common development shall have similar architectural styles and materials.
This shall include all buildings situated on lots included within an approved preliminary plan.
C. Facade Finish
All nonresidential buildings shall be architecturally _inished on all four sides with same materials,
detailing, and features.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 153/320
D. Articulation Standards
Any primary façade shall include projections or recesses and vertical variations in the roof line in
accordance with the horizontal and vertical articulation requirements set forth below.
1. Horizontal Articulation.
a. The total length of all façade walls in a single plane shall not exceed 60 percent of
the total façade length without a horizontal wall offset a minimum of two (2) feet
in depth and ten (10) feet in length parallel to the average façade plane.
Regardless of façade length, all primary facades shall have at least one horizontal
wall offset of a projection or recess.
b. Single-use or multitenant buildings between 15,000 -and 49,000 square feet in
size shall provide horizontal wall projections and/or recesses, a minimum offset
of _ive (5) feet in depth and _ifteen (15) feet in length parallel to the average
façade plane at all building entrances fronting public right-of-way and along a
primary facade.
c. Single-use or multitenant buildings equal to or more than 50,000 square feet in
gross _loor area shall provide horizontal wall projections and/or recesses, at a
minimum offset of ten (10) feet in depth and thirty (30) feet in length parallel to
the average façade plane at all customer entrances fronting a public right-of-way
and along a primary façade.
2. Vertical Articulation.
a. Regardless of the façade length, all primary facades shall have at least one
vertical elevation change without a vertical roof-line offset a minimum of two (2)
feet in height and ten (10) feet in length.
b. Flat roofs with a parapet wall are permitted, provided the roo_line meets the
vertical articulation requirements.
E. Building Entrance Standards
1. Single-use or multitenant buildings over 50,000 square feet in size shall provide clearly
de_ined, highly visible building entrances with the integration of awnings or similar
architectural feature, fronting public right-of-way or along a primary façade.
2. Single-use or multitenant buildings over 50,000 square feet in size shall have outdoor
plazas, courtyards, or other pedestrian spaces at their main entrances.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 154/320
a. Minimum size of pedestrian space shall be one (1) square foot of space per 100
square feet of building _loor area.
b. All pedestrian spaces shall incorporate at least four (4) of the following:
i. Decorative landscape planters or wing walls that incorporate Landscape
Areas.
ii. Pedestrian scale lighting, bollard, or other accent lighting.
iii. Special paving, such as colored/stained and sealed concrete, stamped
concrete, brick or other unit paver.
iv. Public art with a valuation of at least .05% of the total construction cost.
v. Seating such as benches, tables with attached seats, or low seating walls.
vi. Architectural water structures, features, or fountains.
vii. Other amenity approved by the Planning Director.
F. Canopy Standards
The following provisions apply to canopies associated with service stations, drive thru
facilities and other auto-oriented canopies.
1. Canopies shall be constructed of roof building material consistent with that of the
principal building.
2. Canopy columns shall be fully encased with primary masonry material that is
complimentary to that used on the principal building, including brick and stone.
3. Canopies shall be no higher than the principal building. In no case shall the canopy
height exceed 20 feet.
4. The canopy band face must be of a color consistent with the main structure or a
complimentary accent color and may not be backlit or used as signage.
G. Drive-Thru
Drive-thru facilities shall be located to the side or rear of the structure, unless site constraints
limit such orientation as determined by the Planning Director.
H. Overhead Doors
1. Overhead doors shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a conforming residential lot.
2. Overhead doors shall be oriented to the side or rear of the structure and not front or
face a public right-of-way or public street with the following exceptions:
a. An automotive use with a maximum of four (4) single, service bays may
orient toward a public street only when structural awnings of at least 3’ 10”
are provided over the extent of the overhead doors, or equivalent
structural projections are provided in front of the overhead doors to
reduce the visual impact of the service bays from the street.
b. When physical site constraints prevent such orientation, the Planning
Director may consider alternatives when screened in accordance with
Subchapter 11.
I. Loading Docks
1. Loading docks shall not be located closer than 50 feet to a conforming residential lot.
2. Loading docks shall be oriented to the side or rear of buildings, and oriented to not
front the public right-of-way, a public street, major drive aisle, or patron parking lot.
3. Screening shall be in accordance with Subchapter 11.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 155/320
4. When physical site constraints prevent such orientation, the Planning Director may
consider alternatives when screened in accordance with Subchapter 11.
J. Roof Treatment
1. Parapets shall be used to conceal roof-mounted mechanical equipment on all sides.
2. Where overhanging eaves are used, overhangs shall be no less one (1) foot beyond the
overhanging walls.
a. Gable and hip roofs shall be symmetrically pitched between 4:12 and 8:12.
b. Shed roofs, porch roofs, and arcade roofs subordinate and attached to the
primary structure, shall be pitched between 2:12 and 6:12.
3. Roof Type and Material Standards. Tile, metal or asphalt shingles (laminated 320 pound
30-year architectural grade asphalt shingles or better) shall be the dominant roof
material. Any other roo_ing material not stated shall not be permitted unless approved
by the Planning Director.
K. Architectural Waiver
The Planning Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a waiver for a
reduction in the architectural standards in this section in accordance with Subchapter 3.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.6 AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES
9.6.1 Applicability
The architectural standards in this section are applicable to all agricultural structures in the Agricultural/
Conservation (A) zoning district and all agricultural structures on properties governed by nonannexation
development agreements for properties appraised for ad valorem tax purposes as land for
agricultural, wildlife management, or timber land use under the Subchapter C, D, or E Chapter 23, Tax
Code. All other structures, associated or occupied by residential and commercial uses on such
properties, shall satisfy the architectural standards of the most comparable land use structure types per
Sections 9.1, 9.4, or 9.5.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.6.2 Permitted Building Materials
Agricultural structures may utilize the building material listed in Table 9.6.2.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 156/320
Table 9.6.2 Permitted Building Materials – Agricultural Structures
Clay brick
Natural stone
Manufactured stone with a natural appearance (does not include concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Concrete panels1 (masonry)
Stucco (masonry)
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) – High Impact2
Cementitious material (approved by the Administrator) installed as lap siding
Architectural concrete block/concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Metal panels
Wood
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the architectural style of the structure
1 Tilt-wall, poured-in-place, or pre-cast concrete panels shall have integrated color and be textured or patterned.
Tilt-wall or pre-cast concrete structures shall incorporate permitted primary masonry materials.
2 EIFS shall not be permitted below nine (9) feet above _inished grade unless utilized for decorative architectural
features.
9.6.3 Roof Materials
Tile, metal, asphalt or wooden shingles, wooden panels, are permitted as the dominant roo_ing material
for agricultural structures. The Planning Director or designee, at their discretion, may approve other
roo_ing materials not stated herein.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.7 STRUCTURED PARKING
9.7.1 Applicability
The architectural standards of this section are applicable to all stand-alone parking structures and the
facades, or a portion of the facade thereof, on commercial or residential structure(s) which are
structurally designed for the purposes of structured parking. All storefront, of_ice, or residential
elements shall be reviewed according to its districts’ architectural standards.
9.7.2 Design Guidelines
A. New parking structures are encouraged to have retail, commercial, or of_ices uses at the _irst level,
fronting all public streets, parkland and open spaces.
B. Parking structures are encouraged to create visually attractive and active pedestrian environment
through the use of retail/commercial wrap-around tenant spaces.
C. Parking structures should be designed to blend and/or complement the surrounding buildings.
D. Parking structures are encouraged to have “green roofs” or civic spaces on the upper most _loor of
the structure or roof.
E. The parking structures are encouraged to be unique and create a sense of place, rather than a
design that represents only the functional use of the structure.
F. Above ground parking should be designed in such a way the neighboring buildings are not
adversely affected by headlights.
The following section has certain provisions that have been superseded by changes in state law, see
H.B. 2439, 86th Legislature, Regular Session, and the City of P_lugerville is revising these provisions
to be in conformance and will update the Code accordingly. All other provisions not in con_lict will
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 157/320
continue to be effective and enforced. Please contact the City of P_lugerville Planning Department
(512.990.6300 planning@p_lugevilletx.gov) with any questions.
9.7.3 Architectural Design Requirements
A. Façade Building Materials
The façade(s) of the parking garages fronting a public street or open space shall be treated as
primary facades in this Section.
Table 9.7.3 A. - Building Materials
Allowable Percentage
Primary Masonry
Clay brick
Natural stone
Manufactured stone with a natural appearance (does not include
concrete masonry unit (CMU)
100% (unless other
permitted building materials
or accent materials are
utilized then the primary
masonry materials may be
reduced to a minimum of
25%)
Other Permitted Building Materials
Concrete1
Stucco (applied as a _inish to concrete)
Maximum 75%
Accent Materials
Exterior Insulation and Finish Systems (EIFS) – High Impact2
Cementitious material (approved by the Administrator)
Metal (for beams, lintels, trim elements, ornaments)
Architectural concrete block/concrete masonry unit (CMU)
Decorative metal panels (As approved by the Administrator)
Glass block
Tile
Other materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the
architectural style of the structure
Maximum 25%
1 Tilt-wall, pre-cast concrete panels or poured-in-place concrete shall have integrated color and be textured or
patterned. Tilt-wall, pre-cast concrete, and poured-in-place structures shall incorporate permitted primary
masonry materials. Tilt-wall, pre-cast or poured-in-place concrete structures shall have reveals, punch-outs, or
other similar surface characteristics to enhance the facade on at least 25 percent of each primary facade.
2 EIFS shall not be permitted below nine (9) feet above _inished grade unless utilized for decorative architectural
accent.
B. Screening of Vehicles within Structured Parking
1. The open air spaces, along any primary façade, as de_ined by Section 9.7.3, or façade visible
to single-family and two-family residential uses, shall be screened with the use of the
following permitted materials listed in Table 9.7.3 B. in order to reduce any adverse effects
associated with streetscape design and residential adjacency.
2. The visible openings, unenclosed, on a primary façade shall not exceed forty (40%) percent
of the area on such façade.
Table 9.7.3 B. - Screening Materials
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 158/320
Table 9.7.3 B. - Screening Materials
Permitted
Any building materials listed Table 9.7.3 A. with the allowable percentages
Other Vegetation (approved by the Administrator)
Solar panels
Decorative Metal panels (approved by the Administrator)
Decorative plexiglass panels with a maximum 25% translucency
Other durable materials approved by the Administrator in keeping with the architectural style of the
structure
Speci_ically Prohibited
Fabric Panels
C. Architectural Elements
Parking structures shall be designed to incorporate no less than _ive (5) of the architectural
elements from the list below.
1. Canopies, awnings, or porticos;
2. Arcades;
3. Pitched roof forms;
4. Arches;
5. Display windows;
6. Architectural details (such as tile work and moldings) integrated into the building facade;
7. Articulated ground _loor levels or base;
8. Articulated cornice line;
9. A minimum of two building materials constituting a minimum of 15% of the total exterior
walls, differentiated by texture, color, or material and may be a combination of primary and
secondary masonry materials and accent materials; and
10. Other architectural features approved by the Administrator or designee.
D. Common Development
The parking structure shall have similar architectural styles and materials consistent with the
principal building(s) of such parking structure to meet the minimum parking requirements.
E. Facade Finish
The parking structure shall be architecturally _inished on all primary facades with same materials,
detailing, and features. Exposed concrete shall have an applied _inish including stucco, and shall be
painted and/or texturized to complement the architectural style of such parking structure and the
primary structure for which the parking structure is associated.
F. Pedestrian Entrance Standards.
1. Pedestrian entrances shall provide distinct architectural features including but not limited to
horizontal and vertical articulation or structural walls and variation of the roo_line.
2. Any front building entrance shall be set back from a drive aisle or public right-of-way a
minimum distance of 15 feet.
3. Pedestrian entrances for parking structures and commercial tenant spaces along the _irst
_loor of the parking structure shall provide clearly de_ined, highly visible customer or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 159/320
employee entrances with the integration of awnings or similar architectural features.
4. Pedestrian entrances shall provide for courtyards, or other pedestrian spaces at their main
entrances, as provided herein. The minimum size of pedestrian space shall be a minimum of
100 square feet of pedestrian space at each tenant space and _irst _loor pedestrian
entrance(s) to parking structure. Each pedestrian space shall incorporate at least four (4) of
the following types of decorative elements, and a minimum quantity of four items at each
pedestrian space:
a. Decorative landscape planters incorporated into the landscape areas.
b. Pedestrian scale lighting, bollard, or other architectural accent lighting.
c. Special paving, such as colored/stained and sealed concrete, stamped concrete, brick or
other unit paver.
d. Art visible to the public with a valuation of at least .05% of the total construction cost.
e. Seating such as benches, tables with attached seats, or low seating walls.
f. Architectural water structures, features, or fountains.
g. Other amenity approved by the Planning Director.
G. Architectural Waiver
The Planning Director or the Planning and Zoning Commission may grant a waiver for a reduction
in the architectural standards in this section in accordance with Subchapter 3.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
9.8. ADDITIONAL SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS.
1. Fire Standards. All sites must comply with the site speci_ic _ire code requirements of chapter 150 of
the City Code at the discretion of the _ire marshal.
2. Sight Triangle.
a. A Sight Triangle is the area formed by three lines, two of which begin at the same point and extend
30 feet in different directions. The third line in a Sight Triangle connects the ends of the two points.
Sight Triangles at the intersections of two public streets are measured along right-of-way lines or
projections of right-of-way lines. Sight Triangles at the intersections of a public street and a
Driveway or a private street are measured along the right-of-way line or projection of a right-ofway
line and the edge of the Driveway.
Sight Triangle
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 160/320
b. Within a Sight Triangle, nothing may be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such
manner so as to materially impair a vehicle driver’s vision at an intersection unless speci_ically
allowed by Subchapter 4.
Effective on: 9/1/2019
SUBCHAPTER 10. PARKING, MOBILITY AND CIRCULATION.
10.1 GENERAL
10.1.1 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish parking mobility and circulation regulations to promote safe,
ef_icient vehicular and pedestrian access into and within development and to ensure that adequate
parking is provided. Additionally, this subchapter is intended to establish regulations for off-street
parking and loading requirements to ensure that developments within the City provide adequate and
reasonable parking necessary to serve the uses located on a development. The use of alternative parking
plans, such as off-site parking and shared parking, is encouraged. Accommodation of alternate modes of
transportation, including, but not limited to, bicycles is also encouraged.
10.1.2 Applicability
This Subchapter shall apply to all districts for all uses, at the time any building or structure is erected,
enlarged, or increased in capacity, or at any time any other use is established on the site. Additional
applicability provisions as it applies to parking requirements are provided under Section 10.4.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
10.2 SITE ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
10.2.1 Vehicular Access and Circulation Standards
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 161/320
A. General Standards
1. Sites, other than single family, that are expected to generate more than 2,000 trips per day
must have at least one access point from a collector or arterial roadway unless otherwise
supported by a Traf_ic Impact Analysis (TIA).
2. No single-family dwelling, condominium, townhouse, or duplex dwelling unit may take direct
access to arterial or major collector roadways if the property has alternative access. If it can
only be accessed by an arterial street, or major collector then adequate on-site maneuvering
space must be provided, as vehicles will not be allowed to back directly into these roadways.
3. Access to TxDOT roadways shall require approval of TxDOT. No person, _irm, or corporation
shall construct, reconstruct, alter or repair, remove or replace any drive approach or any
concrete work on any TXDOT right-of-way within the City without _irst obtaining an approved
TXDOT permit. A copy of the approved TXDOT permit is required for any lot taking access to
a state roadway before the site development permit is issued.
4. Driveways shall be located and designed with respect to both the public street and the onsite
circulation to provide maximum safety and to minimize interference with street traf_ic. To
ensure this, a Traf_ic Impact Analysis may be required at the owner’s expense.
5. The owner, successor or assigns shall do all work and pay all costs in connection with the
construction of access driveways and their appurtenances on the right-of-way.
6. If a curb inlet is present, there shall be ten (10) feet between the inlet opening and the edge
of the driveway curb return.
7. The angle of driveway approach shall be approximately 90 degrees.
8. All driveways must be constructed within the street frontage of the subject property, as
determined by extending the side property lines to the curb line. Neither the driveway nor
the curb returns shall overlap adjacent property frontage without written approval from the
adjacent property owner.
9. It is desirable to minimize the number of driveways on arterial and collector roadways in
order to reduce the number of con_lict points and facilitate traf_ic _low. The dimensions in
Section 10.2.1(D) and (E) for spacing between driveways should be increased whenever
possible so that the number of driveways can be reduced. It is recognized, however, that
certain existing tracts may not be able to fully comply with these standards due to limited
frontage or other constraints. When compliance with criteria stated in 10.2.1(D) and (E)is
precluded due to the location of driveways on adjoining properties, attempts should be made
to obtain alternative access where feasible, including joint access driveways, access
easements to adjoining properties or access to intersecting streets.
10. Where divided driveways are proposed, on site circulation must be designed to minimize
driver confusion and reinforce the one way traf_ic _low on either side of the driveway
median.
B. Driveway Types
1. Type I – A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a
roadway to a lot or parcel of land which is used for single family or duplex dwelling unit.
2. Type II – A concrete driveway approach designed and intended to serve as access from a
roadway to a lot or parcel of land used for any development or purpose other than a single
family or duplex dwelling unit.
3. Type III – A temporary asphalt driveway approach intended to provide vehicular access to a
lot or parcel of land, such access being from a roadway not yet constructed to permanent
lines and grades or a roadway not having curb and gutter. Driveways shall be reconstructed
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 162/320
under type I or type II standards within sixty (60) days after construction of the abutting
street to permanent line and grade with concrete curb and gutter.
C. Type II Driveway Criteria
Table 10.2.1C Type II Driveway Criteria
Roadway Type
Local Street Minor Collector Major Collector Minor Arterial Major Arterial
Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max Min Max
One Way Driveway
Width 15(a) 20 15(a) 20 18(a) 25 18(a) 25(b) 18(a) 25(b)
Curb Return
Radius 10 25 15 25(c) 15 30(c) 20 30(c) 20 30(c)
Throat Length (d)
(g) - - 50 - 50 - 50 - 50 -
Distance Between
Entry and Exit
Drive
50 - 50 - 50 - 75 - 75 -
Two-Way Undivided Driveway
Width 25 40 25 40 30 40 30 45 30 45
Curb Return
Radius 10 25 15 25(c) 15 30(c) 20 30(c) 20 30(c)
Throat Length (d)
(g) - - 50 - 50 - 50 - 50 -
Two-Way Divided Driveway
Width (each side
of median) (e) 20 24 20 24 20 24 20 30 20 30
Curb Return
Radius 15 25 15 25 15 25 20 30 20 30
Throat Length (d)
(g) 50 - 50 - 50 - 50 - 50 -
Median Width (e) 4 15 4 15 4 15 4 15 4 15
Median Length 10 - 10 - 10 - 20 - 20 -
a. Greater width may be required for _ire department emergency access.
b. 30-foot minimum width may be required on state highways.
c. Radius may be increased to 40 feet at driveways serving large trucks.
d. Distance from the edge of pavement to _irst con_lict point.
e. On state highways, state standards may vary from city standards.
f. All standards are per the street classi_ication except as shown.
g. Throat lengths in excess of those shown may be required by the Planning Director
and/or City Engineer if justi_ied by the _indings of a Traf_ic Impact Analysis or queueing
study.
D. Driveway Separation
1. Minimum spacing between driveways will depend upon the adjacent street design speed in
accordance with the following table:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 163/320
Table 10.2.1(D) Driveway Spacing
Posted Speed Limit Minimum Spacing Standard
Under 35 mph (single family or two family residential) NA
Under 35 mph (all other uses) 175 feet
40-49 mph 325 feet
50 mph and above 450 feet
2. Spacing between driveways is measured from driveway edge to the edge of the adjacent
driveway. Spacing driveways and intersections is measured from the edge of the driveway to
the edge of the pavement.
3. Discretion regarding driveway spacing requirements may be considered and approved by the
City Engineer with consideration to street type such as cul-de-sac streets, site constraints or
other circumstances where a bene_it can be demonstrated through a Traf_ic Impact Analysis,
or similar transportation study completed by a registered professional engineer such that
variation from the standards herein do not compromise health, safety and general welfare. If
discretion is not provided, a variance from the Board of Adjustment shall be required from
this section.
E. Driveway Spacing from Intersections
1. On local streets, no driveway is permitted closer than 50 feet to a corner, measured edge to
edge, unless lot dimensions prohibit such spacing.
2. On collector streets, driveway is not permitted closer than 75 feet to a corner, measured edge
to edge, unless lot dimensions prohibit such spacing.
3. On minor arterial streets, driveway is not permitted closer than 120 feet to a corner,
measured edge to edge, unless lot dimensions make such spacing impossible or completely
impractical.
4. On major arterial streets, no driveway is permitted closer than 200 feet to a corner,
measured edge to edge, unless lot dimensions makes such spacing impossible or completely
impractical or joint access to the subject tract from an adjacent parcel is not feasible.
5. Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Chapter, if the frontage of a development site is
insuf_icient to comply with these requirements, the driveway must be situated as far as
practicable from any of the above-described intersections.
F. Driveway Grades
1. The slope of a driveway may not exceed 14 percent as measured between the street end of
the apron and the opposite end of the driveway.
2. Where a driveway crosses or adjoins a sidewalk, walkway or an accessible path of travel (as
de_ined by ADA) the driveway grade shall be a maximum of two (2) percent, over a minimum
throat length of three (3) feet contiguous with the sidewalk, thereby effectively matching the
cross slope of the sidewalk or accessible path of travel across the full width of the driveway.
G. Driveway Alignment
1. All Type II and III driveways on undivided arterial streets shall be designed to align with
opposing streets or driveways or be offset by a minimum of one hundred twenty (120) feet
(measured from edge to edge).
2. All Type II and III driveways on undivided major or minor collector streets shall be designed
to align with opposing street or driveways or be offset by a minimum of eighty (80) feet
(measured from edge to edge).
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 164/320
3. All Type II and III driveways on divided streets shall be designed to align with median breaks
or be offset by a minimum of one hundred (100) feet (measured from the nose of the
median to the nearest edge of the driveway).
4. Alignment of driveways with opposing streets is discouraged for signalized intersections
unless approved by the City Engineer. When such a design is approved, the driveway
approach shall be constructed without an apron and the maximum driveway widths shown
in Table 10.2.1(C) may be increased to match the cross-section of the opposing street.
10.2.2 Internal Circulation Standards
A. Internal vehicular circulation patterns must provide clear and direct paths to principal customer
entrances, outlying pad sites and parking areas.
B. Major drive aisles, aisles which provide the primary access through the development and connect
to the public right-of-way, shall serve as primary means of access for both vehicular and pedestrian
access through the site. Major drive aisles shall:
1. Provide a six (6) foot sidewalk along both sides;
2. Create pedestrian and vehicular blocks no greater than 800 linear feet in length without an
intersection of another major drive aisle;
3. Be owned and maintained by the property owner or a property owner’s association;
4. Be included in a joint access easement or Uni_ied Development Agreement when traversing
more than one lot; and
5. Are subject to the parking lot design and screening standards identi_ied in Subchapter 11.
C. Internal intersections of drive aisles must have adequate sightlines and traf_ic controls to minimize
potential accidents.
D. Entry driveways equipped with controlled access gates must provide a minimum of 50 feet of
storage space measured from the gate to the property line.
E. All semicircular drop-off drives shall be designed to operate in one (1) direction only.
F. The minimum width for an internal drive or circulation aisle with no parking is 20 feet for two-way
traf_ic and 10 feet for one-way traf_ic. Additional width, up to 26 feet for two-way traf_ic and 15 feet
for one-way traf_ic, may be required where traf_ic volumes are heavy or where obstructions or
circuitous alignment necessitates a wider drive for clearance of turning vehicles. Fire Department
access criteria must also be met.
G. Internal access drives must be aligned or offset by a minimum of 60 feet measured centerline to
centerline
10.2.3 Driveway Connections to Adjacent Development
A. Driveway connections to adjacent development must be provided. All driveway connections must
be constructed and stubbed or connected to an existing stub.
B. Joint access easements must be provided to ensure outparcels or adjacent developments have
adequate access.
C. This subsection’s requirement for a driveway connection may be waived by the Planning Director
when one or more of the following constraints are present:
1. Topographic constraints;
2. Environmental constraints;
3. Site constraints; and/or
4. Adjacent uses are incompatible for the purposes of mixing traf_ic
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 165/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
10.3 PEDESTRIAN MOBILITY
10.3.1 Sidewalks
A. Sidewalks must extend the entire length of the development’s frontage on a public street and must
be constructed in accordance with City speci_ications and requirements.
B. Sidewalks along TxDOT roadways shall require approval of TxDOT. No person, _irm, or corporation
shall construct, reconstruct, alter or repair, remove or replace any sidewalk, or any concrete work
on any TXDOT right-of-way within the City without _irst obtaining approval from TXDOT. . Approval
from TXDOT will be required to be provided on the cover sheet for a site plan proposing sidewalks
within TXDOT right-of-way.
C. Sidewalks must connect to existing adjacent sidewalks, or be designed and placed to allow
connection to future adjacent sidewalks. Required sidewalks shall connect to parking within the lot
and to primary entrances of each commercial building, including outparcels. Required connections
may include driveway aisle crosswalks, but may not span distances of more than 50 feet without a
pedestrian refuge in order to protect pedestrians from vehicles.
D. Pedestrian walkways, a minimum of 6 feet in width, must also connect primary building entrances
to all associated outdoor amenities, such as courtyards and other outdoor gathering places.
E. Sidewalks for all non-residential development must be six (6) feet wide.
F. All required sidewalks must be constructed before a Certi_icate of Occupancy (CO) may be issued.
G. A fee in lieu of constructing a public sidewalk, equivalent to the cost of construction, may be
considered by the City Engineer in lieu of constructing sidewalks if it is determined that a Capital
Improvement Project (CIP) will be complete on the adjacent roadway that includes sidewalk
construction within three(3) years from the date of permit issuance. Public sidewalks shall be
placed in the right-of-way, unless the Administrator determines that such placement is not safe.
Public sidewalks not located within the right-of-way will be required to be placed on private
property within a sidewalk easement.
H. Sidewalks must be installed to provide all residential areas with direct access to all neighborhood
facilities including schools, parks and playgrounds, churches and shopping centers.
I. Sidewalks of different widths between residential subdivisions and adjacent nonresidential parcels
must be transitioned within a length of sidewalk by two expansion joints not less than six feet apart
as required by Texas Accessibility Standards.
J. Sidewalks must be provided from the required development frontage sidewalk to the main
entrance of each building or to a sidewalk leading to the main entrance.
10.3.2 Hike and Bike Trails
A. The City shall require the provision of pedestrian and bicycle facilities at the locations shown on
the City of P_lugerville Comprehensive Master Plan, unless the Parks and Recreation Director
determines in his or her discretion that no such facilities are necessary.
B. Trails along drainage channels may be located in the 100 year or 25 year _lood plain.
C. Trails can be located adjacent to streets provided the street right-of-way is widened by 10 feet to
accommodate the trail.
D. Trails located neither adjacent to a street nor along a drainage channel must have a right-of-way or
access easement 20 feet wide. Such 20 foot wide easement must not be longer than 300 feet, as
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 166/320
measured from the public street or right-of-way to public parkland unless otherwise identi_ied in
the Trails Plan.
E. Trails must be designed to provide distinct areas for walking and bicycling/riding in areas separate
from and in addition to traditional sidewalks as required by the Planning Director. Trails must be
designed and constructed using either ten (10) feet wide concrete or brick multi-modal surfaces as
appropriate for the location as determined by the Planning Director and Parks & Recreation
Director or designee.
F. Residential blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length must have a hike and bike trail pass through at
mid-block with a minimum ten (10) foot trail on a privately maintained lot that is a minimum of 20
feet in width.
G. Trails, depending on location, may require a public access easement and/or drainage easement.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
10.4 OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS
10.4.1 Applicability
A. New Development
The off-street parking and loading standards in this Subchapter apply to any new building
constructed and to any new use established.
B. Expansions and Alterations
The off-street parking and loading standards in this section apply when an existing structure or
use is expanded or enlarged. When a use is expanded or enlarged, additional off-street parking
and loading spaces are only required to serve the enlarged or expanded area, not the entire
building or use.
C. Change in Use
The requirements of this Subchapter apply to any development, building, or structure that
undergoes a change in use.
D. Location
Except as expressly stated in this section, all required off-street parking spaces must be located on
the same lot as the principal use.
10.4.2 Development of Parking Areas
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including commercial parking
lots, automobile, farm equipment, mobile home trailer or other open air sales lots, must be developed in
accordance with this Chapter. The temporary uses listed in Subchapter 4 are exempt from this Section
unless otherwise provided herein.
10.4.3 Surfacing
All off-street parking areas must be asphalt or Portland Cement binder pavement and must be consistent
with City paving standards, subject to the approval of the City Engineer. Off-street parking areas must be
installed, maintained, graded and drained to dispose of surface water accumulated within the area.
Parking spaces must be arranged and marked and paved areas to provide for orderly and safe parking.
Single-family residential and duplex uses do not have to stripe the parking spaces built to serve these
uses.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 167/320
10.4.4 Timing of Installation
Required parking spaces and drives must be ready for use and approved by the Building Of_icial before a
Certi_icate of Occupancy may be issued.
10.4.5 Driveways for Dwellings
A driveway serving a garage or carport for each single family or duplex dwelling unit shall incorporate
an area that is sheltered by an enclosed garage or carport area of at least twenty (20) feet by twenty
(20) feet, and available for the parking of two vehicles side by side. The use of tandem parking to ful_ill
the parking requirements herein is prohibited. Refer to Subchapter 4, Accessory Structures, for
additional requirements.
10.4.6 Parking Requirements
A. The following requirements for off-street parking must be met:
1. Existing parking and loading spaces may not be reduced below the requirements established
in this section without the approval of an alternative parking plan by the Administrator. Any
change in use that increases off-street parking or loading requirements must provide for
installation of the required parking and loading spaces or be approved by the Administrator.
2. Notwithstanding landscaping requirements set forth in Subchapter 11, if parking is in excess
of 110 percent of the parking spaces required by Table 10.4.6 is provided, landscaping area
equivalent to 25 percent of the parcel’s impervious cover must be provided unless an
alternative landscaping plan is approved as prescribed in Subchapter 11.
3. Discontinuing or dispensing with, or causing the discontinuance or reduction of, the required
parking facilities unless a building, use, or structure is discontinued or alternative off-street
parking facilities are approved by the Administrator.
4. Required off-street parking areas shall not be used for the commercial sale, repair,
dismantling, servicing, storage or display of vehicles, equipment, materials, supplies or
merchandise.
5. All off-street parking spaces shall be accompanied by adequate automobile maneuvering
area permitting full and direct ingress and egress to such parking spaces. The maneuvering
area thereto shall be located entirely upon private property.
6. All off-street parking areas shall be so graded and drained as to dispose of all surface water
accumulated within the area, and shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly
and safe loading or unloading, parking and storage of vehicles in accordance with
stormwater, detention and water quality requirements.
B. Required Parking Ratio
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
Residential Uses
Accessory Dwelling Unit To be determined by Planning Director
Assisted Living 0.5/bed plus 1 space for every 2 employees
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park To be determined by Planning Director
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 168/320
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
Condominium 2 spaces per dwelling unit plus guest parking at a ratio of 20% of
the dwelling units
Duplex 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Live Work Unit 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Manufactured Home Dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Multi-Family
1.5 spaces per 1 bedroom unit
2 spaces per 2 bedroom unit
2.5 spaces per 3+ bedroom unit
plus guess parking at a ratio of 5% of the required spaces
Nursing Home/Skilled Nursing
(Convalescent) 0.5 per bed plus 1 space for every 2 employees
Single Family Attached (2 units) 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Single Family Attached (3 or more units)
Townhome
2 spaces per dwelling unit plus guest parking at a ratio of 20% of
the dwelling units
Single Family, Detached 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Non-Residential Uses
Amenity Center 1.5 spaces per 250 s.f.
Animal Establishments, Commercial 1 space per 300 s.f. of of_ice
Athletic Facilities 1 space for every 4 seats (with seats)
1 space for every100 sf (without seats)
Auction Sales 1 space per 200 sf
Auto Salvage Yard
<2,500s.f. : 1 space per 275 s.f.
2,500 s.f. - 10,000 s.f. : 1:100 s.f.
of_ice 1 per 250 s.f.
Automobile Parking Lot/Garage To be determined by Planning Director
Automobile Sales and Rental 1 space per 500 s.f. indoor facility plus 1 space per 1,000 s.f.
outdoor lot area
Automotive Body Repair Shop (Collision
Repair) 5 per service bay
Automotive Parts Sales, Inside 1 space per 250 s.f.
Automotive Repair and Service 6 spaces per service bay
Bar/Tavern 1 space per 75 s.f.
Body Art Studio 1 space per 200 s.f.
Brewery/Distillery/Winery, Micro 1 space per 100 s.f. of designated seating area/entertainment + 4
additional spaces
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 169/320
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
Brewpub/Wine Bar 1 space per 100 s.f.
Business Services 1 space per 250 s.f.
Call Center 1 space per 400 s.f.
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park To be determined by Planning Director
Car Wash
self serve: 2 spaces per facility
full service: 1 space per 150 s.f.
Catering Establishment 1 space per 400 s.f.
Cemetery/Mausoleum 1 space per 150 internment plots plus 1 space per 350 s.f.
Civic Center 1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 100 sf, based on maximum
design capacity whichever is less
Clinic 1 space per 200 s.f.
College, University, Trade School, or Private
Boarding School
1 space per every faculty and staff plus 1 space per every 5
residents and 1 space per every commuter student
Commercial Recreation and Entertainment,
Indoor
1 space per 250 s.f. plus
1 space per 500 s.f. up to 50,000 s.f. plus
1 space per 1000 s.f. over 50,000 s.f.
Commercial Recreation and Entertainment,
Outdoor 1 space per 250 s.f. structural area plus 1 space per 2 seats
Commissary 1 space per 400 s.f.
Contractor's Shop 1 space per 500 s.f.
Convention Center 1 space per 4 seats or 1 space per 100 sf GFA, based on maximum
design capacity whichever is less.
Crematorium 1 space per 350 s.f.
Data Center 1 space per 300 s.f.
Day Care Facility 1 space per 6 students plus 1 space per employee
Distribution/Logistics Center 1 per 1000 s.f.
Drive-in/ Thru
1 parking space for each 50 s.f. of _loor space used or designated as
customer service and waiting area, or 4 spaces, whichever is
greater
Dry Cleaning, Major 1 space per 250 s.f
Dry Cleaning, Minor 1 space per 250 s.f
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental,
Indoor 1 space per 500 s.f.
Equipment and Machinery Sales and Rental,
Outdoor 1 space per 2,000 s.f.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 170/320
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
Event Center 1 space per 100 sf used for assembly or dancing
Farm, Ranch, Garden, Orchard, or Winery To be determined by Planning Director
Financial Institution 1 space per 300 s.f.
Financial Services Institution, Alternative 1 space per 300 s.f.
Food Processing Establishment, Major See industrial, heavy
Food Processing Establishment, Minor See industrial, light
Gas Station 1 space per 400 s.f.
Golf Course and/or Country Club 4 space per hole plus 1.5 space per accessory structure
Golf Driving Range 0.5 space per tee
Government Facilities 1 space per 250 s.f. plus 1 space per _leet vehicle
Health/Fitness Center 1 space per 200 s.f.
Hospital 1 space per 4 beds
Hotel/Hotel Residence 1 space per bedroom plus 1.5 spaces per 2 employees
Household Appliance Service and Repair 1 space per 250 s.f.
Industrial Uses, Heavy 1 space per 700 s.f. of indoor (non-storage) plus 1 space per 1,000
s.f. of outdoor space plus 1 space per 2,500 s.f. of indoor storage
Industrial Uses, Light 1 space per 600 s.f. of indoor (non-storage) plus 1 space per 1,000
s.f. of outdoor space plus 1 space per 2,500 s.f. of indoor storage
Laundromat 1 space per 250 s.f.
Liquor Store (Off-Premise Consumption) 1 space per 250 s.f.
Lounge 1 space per 100 s.f.
Machine Shop See industrial uses, light
Massage Therapy, Licensed 1 space per 200 s.f.
Microwave and Satellite Receiving Station,
Commercial 1 space per service employee
Mini-warehouse/public storage 1 space per 250 s.f. of of_ice space
Mobile Food Park See Section 4.9
Mortuary/Funeral Home 1 space per 150 internment plots plus 1 space per 350 s.f.
Museum/Art Gallery 1 space per 500 s.f.
Nursery Indoor/Outdoor Sales 1 space per 250 s.f. of of_ice space
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 171/320
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
1 space per 750 s.f. outdoor sales, service and display
1 space per 500 s.f. indoor sales, service and display
Of_ice/Showroom 1 space per 300 sf of_ice + 1 space per 1000sf showroom
Of_ice/Warehouse 1 space per 300 sf of_ice + 1 space per 1000sf warehouse
Of_ice: Administrative or Professional 1 space per 250 s.f.
Of_ice: Medical 1 space per 200 s.f.
Open Storage (Primary Use) 1 space per 2000 s.f.
Park or Playground To be determined by Planning Director
Pawn Shop 1 space per 250 s.f.
Personal Services 1 space per 200 s.f.
Place of Worship 1 space per 3 seats plus spaces necessary to accommodate
accessory uses based on general requirements for accessory uses
Portable Building Sales 1 space per 500 sf of sales and service building
Print Shop, Major 1 per 400 s.f.
Print Shop, Minor 1 per 400 s.f.
Reception Hall 1 space per 100 sf used for assembly or dancing
Recycling Center To be determined by Planning Director
Recycling Plant See industrial uses, heavy
Research and Development Center 1 space per 300 s.f.
Restaurant 1 space per 75 s.f. (includes outdoor seating and waiting area)
Retail Sales and Service - Single tenant over
50,000 SF 1 space epr 225 s.f. of net retail _loor area
Retail Sales and Services 1 space per 250 s.f. of _irst 20,000 s.f. plus 1 space per 500 s.f. for
s.f. between 20,000 s.f. to 50,000 s.f.
School: Public, Private or Parochial
Elementary School - 1.5 spaces per classroom
Middle School - 1.5 spaces per classroom
High School - 1.5 spaces for each staff member plus 1 space for
each 3 students enrolled in 11th and 12th grades
Sexually Oriented Business 1 space per 200 s.f.
Shooting Range, Indoor 1 space per 200 s.f. of indoor facilities, plus 1 space per bay or
target
Small Engine Repair Shop 1 space per 400 s.f.
Stable, Commercial To be determined by Planning Director
Theatre 1 space per 3 seats
Transit Facility (Park & Ride) To be determined by Planning Director
Transit Terminal (Park & Ride) 1 per 300 s.f. of of_ice; 1 per 400 s.f.
of terminal area + additional spaces as determined by the Director
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 172/320
Table 10.4.6 Required Parking
Truck Sales and Rental, Truck/Trailers/Heavy
Truck
1 space per 500 s.f. indoor facility plus 1 space per 1,000 s.f.
outdoor lot area
Truck Terminal To be determined by Planning Director
Trucks/Bus/Large Vehicle Repair 6 spaces per service bay
Utilities 1 space per facility plus 1 space for every 250 s.f. of habitable
building space
Vehicular Sales and Rental, Recreational 1 space per 500 s.f. indoor facility plus 1 space per 1,000 s.f.
outdoor lot area
Wireless Telecommunication Facilities
(WTFs) / Radio TV Tower
1 space per facility plus 1 space for every 250 s.f. of habitable
building space
Wrecker/Towing Services 1 per 500 sf of service building
10.4.7 Rules for Calculating Requirements
A. General
1. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be constructed to be the
next largest whole number.
2. In computing the parking requirements for any building or development, the total parking
requirements shall be the sum of the speci_ic parking space requirements for each class of
use included in the building for development.
3. Where open land is used for manufacturing, storage, or other operations in a manner similar
to indoor operations, such open land shall be added to _loor space in determining the
number of parking spaces required.
B. Multiple Uses
Lots containing more than one use must provide parking and loading in an amount equal to the
total of the requirements for all uses, unless an alternative parking plan is approved by the
Administrator.
C. Area Measurements
Unless otherwise expressly stated, all square-footage-based parking and loading standards must
be computed on the basis of Gross Floor Area (GFA), which for purposes of computing off-street
parking requirements, means the Gross Floor Area of the building measured from the exterior
faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings. The following
areas are part of GFA:
1. The area of each _loor of the structure.
2. All attic space used for an active commercial use unless otherwise determined by the
Planning Director.
D. Occupancy-Based Standards
For the purpose of calculating parking requirements based on employees, students, residents or
occupants, calculations must be based on the following whichever is applicable and results in the
greater number of spaces:
1. The largest number of persons working on any single shift;
2. The maximum enrollment; or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 173/320
3. The maximum _ire-rated capacity
E. Unlisted Uses
Upon receiving a site development permit application for a use not speci_ically listed in Table
10.4.6, Required Parking Ratio, the Planning Director must apply the off-street parking standard
for the listed use that is deemed most similar to the proposed use or require a parking study to
create an alternative parking plan.
F. Ratios determined by the Planning Director
The Planning Director shall determine the minimum parking requirement as indicated by that use.
In making a determination, the Planning Director shall consider the requirements applicable to
similar uses, the location and characteristics of the use, and appropriate traf_ic engineering and
planning data.
10.4.8 Parking Space and Parking Lot Design
A. Parking Space Dimensions
1. Accessibility
Parking spaces designated as handicapped must comply with the design and location
requirements of the American National Standards Institute (A117.1) and the Texas
Accessibility Standards administered by the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation.
2. Dimensions
a. All parking areas and spaces shall be provided with wheel stops for each individual
parking space, or wheel stop curbing designed to prevent parked vehicles from
extending beyond the property lines, damaging adjacent landscaping, walls or
buildings, or overhanging sidewalk areas. Each handicapped accessible parking space
without a curb stop should be furnished with a parking barrier. Barriers should not
block the access aisles between handicapped accessible spaces. If the parking space is
located adjacent to a sidewalk a wheel stop for each individual parking space is
required in addition to any raised curb provided.
b. Minimum parking dimensions must be consistent with the dimensions indicated in
Table 10.4.8 Parking Dimensions.
Table 10.4.8 Parking Dimensions
Angle (degrees) Width (ft) Length (ft)
Adjacent Aisle Width (ft)
One-Way Two-Way Fire Lane
90 9 19 n/a 24 26’
75 8.5 19.5 25 24 26’
60 8.5 17 18 24 26’
45 8 16 15 22 26’
Parallel 8 25 15 20 26’
B. Parking Lot Setback
1. See Subchapter 4 for distances regarding streetscape yard.
2. Parking lots within 20 feet of a public right-of-way must have a maximum of seven
contiguous spaces separated by a landscape island that is a minimum of 18 feet by 19 feet,
the area of two parking stalls.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 174/320
C. Parking is discouraged along major entrance drives.
D. Drive Aisle Widths
1. Drive aisle widths adjoining off-street parking spaces must comply with the standards in
Table 10.4.8, Parking Dimensions.
2. For aisles without parking spaces, Aisle widths may be reduced to 20 feet for two-way traf_ic
and 10 feet for one-way traf_ic unless otherwise required by the Fire Code.
E. Parking Lot Landscaping
Landscaping shall be included within surface parking lots in accordance with Subchapter 11.
Landscaping and Screening Standards.
F. Parking Lot Striping
All striping for parking stalls shall be minimum of four (4) inches wide of white safety traf_ic paint
designated for such use. All other markings required to designate crosswalks, directional arrows,
_ire lanes, ADA accessible spaces, or service areas shall be in compliance with the State Manual of
Uniform Traf_ic Control Devices (MUTCD) and/or the International Fire Code.
10.4.9 Structured Parking Standards
A. Standards
1. Primary vehicular access to parking structures should consider the location of pedestrian
routes and avoid using a major pedestrian thoroughfare such as a primary point of access.
2. Pedestrian routes in structures and lots shall be easily identi_iable and accessed.
3. Clear visual connections between a garage or surface parking lot and adjacent sidewalks and
buildings are desirable.
4. Interior and exterior lighting shall be designed for safety as well as nighttime appearance in
accordance with Subchapter 13.
5. Dimensions for parking within a parking structured will be provided as outlined in Table
10.4.9 Structured Parking Criteria.
TABLE 10.4.9 STRUCTURED PARKING CRITERIA
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
Width of
Stall
Depth of
Stall 90° to
Aisle
Width of Aisle Width of Stall
Parallel to
Aisle
Module Width
One Way Two Way One Way Two Way
Standard Parking Spaces
30 8'6? 15'6? 11' — 17' 42' —
30 9' 15'6? 10' — 18' 41' —
45 8'6? 16'6? 13' — 12' 46' —
45 9' 16'6? 12' — 12'9? 45' —
60 8'6? 18' 14'6? — 9'10? 50'6? —
60 9' 18' 13' — 10'5? 49' —
75 8'6? 18' 18' — 8'10? 54' —
75 9' 18' 17' — 9'4? 53' —
90 8'6? 17' — 24' 8'6? — 58'
90 9' 17' — 23' 9' — 57'
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 175/320
10.4.10 Alternative Parking Plans
A. An alternative parking plan may be approved by the Administrator for speci_ic unlisted
developments or uses that the Administrator determines require a different amount of parking
than the standards shown in Table 10.4.6 Required Parking Ratio. Provided, however, that the
Administrator must ensure adequate on-site parking when approving an alternative parking plan.
1. Parking Study Option: Parking studies may be required for speci_ic unlisted uses or when a
reduction in the parking requirement is desired. applicants for Uses that appear on Table
10.4.6 Required Parking Ratios may choose to conduct a parking study to determine
appropriate parking requirements. This option is intended to allow development to meet
vehicle parking and transportation access needs by means other than providing parking
spaces on-site in accordance with the ratios in Table 10.4.6 Required Parking Ratios.
2. Parking Study Required: Applicants proposing to develop or expand an unlisted use or when
a reduction in the parking requirement is desired may submit a parking study or other
documentation that provides justi_ication for the number of off-street parking spaces
proposed. A parking study may include estimates of the parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute of Traf_ic Engineers (ITE), or other acceptable estimates as
approved by the Administrator. A parking study must, where possible, include reliable data
from uses or combinations of uses that are the same as or comparable with the proposed
use. Comparability is based on density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, and location. The
study must document the source of the data used to develop the recommendations.
3. Eligible Alternatives: A number of speci_ic parking and access alternatives may be considered,
including off-site and shared parking. The Administrator may consider and approve any
alternative to providing off-street parking spaces on the site of the subject development. An
alternative plan must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Administrator that the proposed
plan will bene_it surrounding neighborhoods and improve City-wide traf_ic circulation or
urban design more than strict compliance with off-street parking standards in this Code. An
alternative parking proposal must be prepared by a registered professional engineer or
other individual with training or experience in the design of parking facilities. Statements of
quali_ications may be required in order to document such training or experience.
B. Review by Administrator
The Administrator must review a parking study and any other traf_ic engineering and planning
data relevant to the establishment of an appropriate off-street parking standard for an unlisted or
proposed alternative parking standard use. After reviewing the parking study, the Administrator
must establish a minimum off-street parking standard for the proposed use.
10.4.11 Off-Site Parking
A. Off-site parking spaces may be located on a separate lot from the lot on which the principal use is
located in accordance with all the following standards:
1. Off-site parking may not be used to satisfy the off-street parking standards for residential
uses, restaurants, convenience stores or other convenience-oriented uses.
2. Required parking spaces reserved for persons with disabilities shall not be located off-site.
3. Off-site parking must be located within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the use served.
4. Off-site parking spaces may not be separated from the use that they serve by a street rightof-
way with a width of more than 80 feet, unless an adequate pedestrian path is provided as
approved by the Administrator.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 176/320
5. Off-site parking areas serving uses located in non-residential zoning districts must be located
in a district that is the equivalent zoning district or less restrictive as the site requesting off
site parking.
6. In any case where required parking spaces are not located on the same property with the
activity or establishment, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used,
a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, _iled
with Williamson and/or Travis County and submitted with the application for site plan
approval.
10.4.12 Shared Parking
A. Ef_icient use of land and resources by allowing users to share off-street parking facilities is
encouraged whenever feasible. Developments or uses that have different operating hours or peak
business periods may share off-street parking spaces if approved by the Administrator based upon
the following standards:
1. Shared parking spaces must be located within 1,000 feet of the primary entrances of all uses
served.
2. Shared parking spaces serving uses located in nonresidential districts must be located in a
district that is at least as restrictive as the more restrictive of the uses applying for shared
parking spaces. Shared parking spaces serving uses in residential districts may be located in
residential or nonresidential districts.
3. Those wishing to use shared parking as a means of satisfying off-street parking requirements
must submit a shared parking study to the Administrator that clearly demonstrates the
feasibility of shared parking. The study must address, at a minimum, the size and type of the
proposed development, the composition of tenants, the anticipated rate of parking turnover
and the anticipated peak parking and traf_ic loads by hour of the day for all uses that will be
sharing off-street parking spaces.
4. A shared parking plan must be enforced by a written agreement among all owners of record.
An attested copy of the agreement between the owners of record must be submitted to the
Administrator before a site development permit for any use to be served by the off-site
parking area may be issued. A shared parking agreement may be revoked only if all required
off-street parking spaces will be provided in accordance with this section.
5. Failing to comply with the shared parking provisions of this subchapter constitutes a
violation of this code that is subject to penalties as described in Subchapter 1.
6. In any case where required parking spaces are not located on the same property with the
activity or establishment, or where such spaces are collectively or jointly provided and used,
a written agreement thereby assuring their retention for such purposes shall be properly
drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the city attorney, _iled
with Williamson and/or Travis County and submitted with the application for site plan
approval.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
10.5 LOADING AND DELIVERY REQUIREMENTS
A. Common or shared loading and delivery entrances, or service courts, must be provided between
adjacent buildings or developments.
B. Non-residential uses over 20,000 square feet in area must provide loading and delivery facilities
separate from customer parking and pedestrian areas.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 177/320
C. Loading spaces should be designated and measure 45 feet in length by 12 feet in width unless
otherwise approved by the Planning Director.
D. Nonresidential loading and delivery facilities must be screened in accordance with Subchapter 11
and designed in accordance with Subchapter 9.
E. Loading and unloading areas shall be located so as not to restrict or interfere with the normal
movement of pedestrians and vehicles along streets, sidewalks or in parking areas. Driveway
placement should be such that loading and unloading activities will in no way hinder vehicle
ingress or egress.
F. Child care centers and other child care facilities shall be required to provide onsite
loading/unloading area, separate from the parking area and as close to the main entrance as
possible. The loading/unloading area shall have one-way movement.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
10.6. QUEUING REQUIREMENTS
10.6.1 Applicability
The vehicle queuing standards of this subsection apply unless the Administrator grants an exception. The
Administrator may require additional queueing spaces where trip generation rates suggest that
additional spaces will be needed.
10.6.2 Number of Spaces Required
A. Off-street queuing spaces must be provided as follows:
Activity Type Minimum Queuing Spaces Measured From
Automobile repair shop 1 Entrance to stall
Automated teller machine 3 Machine
Bank teller lane 4 Teller window
Car wash stall, automated 4 Entrance to wash bay
Car wash stall, self-service 3 Entrance to wash bay
Gasoline pump island 2 Pump island
Parking lot, controlled entrance 4 Key code box
Pharmacy pickup 3 Pharmacy window
Restaurant drive-thru
6 Order box
4 Order box to pick-up window
Other Determined by Administrator
B. Required queuing spaces are subject to the following design and layout standards.
1. Queueing spaces must be at least eight (8) feet in width and 20 feet in length.
2. Queueing spaces may not impede _ire lane(s), on or off-site traf_ic movements, identi_ied
pedestrian routes, or vehicular movements into or out of off-street parking spaces.
3. Queue spaces must be separated from other internal driveways by raised medians for traf_ic
movement and safety if the Administrator determines that such a separation is necessary.
4. Queue spaces are not interchangeable with parking spaces unless speci_ically provided for in
the Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 178/320
10.7 BICYCLE FACILITIES
A. A bicycle rack is required for each development/building providing storage capacity for a
minimum of four (4) bicycles. For sites with multiple buildings a bicycle rack is required to be
provided at each building. For commercial sites with buildings exceeding 50,000 s.f. a bicycle
rack(s) with the capacity to provide a minimum of 8 bicycle spaces is required.
B. Bicycle facilities should be placed in clearly designated, safe, and convenient locations, so that no
tenant entrance is greater than 100 feet from a bike facility.
C. Bicycle facilities must be separated from motor vehicle parking in order to protect both bicycles
and vehicles from accidental damage. Facilities must be separated from the building or other walls,
landscaping, other features a minimum of three (3') feet to make such facilities easy to use.
D. Bicycle facilities must be constructed to enable the user to secure a bicycle by locking the frame
and one wheel of each bicycle. Facilities must be easily usable for both U-locks and cable locks and
support the bicycle frame at two points. Facilities must be anchored securely to the ground or
building.
E. Bicycle racks shall be shown on the site plan along with a detail of the proposed bicycle rack
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 11. LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING STANDARDS.
11.1. PURPOSE.
This Subchapter establishes requirements for landscaping elements, buffering and screening to provide
orderly, safe, attractive and healthy development of land within the community. The regulations in this
Subchapter are intended to enhance the community’s ecological, environmental and aesthetic quality.
The City experiences frequent periods of drought; therefore all landscapes shall maximize the use of
native, drought tolerant plants to the extent practicable.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.2 APPLICABILITY
A. General
The provisions of this Subchapter shall apply to all property located within the corporate limits of
the City of P_lugerville, and when developed as any residential or non-residential use in the ETJ
when governed by a development agreement.
B. Additions, expansions and redevelopments shall comply with this Subchapter in the following
situations:
1. Existing non-residential or multi-family sites when ground level additions, expansions,
and/or redevelopments are equal to or greater than 25% of the existing impervious cover, at
which point the entire site shall conform to the requirements of this Subchapter.
2. Existing non-residential or multi-family sites when cumulative ground level additions,
expansions, and/or redevelopments total 25% or more of the existing improvements over a
three (3) year period, at which point the entire site shall conform to the requirements of this
Subchapter.
3. Existing non-residential or multi-family sites when the amount of parking is increased by
10% or more.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 179/320
4. Existing non-residential or multi-family sites with lawfully established nonconforming uses,
when the use is expanded, discontinued or otherwise changed in accordance with
Subchapter 8.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MINIMUM REQUIRED LANDSCAPING
A. General
A minimum percentage of all lots shall be devoted to landscaping through the use of native trees
and shrubs. Areas not planted with trees or shrubs should be designed with landscape beds
containing native ornamental grasses, perennials, and ground cover. Integration of natural rocks,
crushed granite, and wood mulch is permitted within the required landscape area, provided it is
architecturally integrated into landscape beds and complimentary of plantings. The use of turf
grass is permitted, but irrigated turf areas shall be limited to the amount identi_ied in 11.4 (D).
B. Non-Residential Zoning Districts
The required percentage of landscape area and quantity of trees and shrubs for non-residential
uses shall comply with the requirements provided in Table 11.3 B and the following:
1. In the Agriculture/Conservation district, landscaping requirements shall apply to the limits of
construction, and are not applicable to agriculturally exempt appurtenances.
2. Multi-Family developments within non-residential or corridor districts are subject to Table
11.3 C requirements, industrial uses permitted by speci_ic use permit are subject to CI
landscaping requirements;
3. Additional plantings may be required to comply with the streetscape, building, bufferyard,
screening, and parking lot landscaping requirements.
Table 11.3 B - Non-residential Landscape Area and Minimum Planting Requirements
Non-Residential Zoning Districts Percent of lot
Landscaped
Required Trees (3” Caliper) and Shrubs (3-
Gallon) in landscape area
A Agriculture/Conservation Min. 30% 1 Tree & 2 shrubs per 300 S.F.
O Of_ice Min. 30% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
NS Neighborhood Services Min. 25% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
R Retail Min. 20% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
GB-1 General Business-1 Min. 20% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
CL3 Corridor Urban Level 3 Min. 20% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
CL4 Corridor Urban Level 4 Min. 20% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
CL5 Corridor Urban Level 5 Min. 15% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
GB-2 General Business-2 Min. 15% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 500 S.F.
CI Campus Industrial Min. 15% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 500 S.F.
LI Light Industrial Min. 15% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 800 S.F.
GI General Industrial Min. 15% 1 Tree & 4 shrubs per 800 S.F.
C. Residential Zoning Districts
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 180/320
The required percentage of landscape area and quantity of trees and shrubs for residential uses
shall comply with the requirements provided in Table 11.3 C and the following:
1. At least half of the required trees shall be planted in the commonly perceived front yard;
2. Within a condominium, a corner residential dwelling shall be considered a dwelling adjacent
to two public streets, internal drive aisles or a combination thereof;
3. Where tree spacing constraints exist, remaining required trees may be planted within
common open space areas within the development if approved by the Administrator;
4. Additional plantings may be required to comply with the streetscape, building, bufferyard,
screening, and parking lot landscaping requirements.
Table 11.3 C – Residential Landscape Area and Minimum Planting Requirements
Zoning Districts per Residential
Development Type
Percent of lot
Landscaped
Required Trees
(3” Caliper)
Required Shrubs
(3-Gallon)
All Single Family Detached Min. 30%
2 Trees per non-corner
residential dwelling; 4
trees per corner
residential dwelling
4 shrubs per 10'
foundation facing a
street, exception of
driveway
All Single Family Attached Min. 30%
1 Tree per non-corner
residential dwelling; 2
trees per corner
residential dwelling
4 shrubs per 10' of
foundation facing a
street
MF-10,
CL3, R Multi-Family Min. 40% 1 Tree per 300 S.F.
landscape area
4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
landscape area
MF-20,
CL4, GB-1 Multi-Family Min. 40% 1 Tree per 300 S.F.
landscape area
4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
landscape area
CL5 Multi-Family Min. 40% 1 Tree per 300 S.F.
landscape area
4 shrubs per 300 S.F.
landscape area
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.4 GENERAL PLANTING CRITERIA
Landscape areas shall be designed to enhance visual interest, encourage native landscapes and
biodiversity, reduce soil erosion, and maximize water conservation. All landscaping shall comply with the
planting criteria described herein.
A. Selection
1. Plantings shall consist of a mix of native drought tolerant trees, shrubs, ornamental grasses,
_lowering perennials and ground cover as approved through the P_lugerville Drop by Drop
program or a similar Central Texas native plant resource approved by the Planning Director.
2. When native material is not appropriate for the intended use or appearance, the Planning
Director may consider alternatives meeting the following criteria:
a. Species is found within Zones 8 - 9 of the USDA Plant Hardiness Zones with preference
given to species located in Zone 8b; or
b. Species is considered regionally adapted to heat, cold, and drought conditions, is noninvasive,
and is not readily susceptible to disease or pests.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 181/320
3. All new plant material shall meet the latest requirements of the American Standard for
Nursery Stock (ANSI Z60.1).
4. All new plant material shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the latest edition
of the American National Standards Institute requirements for Tree, Shrub, and Other Woody
Plant Maintenance (ANSI A300 Parts 1 through 6).
B. Trees
1. Type A and B Trees provided in Table 11.11.3 shall be a minimum of three-inch (3”) caliper at
planting.
2. Type C Trees provided in Table 11.11.3 shall be a minimum of two-inch (2”) caliper at
planting.
3. Trees not included on the Approved Tree List in Table 11.11.3, such as palms, may be
considered by the Planning Director if the following are met:
a. Species is found within Zones 8 - 9 of the USDA Plant Hardiness Zones with preference
given to species located in Zone 8b; or
b. Species is considered regionally adapted to heat, cold, and drought conditions, is noninvasive,
and is not readily susceptible to disease or pests; and
c. Shall be a minimum of three-inch (3”) caliper at planting.
4. All trees shall be planted and maintained in accordance with the Tree Speci_ications provided
within this Subchapter and per the Tree Technical Manual, including but not limited to the
addition of amended soil and organic mulch at time of planting, and a bubbler irrigation
system as required within this Subchapter.
C. Shrubs, Vines, Ground Cover, Perennials and Ornamentals
1. Shrubs, vines, ground cover, and perennials shall be planted within landscape planting beds
to minimize the amount of irrigated lawn or turf grass.
2. Shrubs, vines, ground cover, and perennials shall be of a native Central Texas variety listed in
the P_lugerville Drop by Drop program or a similar Central Texas native plant list, and a
minimum three (3) gallon container size at time of planting.
3. Ornamental grasses identi_ied in the P_lugerville Drop by Drop program or a similar Central
Texas native plant list may be utilized in lieu of shrubs if they are a minimum three (3) gallon
container size at time of planting.
4. Yuccas, agaves, succulents, cacti, and sotols recognized as native or hardy to the area by the
Lady Bird Johnson Wild_lower Center may be considered in lieu of shrubs if they are a
minimum three (3) gallon container size at time of planting.
D. Turf and Lawn Grass
1. To encourage water conservation, irrigated turf and lawn grass shall be minimized in the
landscape. Where turf or lawn grass is planted, drought tolerant species shall be used with
preference to native blends, as appropriate. Examples of recommended varieties for full sun,
high foot traf_ic areas are “Sahara” Bermuda, and “Thunder” or “Tech” turf blends. “Habiturf”
is encouraged in full sun, low foot traf_ic areas and may be appropriately used as a transition
between landscape planting beds and areas with high foot traf_ic. Areas with partial shade
are recommended to utilize: “Palisade” Zoysia or “Shadow Turf” Buffalo in lieu of Saint
Augustine.
2. Residential Lawn or Turf Grass:
a. The amount of irrigated lawn or turf grass for residential sites shall not exceed 2.5
times the foundation footprint or 10,000 square feet, whichever is the smaller square
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 182/320
footage for all single family lots _inal platted after January 1, 2016.
b. Areas not irrigated are encouraged to utilize landscape beds with native plants. Lawn
or turf grass blends may be planted in the remaining landscape area, provided the area
is not irrigated.
c. Any lawn or turf grass installed shall utilize a warm weather grass variety or blend that
has summer dormancy capabilities. Examples of recommended varieties and blends are
provided above.
d. Saint Augustine shall only be allowed in shaded areas with less than 6 or more hours of
full sun a day.
3. Non-Residential Lawn or Turf Grass:
a. Lawn or turf grass for commercial sites shall not exceed thirty-three (33%) percent of
the total landscaped area. Areas not irrigated or left naturally shall be exempt from the
limitation.
b. Any lawn or turf grass installed shall utilize a drought tolerant species with preference
to native blends as described above.
c. Landscape areas not otherwise planted with shrubs, trees, or lawn shall contain
landscape planting beds in accordance with requirements provided herein.
4. Turf areas may be sodded, plugged, sprigged, or seeded, except in times of Stage 3 or greater
drought at which time solid sod shall be utilized. Solid sod shall also be used in swales or
other areas subject to erosion as determined by the City Engineer.
5. Right-of-way shall be restored and maintained with vegetative ground cover as required by
the Engineering Design Manual.
6. Synthetic or arti_icial lawns or plants shall be prohibited.
E. Landscape Planting Beds.
1. Landscape planting beds containing native shrubs, vines, perennials and ornamentals are
encouraged to minimize the amount of irrigated lawn or turf grass.
2. Irrigation within landscape beds shall be limited to a drip irrigation system as required
within this Subchapter.
3. All debris, wood chips, pavement, concrete, and rock over 2” in diameter shall be removed
from the planting pit to a minimum of twenty-four (24”) inch depth. The entire planting bed
shall contain a minimum depth of twenty-four (24”) inches of soil suitable for plant
establishment and growth and may not be compacted or stabilized.
4. A native drought tolerant ground cover or an organic wood mulch shall be installed to
conserve moisture in the ground and improve soil fertility. Native rock such as limestone,
river rock, crushed granite or similar architectural material may be considered in landscape
planting beds when used in combination with the native drought tolerant ground cover or
organic mulch to enhance interest and add variety in the landscape. At no point shall an
entire site’s landscape planting bed be covered in rock, unless otherwise approved by the
Planning Director.
5. Landscape planting beds may be used as stormwater collection areas commonly known as
rain gardens, provided the planting beds are designed to prevent loss of mulch and planting
material, include plants capable of surviving wet and drought conditions, and include either
engineered soils or other design measures to prevent stagnant conditions.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 183/320
11.5 STREETSCAPE YARD STANDARDS
Street trees help to provide a visual and audible buffer to mitigate vehicular traf_ic from adjacent land
uses, and also assist with improving regional air quality. Street trees shall be provided in the following
circumstances:
A. Non-residential and Multi-family Developments
The streetscape yard required per zoning district in Subchapter 4 shall include the street trees
required below. Trees may be planted in a non-linear or clustered fashion as long as the total
number of trees otherwise required are provided, the recommended spacing requirements in
Table 11.11.3 Approved Tree List and the Tree Technical Manual are generally maintained, and all
trees are planted outside of the sight triangle. Street yard trees may be used to meet the overall
landscaping requirements established in Table 11.3 (B) for non-residential sites.
1. One medium or large tree (Type A or B), from among the options identi_ied in Table 11.11.3
Approved Tree List, must be planted for every 40 linear feet of street frontage when
overhead utilities are absent.
2. One small tree (Type C), from among the options identi_ied in Table 11.11.3 Approved Tree
List, must be planted for every 20 linear feet of street frontage when overhead utilities are
present.
B. Residential Developments
Street trees shall be planted along a collector or arterial street when a landscape lot is required
per Subchapter 15. Trees may be planted in a non-linear or clustered fashion as long as the total
number of trees otherwise required are provided, the recommended spacing requirements in
Table 11.11.3 Approved Tree List and the Tree Technical Manual are generally maintained, and all
trees are planted outside of the sight triangle.
1. One medium or large tree (Type A or B), from among the options identi_ied in Table 11.11.3
Approved Tree List, shall be generally planted every 40 linear feet of street frontage when
overhead utilities are absent.
2. One small tree (Type C), from among the options identi_ied in Table 11.11.3, shall be
generally planted every 20 linear feet of street frontage when overhead utilities are present.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.6 BUILDING FOUNDATION LANDSCAPING
A. Non-residential and Multi-Family Developments
A landscape planting bed consisting of a minimum _ive (5) foot deep planting strip as measured at
ground level extending outward from the building façade and extending at least 50 percent of the
length of the building’s primary facades shall be provided.
1. One (1) shrub shall be planted every four (4) linear feet on center within the planting strip.
2. Ornamental Type C trees may be planted within the planting strip.
3. Shall comply with the general planting criteria as provided in 11.4.
4. The building foundation landscaping requirements may be used to meet the overall
landscaping requirements established in Table 11.3(B). Above ground planters, tree wells,
vegetative roof systems or similar approaches may be considered when traditional building
landscaping is not feasible.
B. Residential Developments
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 184/320
Foundation landscaping shall be provided in accordance with Table 11.3 C.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.7 SURFACE PARKING LANDSCAPING
Landscaping is required for all off-street surface parking areas, with exception of an individual singlefamily
dwelling driveway, and may be used to meet the overall landscaping requirements. Landscaping
shall be designed as provided below while maintaining Sight triangles at intersections within the parking
lot, along adjacent streets, at driveways, and access easements. Where designated on-street parking
spaces are proposed as part of a development, this provision shall apply.
11.7.1 Design
A. End Islands
1. An end or raised island at least 180 square feet in area must be located at both ends of every
interior and peripheral parking row, regardless of the length of the parking row. End islands
may have sidewalks through them.
2. All end islands must be raised at least six inches, curbed and must contain a surface, the
majority of which is planted or treated with enhanced paving. The soil within the planted
area shall not be compacted or stabilized. An alternative end island design may be
considered to address stormwater runoff if approved by the City Engineer.
B. Interior Islands
All interior islands must be raised at least six inches and curbed, with the majority of the area of
each island planted or treated with enhanced paving. The soil within the planted area shall not be
compacted or stabilized. An alternative interior island design may be considered to address
stormwater runoff if approved by the City Engineer.
C. Medians
1. A landscape median must be raised at least six (6) inches, curbed and must contain a surface,
the majority of which is planted or treated with enhanced paving. Medians shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet in width measured from back of curb to back of curb.
2. The soil within the planted area shall not be compacted or stabilized. An alternative median
design may be considered to address stormwater runoff if approved by the City Engineer.
D. Parking Rows
1. A parking space delineated by striping or curbing may not be located more than 50 feet from
a landscaped area.
2. A Parking Row adjacent to a public right of way or major drive aisle shall have a maximum of
ten (10) contiguous parking spaces separated from the right of way or drive aisle by a
Landscape Peninsula of at least 360 square feet as measured from the backs of curbs or the
equivalent of two (2) parking spaces.
3. In no case shall a Parking Row exceed ten (10) parking spaces without a separation of a
Landscape Island or Peninsula of at least 180 square feet as measured from the backs of
curbs.
4. There shall be no more than three (3) adjacent Parking Rows without a Landscape Median of
least ten (10) feet in width measured from back of curb to back of curb. A sidewalk may be
included within the Landscape Median if the median is expanded to ensure a minimum 10-ft
wide landscape area is maintained.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 185/320
5. Landscape medians shall be utilized within parking area designs to segment large expanses
of surface parking into “parking rooms” such that each parking room has no more than 200
parking spaces.
6. All Parking Rows must terminate with a landscape end island or Peninsula of at least 180
square feet regardless of Parking Row length. End islands or Peninsulas may have sidewalks
through them.
7. Landscape Islands, Peninsulas, and Medians may be utilized to accommodate innovative
storm water management approaches (i.e. rain gardens) provided they are designed and
certi_ied by a registered Landscape Architect or Engineer and approved by the Planning
Director in consultation with the City Engineer. All landscape islands, Peninsulas, and medians
shall be in accordance with the City of P_lugerville standard curb details and must contain a
surface, the majority of which is vegetated.
8. Any landscape area adjacent to pavement must be protected with a concrete curb and/or an
equivalent barrier such as a wheel stop.
11.7.3 Required Plantings within the Landscape Islands, Peninsulas, and Medians
A. One (1) Tree shall be planted within each landscape island and peninsula. If a Landscape island
extends the length of two (2) parking spaces then two (2) trees shall be planted within the
Landscape Island.
B. One (1) Tree shall be planted at least every 30 feet within a Landscape Median, measured from the
center of each trunk.
C. All new trees within a parking lot must be planted in a pervious area of at least 180 square feet
and with a minimum interior width of eight (8) feet.
D. Graphic L1, Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. The illustration below shall serve as an
example for the Parking Lot Landscaping Requirements. If there is a discrepancy between the text
of this Subchapter and the image below, the text shall control.
Graphic L1 – Parking Lot Landscaping
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 186/320
11.8 SCREENING REQUIREMENTS
Notwithstanding the minimum screening requirements provided below, Alternative Screening Plans that
re_lect innovative approaches to screening which exceed the minimum screening objectives of this
Subchapter may be considered on a case by case basis by the Planning Director.
11.8.1 Screening of Parking lots
A. All off-street surface parking associated with non-residential and multi-family uses and districts
must be screened from public rights-of-way and major drive aisles using one or more of the
screening methods described in this subsection.
1. A vegetated berm;
2. A planting screen utilizing evergreen shrubs.
3. A 3-ft tall wood picket fence, or a 3-ft tall native rock, stone, or brick wall may be permitted if
used in combination with native ornamental grasses, shrubs, _lowering perennials or similar
as identi_ied above in Subsection 11.8; or
4. A combination of any of the above and trees.
B. Planted screening must be capable of providing a solid screen of at least 36-inches in height within
two (2) years, and must be planted in a prepared bed that is at least three feet (3') in depth.
Parking lot screening shrubs may be used to meet the overall landscaping requirements
established in 11.3(B) and 11.3(C).
C. Screening must have a visual offset of at least three feet (3') every 60 linear feet. While a physical
offset is required, the use of clumped street trees within planting beds may be considered when
establishing the visual offset.
11.8.2 Screening of Mechanical Equipment
Mechanical equipment utilized in all developments shall be subject to the following screening
requirements:
A. All ground and wall-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air handling equipment, compressors,
duct work, transformers and elevator equipment) must be screened from public view from a street
or parking area, and on a minimum of three sides.
B. Roof-mounted mechanical equipment must be completely screened from ground level view on all
sides using a parapet wall. The parapet wall shall be provided along the full perimeter of the
building and be architecturally integrated into the structure using materials permitted in
Subchapter 9. If topography prevents full screening of the mechanical equipment through the use
of a parapet wall, alternative screening of the mechanical equipment in the area where a con_lict
occurs may be considered by the Planning Director.
C. Wall or ground-mounted equipment screening must consist of native evergreen vegetation, brick,
stone, reinforced concrete, or other similar masonry materials.
D. All fence or wall posts shall be concrete-based masonry or concrete pillars.
E. Exposed conduit, ladders, utility boxes and drain spouts must be painted to match the color of the
principal structure. Natural metallic _inishes are an acceptable alternative to paint.
11.8.3 Screening of Outdoor Storage
A. Outdoor storage in non-residential zoning districts, where permitted, shall only be located on the
side or rear of the principal structure and must be screened from public view at ground level.
B. Outdoor storage shall be screened with a minimum eight-foot (8') tall screen consisting of one or
more of the following:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 187/320
1. A masonry wall or other material that is similar to the principal structure;
2. Native, evergreen shrubs planted a maximum of four (4') feet apart on center that shall
create a solid screen to a minimum height of eight (8') feet within two (2) years; or
3. A three-foot (3') landscaped berm in conjunction with the aforementioned masonry wall or
evergreen shrubs.
11.8.4 Screening of Refuse Containers
All trash, recycling, compost and similar refuse containers for non-residential and multi-family uses and
districts shall comply with the following standards and screening:
A. Containers shall be located on the side or rear of the principal structure and screened from
ground level public view. Enclosure gates shall not face a public street unless otherwise approved
by the Planning Director.
B. Containers shall be located at least 50 feet away from the property line of any conforming
residential use or the boundary of any residential district with exception, the distance requirement
shall not be applicable when adjacent to a multi-family property or district.
C. Containers shall be located on a reinforced slab that is at least six inches thick and sloped to an
internal drain which is connected to a wastewater line.
D. Containers shall be screened on all four (4) sides, using an enclosure that screens the container
from view at the property line. Screening shall be at least as tall as the container(s) and comprised
of materials and color schemes that are visually and aesthetically compatible with the overall
project that incorporate the following:
1. Brick;
2. Stone;
3. Stucco;
4. Reinforced concrete; or
5. Other similar masonry materials as approved by the Planning Director.
E. Concrete _illed steel pipes (bollards) of minimum six-inch diameter shall be located around the
enclosure to protect it from vehicle operations while not obstructing operations associated with
the container.
F. Container enclosures shall have steel gates with spring-loaded hinges, or the equivalent, and
fasteners to keep them closed. With exception of typical container operations, the container lid and
enclosure doors shall be in the closed position. At no time shall a container enclosure door be left
in the open position.
G. When an enclosure is located adjacent to a landscaped area, trees, shrubs, vines, perennials and
ornamental plantings as permitted in this subchapter shall be located around the container
enclosure to enhance the aesthetics. All screening and landscaping shall be maintained by the
property owner at all times.
H. The ingress, egress, and approach to all container pads must conform to _ire lane requirements.
11.8.5 Screening of Loading Docks, Overhead Door, and Service Courts
This subsection shall apply to all buildings in non-residential zoning districts with a loading dock,
overhead door, or service court.
A. Service Courts containing loading docks and delivery receivable areas for multiple of_ice and
commercial uses shall be located to the side or rear of the buildings, with the entire extent of the
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 188/320
Service Court screened at ground level from a public street, main drive aisle and patron parking
area on all sides, with exception of the access point into the Service Court.
1. Screening of a Service Court shall consist of a wall constructed of complimentary materials as
the principal structure as permitted by Subchapter 9, and at a consistent height which
substantially provides consistent screening from the highest loading dock. Landscaping
shrubs and ornamental trees are encouraged to be located along the extent of the required
wall to provide visual relief.
2. The Planning Director may consider native evergreen trees and shrubs to be used to screen
all or a portion of the Service Court if the plantings result in a solid vegetative screening of at
least 8 feet tall within 2 years, the plantings or wall combination extend the entire distance
otherwise required for a solid wall as required herein, and the plantings are in addition to
the minimum landscaping required in Section 11.3.
B. When multiple buildings with a land use permitted in an industrial zoning district containing more
than two (2) loading docks are proposed, Loading Docks from each building shall be oriented
toward one another to establish a common Service Court.
C. At a minimum, walls commonly known as “wing walls” shall be provided to screen from ground
level all Loading Docks from public view. The wall shall consist of complimentary materials as the
principal structure permitted by Subchapter 9, at a consistent height which substantially provides
consistent screening from the highest loading dock, and extending at least 50 feet from the building
in order to screen the truck and trailer. If a wall is determined to not be feasible due to site or
height constraints, the Planning Director may consider native evergreen trees and shrubs to be
used provided the plantings result in a solid vegetative screening of at least 8 feet tall within 2
years, the plantings or wall combination extend the distance otherwise required for a solid wall as
required herein, and the plantings shall be in addition to the landscaping required in Section 11.3.
D. Where physical constraints prevent the required orientation of Overhead Doors required in
Subchapter 9, the Planning Director may consider an alternative orientation if the following is
provided:
1. Approved alternative landscape screening per Table 7 of this Subchapter; and
2. Structural awnings with a depth of at least 3’ 10” are provided over the extent of all
overhead doors facing the public street, or
3. Structural projections of at least 3’ 10” are provided in front of the overhead doors facing
the public street to reduce the visual impact of the service bay from the street.
E. Where physical constraints prevent the required orientation of loading docks required in
Subchapter 9, the Planning Director may consider an alternative orientation if the following
screening is provided:
1. Approved alternative landscape screening per 11.16 of this Subchapter; and
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 189/320
2. Structural projections of at least 3’ 10” are provided in front of the Loading Docks to reduce
the visual impact from the street; and
3. Structural awnings with a depth of at least 3’ 10” provided over the extent of aforementioned
structural projections facing the public street.
11.8.6 Screening of Storm Water Detention
Storm water detention and water quality ponds (if provided) should be located to the side or rear of a
lot to minimize visibility from a public street, major drive aisle, and patron parking. All storm water
detention and any water quality facilities within the city shall be screened by means of the following
landscape elements:
A. One Type A or Type B tree shall be planted for every thirty (30) linear feet of the detention and/or
water quality facility visible from a public street or major drive aisle; and
B. One Type C tree shall be planted for every thirty (30) linear feet of the detention and/or water
quality facility visible from a public street or major drive aisle; and
C. One large shrub (minimum _ive (5) gallon size) shall be planted on center for every four (4) linear
feet of the detention and/or water quality facility visible from a public street or major drive aisle;
and
D. Wrought iron fence (minimum 4 feet in height) shall be installed around the perimeter of the
detention and/or water quality facility when a fence is required to ensure safety. Plantings shall be
installed in front of the fence.
Full or partial exceptions to the screening requirement may be approved by the Planning Director if the
facility is designed as a retention pond with a waterfall, fountain or similar feature used as a visual
enhancement to a development.
11.8.7 Screening of Walk-in Coolers
A. Walk-in coolers shall be structurally integrated and composed of similar masonry materials to that
of the principal structure.
B. A wood board privacy fence shall not be permitted.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.9 FENCE AND WALL STANDARDS
The following standards shall apply to all fences and walls in all zoning districts and for all uses.
A. Except as otherwise allowed in this Subchapter, fences and walls shall not be taller than six (6) feet
in height unless otherwise approved by the Administrator, to a maximum of 7 feet, when
topographic or other site constraints exist. Fencing and walls shall not be placed within a sight
triangle.
B. Front yard fences are permitted on single family lots provided the fence does not exceed three (3)
feet in height and is located outside the sight triangle.
C. Fences and walls shall be constructed of high quality materials, such as brick, stone, masonry
fencing, stained cedar wood, and wrought iron. Table 11.9 speci_ies which types are permitted and
prohibited based on the land use:
Table 11.9 - Fencing Materials
Use Wood Chain Link Wrought
Iron
Masonry
Product
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 190/320
Table 11.9 - Fencing Materials
Use Wood Chain Link Wrought
Iron
Masonry
Product
Single-Family Detached Uses(4)
Permitted Prohibited Permitted Permitted
(All districts)
Single-Family Attached Uses(1)
Permitted(2) Prohibited Permitted Permitted
(SF-MU, 2-F, CL3)
Multi-Family Uses
Prohibited with
exception(3) Prohibited Permitted Permitted
Commercial Uses Prohibited with
exception(3) Prohibited Permitted Permitted
(All districts except Industrial)
Industrial Uses
Prohibited Prohibited Permitted Permitted
(CI or Speci_ic Use Permit)
Industrial Uses
Prohibited
Permitted when not visible
from, and set back at least
100 feet from, a public rightof-
way line
Permitted Permitted
(LI, GI only)
(1)Single-Family Attached (3 or more units): Perimeter fencing adjacent to a public right-of-way with a
continuous height greater than three (3) feet tall shall be prohibited.
(2)Single-Family Attached (3 or more units): Use of wood shall be limited to decorative fencing not taller
than four (4) feet in height.
(3)Multi-Family and Commercial Use Exception: A split rail, natural wood fence may be utilized as a
decorative feature and provide separation between uses if included as part of the landscape.
(4) Decorative fencing may be utilized when not visible from or adjacent to the public right of way.
D. Where perimeter fencing is utilized for single-family attached or multi-family uses, breaks in the
fence or wall shall be made to provide for pedestrian and bicycle connections to the public
sidewalk and adjacent developments. Decorative gates may be provided as necessary to ensure
security to the proposed development.
E. Except as otherwise required in this Subchapter, the maximum length of a continuous,
uninterrupted fence or wall plane is 100 feet. Breaks shall be provided through the use of natural
stone or brick columns, landscaped areas, transparent sections or a change in material.
F. When a sound barrier is required to comply with State or Federal requirements, a perimeter fence
or wall greater than six (6) feet may be considered or required by the Administrator.
11.9.1 Residential Subdivision Perimeter Fence Standards
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 191/320
A. Fences located along the perimeter of a residential subdivision shall be located within a landscape
lot or landscape easement, as required in Subchapter 15, to be owned and maintained by the
Homeowner’s Association.
B. Perimeter fencing shall be constructed of high quality materials, such as brick, stone, masonry
fencing, stained cedar wood, wrought iron, or a combination of said materials, in order to provide
variation and ensure longevity.
C. A decorative or capped stained cedar fence along the perimeter of a residential subdivision is
permitted to have a height of no greater than eight (8) feet.
D. All perimeter fencing or walls shall incorporate natural stone or brick columns approximately 120’
apart on center and at all areas where two different sections of fence meet (typically at a 90 degree
angle or similar) along arterial and collector streets, or public view areas.
E. All perimeter fencing shall incorporate staggers or other visual breaks to relieve the monotonous
appearance of continuous perimeter fence walls adjoining arterial streets.
F. Masonry entry signs may be provided in combination with a perimeter fence at the main entrance
to each single-family residential subdivision. An entry sign shall be located within a landscape lot or
landscape easement, outside of the vision clearance triangle, and shall be owned and maintained
by the Homeowner’s Association.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.10. BUFFERYARD REQUIREMENTS
A bufferyard is intended to help minimize any negative effects of a commercial or multi-family use on an
adjacent conforming single family residential property. The landscaping required within bufferyards
shall be provided in addition to the site landscaping required in Section 11.3.
A. Applicability
Refer to Subchapter 4 for bufferyard requirements.
B. Minimum Requirements
1. Four (4) large and/or medium evergreen trees and 15 shrubs per 100 linear feet of the site
development boundary; and
2. Opaque bufferyard wall as required below; and
3. Minimum distance from the property line as established by the speci_ic zoning district stated
in Subchapter 4.
C. Existing Conditions
1. When healthy, native trees and shrubs are located within the required bufferyard, the
existing trees and shrubs shall not be removed or replaced with new plantings.
2. In areas where vegetation is not present, where nuisance vegetation (i.e. poison ivy) is
dominant, or where diseased or dead trees or shrubs exist, bufferyard plantings shall be
required as provided above.
D. Permitted Encroachments
1. Passive recreation including pedestrian or bike trails provided that:
a. None of the required plantings are eliminated;
b. The total depth of the bufferyard from the property line is maintained; and
c. All other regulations of this Subchapter are met; and
d. If approved by the Administrator
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 192/320
2. Stormwater detention may be considered if:
a. Designed as a commonly known rain garden with engineered soils; and
b. None of the required plantings are eliminated; and
c. The total depth of the bufferyard from the property line is maintained; and
d. All other regulations of this Chapter are met; and
e. If approved by the Administrator
11.10.1 Bufferyard Walls
A. Walls shall be at least six (6) feet and at most eight (8) feet tall. When the adjacent property and
the bufferyard are at different elevations, the Planning Director may require a fence or wall height,
berms or other device greater than eight (8) feet to ensure adequate buffering.
B. Walls shall be placed within one (1) foot of the common property line when physically possible and
preferably replace existing fence lines. In the event that there is a physical constraint that will not
allow the construction of a wall on the common boundary line (including, but not limited to, the
existence of a drainage way, easement, or existing vegetation), the Planning Director may authorize
the wall to be located further from the property line or an alternative screening type to be utilized.
C. Walls shall not encroach into a Sight Triangle for a public right-of-way or main drive aisle.
D. When the adjacent use is across a street, no wall shall be required.
E. When the required bufferyard plantings are tripled or there is an existing tree line proposed for
preservation abutting an existing fence, the Planning Director may allow the wall or planting
requirement to be reduced.
F. A building permit is required for walls taller than six (6) feet. Walls and masonry columns shall
meet the footing standards prescribed by the building code for such structures.
G. Walls may be masonry, stone, concrete, masonry fencing, or a combination of these materials, and
shall be _inished on both sides. Walls may be accented by brick, stone, stucco, Exterior Insulation
and Finish System (EIFS), or concrete columns.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.11. TREE LIST
A variety of native trees shall be planted in a manner which establishes healthy trees and aesthetic
interest while reducing potential infrastructure con_licts. These speci_ications shall apply to all nonresidential
and multi-family developments. Designers of single family residential developments shall
select tree species from Table 11.11.3, Approved Tree List, and are encouraged to diversify the tree types
throughout the development.
11.11.1 Tree Diversity
A. If 30 or more new trees are required, there shall be no more than 20% of any tree species, and no
more than 40% of any tree genus planted on a site.
B. If 30 or fewer new trees are required, tree diversity shall be provided in accordance with Table
11.11.1 below.
C. No more than 50 percent of the total number of new trees required on site may be Type C Trees
per Table 11.11.3 with exception of Single Family Attached (3 or more) developments.
Table 11.11.1 Tree Diversity Requirements
Number of New Trees Required Minimum Number of Species Required
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 193/320
Table 11.11.1 Tree Diversity Requirements
Number of New Trees Required Minimum Number of Species Required
1-10 1
11-20 2
21-30 3
11.11.2 Tree Spacing from Utilities and Impervious Cover
In order to promote healthy trees and reduce infrastructure con_licts, trees shall be located away from
impervious cover and utilities as provided below and measured from the base of the tree. In addition,
the recommended spacing identi_ied per tree type in Table 11.11.3 shall be maintained.
A. Utility: No tree shall be planted closer than _ive (5) feet to an underground utility or water line, and
no medium or large tree (Type A or B) shall be closer than 15 linear feet from an overhead utility
unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director.
B. Impervious Cover: No large or medium tree (Type A or B) shall be closer than four (4) feet to
impervious cover, and no small tree (Type C) shall be closer than three (3) feet to impervious
cover measured from the base of the tree.
11.11.3 Approved Tree List
Trees planted within the City of P_lugerville shall be selected from, and planted in accordance with Table
11.11.3. Alternatives may be selected in accordance with the General Planting Criteria for Trees in
Section 11.4.
Table 11.11.3 - Approved Tree List
Common Name
Scienti_ic Name
Family Genus, Species
Type A: Large Trees (mature height 40 feet or more, recommended planting bed 400 square feet,
recommended 40 feet apart)
American Elm Ulmaceae Ulmus Americana
American Sycamore Platanaceae Platanus occidentalis
Bald Cypress Taxodiaceae Taxodium distichum
Bur Oak Fagaceae Quercus macrocarpa
Cedar Elm Ulmaceae Ulmus crassifolia
Chinquapin Oak Fagaceae Quercus muehlenbergii
Chittamwood (Gum Bumelia) Sapotaceae Sideroxylon lanuginosum
Deodar Cedar*8 Pinaceae Cedrus deodara
Eastern Black Walnut Juglandaceae Juglans nigra
Ginkgo Biloba** Ginkgoaceae Ginkgo biloba
Honey-locust (Thornless) Fabaceae Gleditsia tricanthos var. inermis
Live Oak* Fagaceae Quercus virginiana (fusiformis)
Mexican Sycamore Platanaceae Platanus mexicana
Mexican white (Monterrey) Oak* Fagaceae Quercus polymorpha
Montezuma Cypress Taxodiaceae Taxodium mucronatum
Pecan Juglandaceae Carya illinoiensis
Pond Cypress Taxodiaceae Taxodium ascendens
Shumard Red Oak Fagaceae Quercus shumardii
Southern Catalpa Bignoniaceae Catalpa bignonioides
Texas (Spanish) Red Oak Fagaceae Quercus buckleyi
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 194/320
Table 11.11.3 - Approved Tree List
Common Name
Scienti_ic Name
Family Genus, Species
Type B: Medium Trees (mature height 25-39 feet, recommended planting bed 300 square feet,
recommended 30 feet apart)
Anacua Boraginaceae Ehretia anacua
Arizona Cypress*8 Cupressaceae Cupressus arizonica
Bigtooth Maple Aceraceae Acer grandidentatum
Carolina Cherry-laurel* Rosaceae Prunus carolinana
Chinese Pistache Anacardiaceae Pistacia chinensis
Eastern Red Cedar*8 Cupressaceae Juniperus viginiana
Escarpment Black Cherry Rosaceae Prunus serotina ssp. Eximia
Golden Rain Tree Sapindaceae Koelreuteria paniculata
Huisache (Sweet acacia) Fabaceae Acacia farnesiana
Japanese Black Pine8 Pinaceae Pinus thunbergii
Lacey Oak Fagaceae Quercus laceyi
Mesquite Fabaceae Prosopis glandulosa spp.
Texas (Little) Walnut Juglandaceae Juglans microcarpa
Texas Ash Oleaceae Fraxinus texensis
Western Soapberry Sapindaceae Sapindus drummondii
Type C: Small Trees (Overhead Utility Compatible)
(mature height 8-24 feet, recommended planting bed 150 square feet, recommended 15 feet apart)
American Smoke Tree Anacardiaceae Cotinus obovatus
Anacacho Orchid Tree Fabaceae Bauhinia congesta
Carolina Buckthorn Rhamnaceae Rhamnus caroliniana
Chilean Mesquite (Thornless) Fabaceae Prosopis chilensis
Chitalpa Bignoniaceae Chilopsis x Catalpa
Crape Myrtle Lythraceae Lagerstromia indica
Desert Willow Bignoniaceae Chilopsis linearis
Eve’s Necklace Leguminosae Sophora af_inis
Evergreen Sumac* Anacardiaceae Rhus virens
Flameleaf Sumac Anacardiaceae Rhus copallina
Goldenball Lead-tree Fabaceae Leaucana retusa
Loquat* Rosaceae Eriobotrya japonica
Mexican Bird of Paradise Leguminosae Caesalpinia mexicana
Mexican Buckeye Sapindaceae Ungnadia speciosa
Mexican Olive* Boraginaceae Cordia bossieri
Mexican Plum Rosaceae Prunus mexicana
Mexican Redbud Fabaceae Cercis Canadensis var. mexicana
Mountain Laurel* Leguminosae Sophora secundi_lora
Possumhaw (Deciduous) Holly Aquifoliaceae Ilex decidua
Retama (Palo verde) Fabaceae Parkinsonia aculeata
Rough-Leaf Dogwood Cornaceae Cornus drummondii
Texas Madrone Ericaceae Arbutus xalapensis
Texas Persimmon Ebenaceae Diospyros texana.
Texas Pistacio* Anacardiaceae Pistacia mexicana
Texas Redbud Leguminosae Cercis Canadensis var. texensis
Vitex (Chaste tree) Verbenaceae Vitex agnus-castus
Wax Myrtle* Myricaceae Myrica cerifera
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 195/320
Table 11.11.3 - Approved Tree List
Common Name
Scienti_ic Name
Family Genus, Species
Yaupon Holly* Aquifoliaceae Ilex vomitoria
* - Evergreen
**-Not to be planted within 20 feet of impervious surface
8 - May be reduced to 2” caliper at planting
(OUC) - Overhead Utility Compatible
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.12. TREE PRESERVATION AND ON-SITE MITIGATION
11.12 TREE PRESERVATION AND ON-SITE MITIGATION
This Subchapter applies to all developments and zoning districts within the City. Developments may
receive tree credit for the preservation of Protected Trees as speci_ied in this Subchapter.
A. Tree Preservation.
1. The total diameter-inch calculation of preserved Protected Trees may count towards meeting
the total tree caliper inch required at a one-to-one (1:1) ratio. Except that a two-to-one (2:1)
ratio (2 inches of the protected trees equates to 1 inch of tree credit) shall apply to Class 3
and 4 trees. However, the landscape design shall still incorporate the minimum required
plantings within the streetscape, building, parking lot, screening and bufferyard landscaping
requirements where feasible. Tree ratio equivalents established in Subchapter 12 shall not be
utilized when determining tree credits.
2. Hackberry, Chinaberry, Chinese Tallow, Ligustrum, Mimosa, Cottonwood and Cedar (Ashe
Juniper) trees may not count towards meeting the minimum landscape plantings required
per 11.3(B) and (C).
3. Trees preserved within the regulatory 100-year _loodplain shall not generate credit towards
the landscaping trees required per 11.3(B) and (C).
B. On-Site Tree Mitigation
1. When on-site tree mitigation is due to the removal of Protected Trees, tree replacement
inches shall be provided at the ratio identi_ied in Subchapter 12.
2. Only trees identi_ied as Type A or B with a minimum three-inch (3”) caliper size per Table
11.11.3 shall receive credit when determining on-site mitigation. Trees providing additional
caliper inches above the minimum three-inch (3”) tree shall receive credit for the additional
caliper inches provided.
3. If the total number of required trees and/or caliper inches cannot feasibly be planted on-site
as determined by the Administrator, off-site tree mitigation may be used in accordance with
Subchapter 12, Tree Preservation Standards.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.13 LANDSCAPING INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE
Unless noted otherwise, this section applies to all development and zoning districts. All landscaping shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with this Subchapter.
A. Maintenance
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 196/320
1. The current Owner and subsequent Owners of the landscaped property, or the manager or
agent of the Owner, shall be responsible for presenting a healthy, neat and orderly
appearance at all times, free of refuse and debris of the following:
a. All landscape areas and materials;
b. Required bufferyard areas and materials; and
c. Required screening materials.
2. Maintenance shall include the replacement of all dead plant material if such material was
used to meet the requirements of this Subchapter. All such plant material shall be replaced
within six months of noti_ication, or by the next planting season, whichever comes _irst.
B. Replacement of Trees
If a tree, for which credit has been obtained pursuant to this Subchapter, dies or is removed within
_ive (5) years of the issuance of a Certi_icate of occupancy, new landscape plantings suf_icient to
equal the area credited will be required. The replacement trees or shrubs shall be of the same size
and species as shown on the approved site plan or must be of equivalent size and type. Trees
installed by the homeowner of a single family residential lot shall be exempt from this requirement.
C. Irrigation Standards
Irrigation shall be provided to ensure survival of the required plant material in all landscaped
areas, except individual single family detached lots, and unless the site utilizes native landscaping
or xeriscaping that can be established through temporary irrigation measures. One of the following
irrigation methods shall be used:
1. Conventional System:
An automatic underground irrigation system with the following:
a. Sub surface drip irrigation shall be utilized for all landscape planting beds,
b. A bubble type head system shall be utilized for all trees,
c. Spray irrigation shall be limited to turf grass areas.
2. Temporary landscape areas utilizing xeriscape plants and installation techniques, including
areas planted with native grasses, wild_lowers, and trees may use a temporary aboveground
system. Irrigation for such areas shall be limited until the plants have been fully established.
3. Rain barrels, cisterns and disconnected downspouts may be used as supplemental irrigation.
4. Gray water recycling systems in accordance with Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(TCEQ) standards and the International Plumbing Code adopted by the City of P_lugerville.
5. No irrigation is required for undisturbed natural areas or for preserved trees.
6. The use of reclaimed, non-potable water for irrigation systems is highly encouraged, but
subject to approval by the Planning Director. All irrigation shall be subject to approval by the
Building Of_icial and installed in accordance with Chapter 113, Irrigators, in the Code of
Ordinances and the Tree Technical Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.14 PERMITS, ENFORCEMENT, AND DROUGHT
A. Permits
With the exception of single-family residential developments, no permit shall be issued for building,
paving, grading, or construction until a landscape plan meeting the speci_ications of this
Subchapter and created by a registered landscape architect is approved by the Planning Director.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 197/320
Prior to the issuance of a certi_icate of occupancy for any building or structure other than a singlefamily
dwelling, all required screening and landscaping shall be in place per the approved
landscape plan and a concurrence letter provided by the landscape architect.
B. Enforcement
If at any time after the issuance of a certi_icate of occupancy, the landscaping that was installed
does not conform to the approved landscape plan or the landscape standards, the City shall issue
notice to the property owner, tenant or agent, citing the violation and describing the action
required to comply with this Subchapter. The owner, tenant or agent shall have thirty (30) days
from date of said notice to comply with the approved Landscape Plan. If the landscaping is not
installed within the allotted time, the property owner, tenant, or agent shall be in violation of this
Subchapter. In addition to any other remedy available to the City, the certi_icate of occupancy for
the subject property may be revoked.
C. Drought
During any period in which the Planning Director determines that it would be impractical to plant
any part of required landscaping, a temporary certi_icate of occupancy may be issued if the
property Owner enters into an agreement with the City stating when the installation shall occur
and provide _iscal security equal to 110% of the cost of the proposed landscaping and installation.
In no instance shall installation be greater than six months from the date of issuance of the
temporary certi_icate of occupancy, unless otherwise approved by the Administrator, or the site
shall be deemed to be in violation of this Subchapter and the temporary certi_icate of occupancy
may be revoked.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.15 LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIREMENTS
11.15.1 Non-Residential and Multi-Family
An application for site plan approval must include a Landscape Plan, a Tree Survey, a Tree Protection
Plan if applicable, and Tree Replacement Plan if applicable. The landscape plan shall be prepared by a
registered landscape architect and contain the following items:
A. North arrow
B. Minimum scale of one inch equals 50 feet (show scale in both written and graphic form)
C. Date of the landscape plan
D. Legend
E. Location of all plant and landscaping material to be used, including plants, paving, benches,
screens, fountains, statues, earth berms, ponds, or other landscape features
F. Scienti_ic and common names of all plant materials to be used
G. Size of all shrubs proposed (container size, planted height, etc.)
H. Size of all trees proposed (caliper size, planted height, spread, etc.)
I. Spacing of plant material where appropriate
J. Bufferyard area and required plant material, if applicable
K. Vegetative screening of parking lots, mechanical equipment, outside storage, loading and service
areas, and storm water detention and water quality facilities, if applicable
L. Location, size, directional lean and species of all trees to be preserved with indication of protective
fencing and preservation measures in accordance with the Tree Technical Manual
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 198/320
M. Location of overhead and underground utilities within or near landscape areas
N. Applicable irrigation notes
O. Description of installation and maintenance provisions
P. Type, height, and location of all fencing or walls
Q. Name and address of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan
R. Signature and seal of the person(s) responsible for the preparation of the landscape plan
S. General landscaping notes (Alternative Landscape Compliance, Tree Mitigation, applicable notes
from the Tree Technical Manual, etc.)
T. Tree protective fencing locations and construction details, if applicable
U. Tree survey in accordance with the Tree Technical Manual
V. Other pertinent information requested by the Planning Director
11.15.2 Residential
An application for a residential building permit shall specify the number and type of trees and shrubs on
the Plot Plan in accordance with the quantities required in Section 11.3.
11.16 ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLANS
In circumstances when a non-residential or multi-family residential development will be phased or when
only a portion of a site is proposed for development, the limits of construction may be considered by the
Planning Director when determining required landscape area and plantings, provided all other
compliance with this Subchapter is demonstrated.
An alternative landscape plan may be submitted to the Planning Director for approval if the aesthetic,
screening, buffering and environmental intent of this Subchapter are met, and the plan does not diminish
any natural feature that would be required if this Subchapter were strictly enforced. Such alternative
plans must be certi_ied by a registered landscape architect. The Planning Director may give special
consideration to the following:
A. Preservation of existing native trees, if applicable.
B. Use of commonly known Low Impact Development (LID) measures including functional cisterns
for alternative irrigation, rain gardens and green roofs.
C. Diversity of tree species above the minimum requirements.
D. Use of porous pavement systems, at the discretion of the City Engineer, which allow for water
in_iltration within parking lots,
E. Use of engineered soils to encourage water in_iltration within parking lot Landscape Islands,
Peninsulas, and medians.
F. Use of rain gardens within parking lot Landscape Islands and medians.
G. Protection of riparian areas.
Table 11.16 - Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciencies or Alternatives
*The following shall be used when formulating an Alternative Landscape Plan when a site design cannot conform
to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Subchapter. The Alternative Landscape plan proposals
shall equal a zero rating or higher.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 199/320
Table 11.16 - Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciencies or Alternatives
% of De_iciency from Required Lot Landscape Area (Site
shall not exceed maximum impervious cover requirements
established in Subchapter 4.
Negative Points
0.1 % - 3% -4
3.1% - 5% -6
5.1% - 7% -8
7.1% - 10% -10
10.1% - 20% -15
20.1% or more Board of Adjustment determination
Required Quantity of Trees Fee in-lieu or Alternative Substitution
Up to a 20% Reduction in # of Trees
$150 per caliper inch required to be paid to the City’s
Tree Fund, or a total caliper calculation can be
utilized where 1 Tree = 3 caliper inches.
Required Quantity of Shrubs Alternative Substitution
Up to a 20% Reduction in # of Shrubs
A total gallon calculation can be utilized where 1
shrub = 3 gallons. The total reduction in quantity of
shrubs provided shall not exceed 20% of minimum
shrubs required per the zoning district.
More than 20% Reduction Not Permitted
Deviation from Table 11.11.3, Approved Tree List Alternative Substitution
Up to 20% of the # of Trees of a different species not
included on the approved tree list As determined by the Administrator
More than 20% of the # of Trees of a different species not
included on the approved tree list
Waiver approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission
Tree Species Diversity Negative Points
Below the requirement -5
Excessive Parking + Additional Landscape Area Negative Points
Exceed parking requirement by 0.1% - up to 10% (Permitted)
Exceed parking requirement by 10.1% to 20% -5
Exceed parking requirement by 20% or more Waiver approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission
Building Landscaping Alternative Substitution
Reduction in quantity of Shrubs Two (2) required building landscaping shrubs may
equal one Type C Tree
Building landscape area dimension variation
A total “building landscape” area requirement can be
converted to a square-footage requirement. [EX. 5’ x
50% building’s primary façade(s) linear feet = Total
Building Landscape Area
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 200/320
Table 11.16 - Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciencies or Alternatives
Waived due to Site Constraints or Building Form/Use
-5
Reduction in S.F. of Parking Lot Landscape Area Negative Points and Alternative Substitutions
Peninsulas or Islands < 180 S.F. & = 150 S.F. -3 points with a minimum of four (4) shrubs within
the landscape peninsula or island
Peninsulas or Islands < 150 S.F. Not Permitted
Median reduction up to 8 feet in width -3 points with the addition of one 5-gallon shrub per
every _ive linear feet within the landscape median.
Landscape Islands or Peninsula Separation Negative Points
More than 10 parking spaces separation -5
More than 14 parking spaces separation -10
More than 19 parking spaces separation Not Permitted
Trees installed in Parking Lot Islands or Peninsulas Negative Points
Within 50 feet of each space (Required) 0
Within 75 feet of each space -5
Within 100 feet of each space -10
Median Placement Negative Points
Every 3 Parking Rows divided by a Median (Required) 0
Every 4 Parking Rows divided by a Median -5
Every 5 Parking Rows divided by a Median -10
No more than 200 parking spaces divided by a Median Not Permitted
Trees Installed in Parking Lot Medians Negative Points and Alternative Substitutions
Planted every 30 or 40 linear feet (Required/Type A) 0
Planted up to every 50 linear feet -5 points with the addition of one 5-gallon shrub per
every _ive linear feet within the median.
Planted 50.1 linear feet or more Not Permitted
Alternative Screening (Not Quantitative) Screening Suf_iciency Determined by Planning
Director
Alternative Buffering (Not Quantitative) Buffer Suf_iciency Determined by Planning
Director
Up to 20% Bufferyard Reduction Administrative Waiver Approved by the P&Z
Planning Director
More than 20% Bufferyard Reduction (Corridor
District) Waiver Approved by the P&Z Commission
Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciency Compensation and Incentives
*The following shall be used when formulating an Alternative Landscape Plan when a site design cannot conform
to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Subchapter. The Alternative Landscape plan proposals
shall equal a zero rating or higher.
Required # of Trees (Additional) Positive Points
3% - 5% +2
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 201/320
Table 11.16 - Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciencies or Alternatives
5.1% - 7% +3
7.1% - 10% +4
10.1% - 20% +5
20.1% or more +6
Required # of 3-Gallon Shrubs (Additional) Positive Points
5% - 10% +1
11% - 20% +1.5
More than 20% +2
Green Roof Positive Points
For at least 75% of available roof space +10
Tree Preservation Positive Points
Protected Tree Preservation
+5
Drought Tolerance Positive Points
Xeriscaping Plants +2
Use of Supplemental Irrigation Positive Points (Use of System) Max 15 pts.
Functional Cistern +15
Rain Barrel +5
Grey Water System +15
Use of Pervious Pavement Systems Positive Points
Used on at least 50% of parking lot surfaces or pedestrian
walkways, where allowed by the City Engineer +10
Within the total root zone of Preserved Trees (critical root
zone protected from any impervious cover) +5
Use of Bio-retention Swales or Rain Gardens Positive Points
Up to 25% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +2
Within 26% to 50% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +4
Within 51% - 75% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +6
Greater than 76% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +10
Use of Structural Soil
{As determined by the Administrator} Positive Points
Within 10 feet of all trees on site +5
Within 11-15 feet of all trees on site +10
Within 16-20 feet of all trees on site +15
100 Year Floodplain Buffer to Undeveloped Floodplain Positive Points
25 foot vegetative Bufferyard +5
26 - 50 foot vegetative Bufferyard +10
Greater than a 50 foot vegetative Bufferyard +15
Detention/Retention Ponds (if applicable) Positive Points
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 202/320
Table 11.16 - Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings - De_iciencies or Alternatives
Fountain feature within a retention pond (credit given to
one fountain per pond) +5
Other Innovative Landscape Features (not listed)
The Planning Director may allow a maximum of +15
points for innovative landscape features. The
Planning Director reserves the right to differ
consideration to the Planning and Zoning
Commission.
Table 6, Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
De_iciencies
*The following should be used to formulate Alternative Landscape Plans when a site design cannot
conform to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Section. The Alternative Landscape
Plan proposals shall equal a zero rating or higher.
% of Lot Landscape Area
de_iciency of req. Negative Points
.1 % - 3% -4
3.1% - 5% -6
5.1% - 7% -8
7.1% - 10% -10
10.1% - 20% -15
20.1% or more Board of Adjustment
Required # of Trees Fee in-lieu
Up to a 20% Reduction in # of
Trees
$150 per caliper inch required to be paid to the City’s Tree Fund, or a total
caliper calculation can be utilized where 1 Tree = 3 caliper inches.
Reduction in Caliper size Negative Points
"Type A" Large Trees Not Permitted
“Type B” Medium Trees {down
to 2” caliper} -3
"Type C" Small Trees {down to 1
1/2" caliper for all Trees} -2
Required # of Shrubs Negative Points
.1% - 5% Reduction -4
5.1% - 10% Reduction -6
10% - 20% Reduction -8
More than 20% Reduction Not Permitted
Deviation from Table 5,
Approved Tree List Negative Points
.1% - 10% of Trees -2
10.1 % - 20% of Trees -4
More than 20% of Trees Not Permitted
Tree Species Diversity Negative Points
Below the requirement -5
Excessive Parking + additional
Landscape area Negative Points
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 203/320
Exceed parking req. by .1% -
4.99% -1
Exceed parking req. by 5% -2
Exceed parking req. by 10% -4
Exceed parking req. by 10.1 + Not Permitted
Exceed parking req. by up to
20% (Corridor Zoning) -5
Exceed parking req. by 20.1% +
(Corridor Zoning) Waiver to the Planning and Zoning Commission
No Protected Tree
Preservation Negative Points
Protected Tree Preservation -
Groups 2, 3 or 4 -5
And Protected Tree Preservation
- Groups 5 or 6 -10
Building Landscaping Negative Points
Reduced by 1/2 of the
requirement -3
Waived due to Site Constraints
or Building Form/Use -5
Reduction in S.F. of Parking
Lot Landscape Area Negative Points
Peninsulas or Islands < 180 S.F.
& = 150 S.F. -3
Peninsulas or Islands < 150 S.F. Not Permitted
Median reduction up to 8 feet in
width -3
Landscape Islands or
Peninsula Separation Negative Points
More than 10 parking spaces
separation -5
More than 14 parking spaces
separation -8
More than 19 parking spaces
separation Not Permitted
Trees installed in Parking Lot
Islands or Peninsulas Negative Points
Within 50 feet of each space
(Required) 0
Within 75 feet of each space -5
Within 100 feet of each space -10
Median Placement Negative Points
Every 6 Parking Rows divided by
a Median (Required) 0
Every 7 Parking Rows divided by
a Median -5
Every 8 Parking Rows divided by
a Median -10
No more than 200 parking
spaces divided by a Median Not Permitted
Trees installed in Parking Lot
Medians Negative Points
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 204/320
Planted every 30 linear feet
(Required) 0
Planted every 40 linear feet {All
Type A Trees} 0
Planted every 50 linear feet -5
Planted every 60 linear feet -10
Planted every 70 linear feet or
more Not Permitted
Alternative Screening (Not Quantitative) Screening Suf_iciency Determined by Planning
Director
Alternative Buffering (Not Quantitative) Buffer Suf_iciency Determined by Planning Director
Bufferyard Reduction (Non-Corridor District) Board of Adjustment
Up to 20% Bufferyard Reduction (Corridor District) Administrative or Waiver to the P&Z Commission
More than 20% Bufferyard Reduction (Corridor
District) Waiver to the P&Z Commission
Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
De_iciency Compensation
*The following should be used to formulate Alternative Landscape Plans when a site design cannot
conform to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Section. The Alternative Landscape
Plan proposals shall equal a zero rating or higher.
Required # of Trees (Additional) Positive Points
3.1% - 5% +2
5.1% - 7% +3
7.1% - 10% +4
10.1% - 20% +5
20.1% or more +6
Required # of Shrubs (Additional) Positive Points
5.1% - 10% +1
10% - 20% +1.5
More than 20% +2
Tree Species Diversity (%) Above Requirement Positive Points
20% - 39.99% +3
40% + +5
Green Roof Positive Points
For at least 75% of roof +10
Tree Preservation Positive Points
Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 2, 3 or 4 +5
Or Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 5 or 6 +10
Trees & Shrubs Credit Positive Points
Xeriscaping Plants +2
All Trees chosen from Table 5. Approved Tree List +2
Use of supplemental Irrigation Positive Points (Use of
system) Max 15 pts.
Functional Cistern +15
Rain Barrel +5
Grey Water System +15
Use of pervious pavement systems Positive Points
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 205/320
Within at least 50% of parking areas +10
Within the total root zone of Preserved Trees (CRZ protected from any impervious
cover unless approved by the Planning Director) +5
Use of Bio-retention swales or rain gardens {Ef_iciency determined by
Planning Director} Positive Points
Within at least 50% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +5
Within at least 90% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +10
Use of Structural Soil {Ef_iciency determined by Planning Director} Positive Points
within 10 feet of all trees on site +5
within 15 feet of all trees on site +10
within 20 feet of all trees on site +15
100 Year Floodplain Buffer (Undeveloped Floodplain) Positive Points
25 foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +5
30 - 50 foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +10
60 + foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +15
Detention/Retention Ponds (if applicable) Positive Points
Fountain feature within a retention pond +5
Other Innovative Landscape Features (not listed) Determined by the
Planning Director
Effective on: 2/25/2015
11.16. ALTERNATIVE LANDSCAPE PLANS.
1. This subsection is applicable to all non-residential and multi-family residential developments.
2. An alternative landscape plan may be submitted for approval to the Planning Director if the aesthetic,
Buffering and environmental intent of the requirements in this section are met, and the plan does not
diminish any natural feature that would be required if this section were strictly enforced. Such
alternative plans must be certi_ied by a landscape architect registered by the State of Texas. The
Planning Director may give special consideration to the following items included in Alternative
Landscape Plans in accordance with Table 6, Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings:
a. Preservation of large existing native trees, if applicable.
b. Use of Low Impact Development (LID) measures including functional cisterns for alternative
irrigation, rain gardens and green roofs.
c. Diversity of Tree species above the minimum requirements.
d. Use of pervious pavement systems within parking areas.
e. Use of structural soil near parking lot landscape islands, peninsulas, and medians.
f. Use of bio-retention swales within parking lot landscape islands and medians.
g. Protection of Riparian Areas
Table 6, Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
De_iciencies
*The following should be used to formulate Alternative Landscape Plans when a site design cannot
conform to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Section. The Alternative Landscape
Plan proposals shall equal a zero rating or higher.
% of Lot Landscape Area de_iciency of req. Negative Points
.1 % - 3% -4
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 206/320
3.1% - 5% -6
5.1% - 7% -8
7.1% - 10% -10
10.1% - 20% -15
20.1% or more Board of Adjustment
Required # of Trees Fee in-lieu
Up to a 20% Reduction in # of Trees $150 per caliper inch required
Reduction in Caliper size Negative Points
"Type A" Large Trees Not Permitted
“Type B” Medium Trees {down to 2” caliper} -3
"Type C" Small Trees {down to 1 1/2" caliper for all Trees} -2
Required # of Shrubs Negative Points
.1% - 5% Reduction -4
5.1% - 10% Reduction -6
10% - 20% Reduction -8
More than 20% Reduction Not Permitted
Deviation from Table 5, Approved Tree List Negative Points
.1% - 10% of Trees -2
10.1 % - 20% of Trees -4
More than 20% of Trees Not Permitted
Tree Species Diversity Negative Points
Below the requirement -5
Excessive Parking + additional Landscape area Negative Points
Exceed parking req. by .1% - 4.99% -1
Exceed parking req. by 5% -2
Exceed parking req. by 10% -4
Exceed parking req. by 10.1 + Not Permitted
Exceed parking req. by up to 20% (Corridor Zoning) -5
Exceed parking req. by 20.1% + (Corridor Zoning) Waiver to the Planning and Zoning Commission
No Protected Tree Preservation Negative Points
Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 2, 3 or 4 -5
And Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 5 or 6 -10
Building Landscaping Negative Points
Reduced by 1/2 of the requirement -3
Waived due to Site Constraints or Building Form/Use -5
Reduction in S.F. of Parking Lot Landscape Area Negative Points
Peninsulas or Islands < 180 S.F. & = 150 S.F. -3
Peninsulas or Islands < 150 S.F. Not Permitted
Median reduction up to 8 feet in width -3
Landscape Islands or Peninsula Separation Negative Points
More than 10 parking spaces separation -5
More than 14 parking spaces separation -8
More than 19 parking spaces separation Not Permitted
Trees installed in Parking Lot Islands or Peninsulas Negative Points
Within 50 feet of each space (Required) 0
Within 75 feet of each space -5
Within 100 feet of each space -10
Median Placement Negative Points
Every 6 Parking Rows divided by a Median (Required) 0
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 207/320
Every 7 Parking Rows divided by a Median -5
Every 8 Parking Rows divided by a Median -10
No more than 200 parking spaces divided by a Median Not Permitted
Trees installed in Parking Lot Medians Negative Points
Planted every 30 linear feet (Required) 0
Planted every 40 linear feet {All Type A Trees} 0
Planted every 50 linear feet -5
Planted every 60 linear feet -10
Planted every 70 linear feet or more Not Permitted
Alternative Screening (Not Quantitative) Screening Suf_iciency Determined by Planning
Director
Alternative Buffering (Not Quantitative) Buffer Suf_iciency Determined by Planning Director
Bufferyard Reduction (Non-Corridor District) Board of Adjustment
Up to 20% Bufferyard Reduction (Corridor District) Administrative or Waiver to the P&Z Commission
More than 20% Bufferyard Reduction (Corridor
District) Waiver to the P&Z Commission
Alternative Compliance Equivalent Ratings
De_iciency Compensation
*The following should be used to formulate Alternative Landscape Plans when a site design cannot
conform to the basic landscaping requirements as described in this Section. The Alternative Landscape
Plan proposals shall equal a zero rating or higher.
Required # of Trees (Additional) Positive Points
3.1% - 5% +2
5.1% - 7% +3
7.1% - 10% +4
10.1% - 20% +5
20.1% or more +6
Required # of Shrubs (Additional) Positive Points
5.1% - 10% +1
10% - 20% +1.5
More than 20% +2
Tree Species Diversity (%) Above Requirement Positive Points
20% - 39.99% +3
40% + +5
Green Roof Positive Points
For at least 75% of roof +10
Tree Preservation Positive Points
Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 2, 3 or 4 +5
Or Protected Tree Preservation - Groups 5 or 6 +10
Trees & Shrubs Credit Positive Points
Xeriscaping Plants +2
All Trees chosen from Table 5. Approved Tree List +2
Use of supplemental Irrigation Positive Points (Use of
system) Max 15 pts.
Functional Cistern +15
Rain Barrel +5
Grey Water System +15
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 208/320
Use of pervious pavement systems Positive Points
Within at least 50% of parking areas +10
Within the total root zone of Preserved Trees (CRZ protected from any impervious
cover unless approved by the Planning Director) +5
Use of Bio-retention swales or rain gardens {Ef_iciency determined by
Planning Director} Positive Points
Within at least 50% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +5
Within at least 90% of all Parking Lot Landscape Areas +10
Use of Structural Soil {Ef_iciency determined by Planning Director} Positive Points
within 10 feet of all trees on site +5
within 15 feet of all trees on site +10
within 20 feet of all trees on site +15
100 Year Floodplain Buffer (Undeveloped Floodplain) Positive Points
25 foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +5
30 - 50 foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +10
60 + foot vegetative Bufferyard to the Floodplain +15
Detention/Retention Ponds (if applicable) Positive Points
Fountain feature within a retention pond +5
Other Innovative Landscape Features (not listed) Determined by the
Planning Director
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 12. TREE PRESERVATION STANDARDS
12.1 PURPOSE
This Subchapter establishes requirements for tree preservation and replacement within the City and, to
the extent authorized by state law relating to subdivision regulations, within the City’s extra territorial
jurisdiction (ETJ), as necessary to provide for orderly and healthful development of the community
through the protection of speci_ied trees, to promote the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life for the
residents of the City and ETJ, to encourage the preservation of trees to provide environmental elements
necessary to reduce the amount of pollutants entering streams and to provide elements crucial to
establishment of the local ecosystem, to protect property values, and to avoid signi_icant negative impacts
on adjacent properties. The existing natural landscape provides superior ecological, environmental, and
aesthetic qualities to the streetscape and parks and continues to help de_ine the unique character of the
City and ETJ. Therefore, the City requires the preservation of the existing natural landscape to the
maximum extent feasible and declares the indiscriminate clearing of land and removal of protected trees
a violation of this Chapter in accordance with the terms of this Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.2 APPLICABILITY/TREE TECHNICAL MANUAL ADOPTED
12.2.1 Applicability of Provisions
Except as speci_ically exempted below, the provisions of this Subchapter shall apply to all property
located within the City and ETJ.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 209/320
A. The following properties are exempt from this Subchapter 12:
1. Developed single-family and two-family dwelling units with certi_icates of occupancies.
2. Properties designated for agricultural purposes and uses, being limited to those properties
granted an agriculture tax exemption by the applicable county tax appraisal district and, in
addition, being located in an Agriculture/Development Reserve (A) district as designated by
the City, are exempt, except in relation to Section 12.4(I) of this Subchapter, which shall apply;
and
3. Capital improvements projects by the City, State or Federal government, on property or
rights-of-way for which the entity owns or controls.
B. This Subchapter is applicable to property located within the City’s ETJ to the extent authorized by
state law pursuant to Texas Local Government Code §§ 212.002 and 212.003. Accordingly, all
provisions in this Subchapter that govern or are incidental to plats, subdivisions and the associated
development of land shall apply in the ETJ as the same are applied within the City.
12.2.2 Applicability of Development Applications
The provisions of this Subchapter shall be reviewed with a preliminary plan, _inal plat, construction plan,
site disturbance plan, site plan, and building permits, as applicable. No certi_icate of occupancy for in city
development or acceptance of public infrastructure associated with a construction plan in the ETJ, as
applicable, shall be issued until the provisions of this Subchapter 12 have been satis_ied.
12.2.3 Tree Technical Manual Adopted
There is hereby adopted a Tree Technical Manual, which is incorporated herein for all purposes as
Appendix A to this Subchapter, as if laid out here in full. The Tree Technical Manual shall provide the
speci_ications, procedures and standards by which this Subchapter shall be interpreted, implemented
and administered. In the event that any con_lict exists between this Subchapter and the Tree Technical
Manual, this Subchapter shall control. A true and correct copy of the Tree Technical Manual shall be
maintained by the Planning Director and be available on the City’s website.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.3 TREE CLASSIFICATIONS
A. Trees within the City and ETJ are grouped in _ive (5) tree classes as outlined below. Classes 2-5 are
considered protected tree classes and are subject to mitigation in accordance with Section 12.8 and
shall not be removed from the site without _irst obtaining necessary approval under a site
disturbance permit, site plan permit, construction plan, or, if required, approval from City Council,
each as applicable.
B. A protected tree is any tree measuring eight (8”) inches or greater in diameter at breast height
(referred to herein as DBH, which is 4.5 feet above natural grade, as more speci_ically described in the
City’s adopted Tree Technical Manual) and any tree planted to satisfy the landscaping requirements of
Subchapter 11 pursuant to an approved site plan, public infrastructure construction plan, or tree
replacement plan. Protected trees include multi-trunk trees, which are measured by combining the
diameter of the largest stem or trunk with one-half of the diameter of each additional stem or trunk,
all measured at DBH.
Table 12.3: Tree Classi_ication
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 210/320
Class 1
Unprotected Trees - Trees with DBH < 8 inches
(unless tree was planted to satisfy requirements of Subchapter
11)
Class 2
Protected Trees with DBH 8 - 17.99 inches
and
Trees planted to satisfy requirements of Subchapter 11
Class 3 Protected Trees with DBH 18 - 24.99 inches
Class 4
Protected Trees with DBH 25 inches or greater
(Not a Heritage Tree species)
Class 5 “Heritage Tree” – Protected Trees with DBH 25 inches or
greater
C. Trees within the Class 1 are not considered protected unless the tree was planted to satisfy
requirements of Subchapter 11 of this Code. However, healthy trees of protected tree species with
good branching structure, height, and spread similar to nursery grown trees with DBHs from 3-7.99
inches may be credited toward landscaping requirements described in Subchapter 11 of this Code
and should be preserved where possible.
D. A heritage tree is any protected tree measuring 25” in DBH or greater of the following tree species:
1. American Elm
2. Bald Cypress
3. Bur Oak
4. Cedar Elm
5. Chinquapin Oak
6. Live Oak
7. Mexican White (Monterrey) Oak
8. Pecan
9. Shumard Red Oak
10. Texas (Spanish) Red Oak
11. Lacey Oak
12. All other Oak trees not speci_ied
13. Texas Walnut
E. A non-hazardous heritage tree shall not be removed unless speci_ically approved by City Council as
provided in Section 12.7 of this Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 211/320
12.4 GENERAL TREE PRESERVATION REQUIREMENTS
A. All trees are considered protected trees within classes 2-5 as described in Section 12.3 of this
Subchapter with the following exceptions: Chinaberry, Hackberry, Ashe juniper (Cedar), Chinese
Tallow, Willow, Ligustrum, Mimosa, Cottonwood, Huisache, and any other tree that is determined to be
in a hazardous condition so as to endanger the public health, safety, or welfare. The Planning Director
shall make the determination as to whether a tree is damaged, diseased, or dying due to natural or
other causes.
B. All existing non-hazardous trees, regardless of species, located within the required bufferyard per
Subchapter 4 of this Code shall be considered protected.
C. All proposed buildings and improvements shall be oriented in a manner that allows, to the greatest
extent feasible, for the preservation of the protected trees.
D. Tree preservation shall also be based on the hierarchy of trees indicated in Section 12.3 of this
Subchapter, Tree Classi_ications with Class 5 heritage trees being at the top of the hierarchy for
preservation purposes.
E. Parking lots shall be designed to incorporate protected trees as focal points or practical means of
segmenting parking lots through preservation of existing trees within landscape islands, peninsulas,
and medians.
F. Trees preserved shall be integrated with the design of open spaces, screening, and landscape areas.
G. Prior to the approval of the applicable Tree Protection, Removal or Replacement Plan where
protected trees are proposed for tree removal with on-site mitigation, _iscal security is required in an
amount equal to 100 percent of the mitigation value of the trees proposed for preservation per
Section 12.8.2(B) of this Subchapter, Tree Classi_ication-Fee by Diameter Inch Removed.
H. All tree preservation and maintenance measures shall be in accordance with the City’s adopted Tree
Technical Manual.
I. Any tree with a DBH of eight (8) inches or greater that is in a _loodplain or _loodway is considered
protected, regardless of species, unless it is determined to be in a hazardous condition so as to
endanger the public health, safety, or welfare or it affects hydraulics in the _loodplain or _loodway. The
Planning Director shall make the determination as to whether a tree is damaged, diseased, or dying
due to natural causes and is, therefore, in a hazardous condition. The Development Engineering
Director shall make the determination as to whether a tree affects the hydraulics of the _lood area.
J. The mowing and clearing of brush located within or under the driplines of protected trees is allowed,
provided a site disturbance permit is issued and such mowing or clearing is accomplished by hand or
by mechanical mowers with turf tires. Mechanical mowers with tracks shall not be used within or
under driplines of protected trees.
K. The Planning Director shall require a signed letter from a landscape architect or a certi_ied landscape
professional that states the development complies with: (1) the tree preservation and tree removal
mitigation requirements of this Subchapter prior to issuance of a certi_icate of occupancy in the City
or acceptance of public infrastructure associated with a construction plan in the ETJ; and (2) if
required, permanent irrigation system provisions are provided. The Planning Director has the right to
inspect each site in conjunction with _inal inspection and at other times to ensure compliance with this
Subchapter.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 212/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.5 TREE PROTECTION
A. All trees identi_ied for preservation on an approved Tree Protection Plan shall be _lagged and
encircled with protective chain-link fencing installed along the critical root zone (CRZ) or a dripline
of the tree, whichever is greater, in accordance with the Tree Technical Manual. If there are physical
constraints preventing the placement of the protective fencing at the CRZ or dripline of the tree,
whichever is greater, the Planning Director may allow for the fencing to encroach into the CRZ by
up to _ifty percent (50%), but at no point may result in a fence closer than _ive (5) feet from the
base of the tree. No construction, such as trenching or regrading, is to occur within an area that
constitutes more than _ifty percent (50%) of the CRZ for each tree being preserved. Tree protective
fencing shall remain in place pursuant to the approved Tree Protection Plan throughout the
construction process, and may not be removed until such time the Planning Director allows for the
removal of such fencing.
B. Grade changes shall not be permitted within the CRZ unless otherwise permitted by the Planning
Director. If grading within the CRZ is approved, grading shall be done by hand or with small
equipment to minimize root damage. Grade changes under speci_ically approved circumstances
shall not allow more than six (6) inches of _ill soil added or allow more than six (6) inches of
existing soil to be removed from natural grade unless mitigated. Grade _ills over six (6) inches or
impervious overlay shall incorporate an approved permanent aeration system, permeable material,
or other approved mitigation. Grade cuts exceeding six (6) inches shall incorporate retaining walls
or an appropriate transition equivalent.
C. No grading or tree removal shall occur on a lot until the Tree Protection Plan has been approved.
D. Compliance with the criteria in this section shall be demonstrated in the _ield as well as on the
applicable plan.
E. Tree Protection Plan adjustments made during construction must be reviewed and approved by
the Planning Director prior to implementing such adjustments. An applicant who removes
protected trees in violation of this Subchapter shall be required to fully mitigate damages caused
by the tree removal and is subject to penalties under Section 12.11 of this Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.6. TREE CLASSIFICATIONS.
12.6.1 Tree Removal in Conjunction with Development Applications
Any approved Tree Removal Plan associated with a development permit or construction plan approval
shall remain in effect until the expiration of such development permit or construction plan, provided
_iscal security is posted and maintained until the expiration of such development permit or construction
plan approval, or the trees have been replaced pursuant to the approved Tree Replacement Plan, as
applicable. Physical tree removal from the site may occur only after Tree Removal Plan approval. A nonhazardous
heritage tree may be removed only if approved by City Council in accordance with Section
12.7 of this Subchapter.
A. Tree Protection Plan Required
A Tree Protection Plan shall be submitted before or with the site plan or associated development
application submittal and prior to the removal of any trees. The Tree Protection Plan shall: (1)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 213/320
include a tree survey in accordance with the Tree Technical Manual graphically identifying
protected trees on the site; (2) provide for tree protective measures; and (3) identify the trees
proposed for preservation and removal. All trees shall be identi_ied by species, diameter, condition,
and mitigation ratio and value.
B. Tree Replacement Plan
If development under a proposed site plan will remove a tree with a DBH of 8” or greater, the City shall
require tree mitigation in accordance with Section 12.8, Mitigation for Tree Removal, of this Subchapter,
including the planting of replacement trees or the payment of an applicable fee in-lieu, as a condition of
site plan or other development application approval. The Planning Director or Development Engineering
Director, as applicable, shall not release the construction plan, site disturbance plan, or site plan until the
applicant satis_ies the condition(s) of approval or posts _iscal security to ensure the condition(s) of the
tree replacement will be satis_ied.
C. Plan Requirements
A tree survey, Tree Replacement Plan, Tree Removal Plan and Tree Protection Plan shall be
provided in accordance with the applicable survey and plan requirements speci_ied in the Tree
Technical Manual and the respective development application. These elements shall be
incorporated into the overall sheet set for preliminary plans, construction plans, site plans, or site
disturbance plans. The irrigation plan shall be in accordance with Subchapter 11 of this Code,
Chapter 113 of the Code of Ordinances (Irrigators), and the Tree Technical Manual.
12.6.2 Tree Removal Not in Conjunction with a Development Application
A. The proposed removal of any tree not associated with a development application or plan shall
require a site disturbance permit with the exception of single-family and two-family lots or units.
The clearing of brush and trees less than eight (8”) inches shall require a site disturbance permit.
B. The site disturbance permit application shall be made by the owner of the property on which the
tree(s) is located or by the owner(s)’s authorized representative. A tree survey in accordance with
the Tree Technical Manual survey requirements, and a Tree Replacement Plan and Tree Protection
Plan, as applicable, shall be provided with the site disturbance permit application.
C. Upon receipt of a complete application, the Planning Director shall inspect the subject tree and
approve or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section.
D. If no construction activity has occurred on the property within 60 days of site disturbance permit
approval, the application shall expire.
E. A non-hazardous heritage tree may be removed only if approved by City Council and tree
replacement or payment for fee in-lieu of replanting is provided per Tables 12.8.1 and 12.8.2(B) of
this Subchapter. The applicable Tree Replacement Plan shall re_lect the heritage tree(s) requested
to be removed, which shall be processed in accordance with Section 12.10 of this Subchapter.
F. A site disturbance permit shall not be approved or released until a Tree Replacement Plan has
been approved and _iscal security has been posted, or payment of fee in-lieu has been provided in
accordance with Section 12.8 Mitigation of this Subchapter for Tree Removal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.7 PROTECTED TREE REMOVAL EXCEPTIONS
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 214/320
A. A protected tree may be removed without tree replacement or mitigation if the tree is identi_ied for
removal in a capital improvement project which has been approved by City Council or governing
jurisdiction (e.g., Travis County).
B. Existing single-family and two-family or duplex lots or units with a valid certi_icate of occupancy
are exempt.
C. A protected tree, including a heritage tree, may be removed if the Planning Director determines
that the tree is in a hazardous condition so as to endanger the public health, safety or welfare, or
the tree is found to be dead or dying by the Planning Director (referred to herein as a hazardous
tree).
D. A property owner may request authorization from City Council to remove a heritage tree in
accordance with Section 12.10 of this Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.8. MITIGATION FOR TREE REMOVAL
12.8.1 On-Site Mitigation
A. Any protected tree removed, damaged, or killed as a result of development or improper
maintenance, such as excessive pruning, shall be replaced by a tree or trees of the same species or
comparable alternative equal to the total number of diameter inches removed, as measured at
breast height (DBH). Tree replacement on site shall be in accordance with Table 12.8.1, Tree
Classi_ication - Mitigation Ratio. Replacement trees shall meet the planting criteria in Subchapter 11
of this Code and in the Tree Technical Manual. The Planning Director shall determine the cause of
damage or death for a protected tree.
Table 12.8.1: Tree Classi_ication - Mitigation Ratio lists the protected tree classi_ications based on
size or designation with the applicable tree mitigation ratio for replacement caliper inches.
Table 12.8.1: Tree Classi_ication Mitigation Ratio
Class 1
Unprotected Trees - Trees with DBH < 8 inches
(unless tree was planted to satisfy requirements of Subchapter
11)
N/A
Class 2
Trees with DBH 8 - 17.99 inches
and
Trees planted to satisfy requirements of Subchapter 11 with
DBH less than 8 inches
1:1
Class 3 Trees with DBH 18 - 24.99 inches 2:1
Class 4
Protected Trees with DBH 25 inches or greater
(Not a Heritage Tree species)
2.5:1
Class 5 “Heritage Tree” - Trees with DBH 25 inches or more 3:1
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 215/320
B. No protected tree shall be removed, and no replacement tree shall be planted, until the Planning
Director has reviewed and approved the Tree Replacement Plan and _iscal security equivalent to
the replacement value, as represented in Table 12.8.2(B), has been posted. Fiscal security will be
returned once all replacement trees have been successfully planted and inspected.
C. Protected trees may be transplanted to a suitable location on the same property or off-site within
the City or its ETJ. If off-site, no replacement on site shall be required. The developer shall comply
with the generally accepted transplanting methods of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI A300 Standards), and the trees are required to survive for a period of at least one (1) year
without showing any signs of decline. Posting _iscal security equivalent to the replacement value of
the transplanted tree is required. Fiscal security will be returned once the one (1) year, outlined
previously, has been successfully completed.
D. Irrigation shall be provided for replacement trees in accordance with Subchapter 11 of this Code,
Chapter 113 of the Code of Ordinances (Irrigators), and the Tree Technical Manual.
12.8.2 Alternative Mitigation
When the Planning Director determines that mitigation for protected tree removal by replanting trees on
site is not feasible (e.g., planting capacity has been reached on site), an applicant may choose one of the
following alternatives in lieu of replanting on site:
A. Plant the replacement trees with the applicable mitigation ratio identi_ied in Table 12.8.1 in a City
park or other City-owned property as would otherwise be required on site in locations approved
by the Planning Director and Parks and Recreation Director; or
B. Make a payment into the Tree Fund, or account for use by the City, for the planting, pruning,
irrigation, and other activities associated with trees in City parks or on other City-owned property.
The payment shall be based on the DBH of the protected trees removed. This payment is nonrefundable.
Table 12.8.2(B) Tree Classi_ication Removal Fees lists the tree classi_ications with their applicable
fees per diameter inch removed, as measured at breast height (DBH).
Table 12.8.2(B) Tree Classi_ication Removal Fees
Tree Classi_ication Fee per Diameter
Inch Removed
Class 1
Unprotected Trees - Trees with DBH < 8 inches
(unless tree was planted to satisfy requirements of
Subchapter 11)
N/A
Class 2
Trees with DBH 8 - 17.99 inches
and
Trees planted to satisfy requirements of Subchapter 11
with DBH less than 8 inches
$150
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 216/320
Class 3 Trees with DBH 18 - 24.99 inches $300
Class 4
Protected Trees with DBH 25 inches or greater
(Not a Heritage Tree species)
$375
Class 5 “Heritage Tree” - Trees with DBH 25 inches or more $450
C. Mitigation Fee Credits. In accordance with Section 212.905 of the Texas Local Government Code,
which is adopted and incorporated herein for all purposes, and notwithstanding anything in this
Subchapter to the contrary, tree planting credits offsetting Tree Classi_ication Removal Fees
identi_ied in Table 12.8.2(B) of this Subchapter are hereby established as required by state law. The
Planning Director shall develop processes and procedures necessary for the implementation of
these requirements.
12.8.3 Mitigation Exceptions
A. Natural Disasters and other Emergencies
If a protected tree is causing a danger or is in a hazardous condition due to a natural disaster, such as a
tornado, _ire, storm, _lood, or other act of God that endangers public health, welfare, or safety, the
requirement of this Subchapter may be waived by the Planning Director.
B. Dead or Diseased Trees
If the Planning Director, with assistance from an ISA Certi_ied Arborist engaged by the property
owner, determines that based on an on-site inspection and a report from the ISA Certi_ied Arborist
a protected tree is already dead, dying, or fatally diseased, the provisions of the mitigation
requirements do not apply.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.9 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
A. It is unlawful for any person to remove any tree without _irst securing the required approvals as
speci_ied in this Subchapter.
B. All development subject to this Subchapter, including grading, trenching, and tree removal on all
sites, is prohibited prior to the approval of a Tree Protection, Replacement and/or Removal Plan,
as applicable.
C. It is unlawful for any person to damage a protected tree in any way, such as through tree topping
or pollarding, excessive pruning or chemical poisoning. All tree maintenance and pruning shall be
conducted pursuant to the requirements of the Tree Technical Manual.
D. Indiscriminate clearing or stripping of the natural vegetation on any lot is prohibited and is
considered a violation of this Subchapter.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 217/320
E. It is unlawful for a person to continue work on a site or lot or remove trees after a stop work
order has been issued.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.10 APPEALS
A. An applicant may appeal the decision of the Planning Director to deny a heritage tree removal
application to City Council where the Planning Director determined the tree to be non-hazardous.
Such appeal must be made in writing and received by the Planning Director within thirty (30) days
from the date of the decision on the tree removal application or of_icial correspondence
referencing the denial of the proposed heritage tree removal application. The request for appeal
must set forth the speci_ic reasons for the appeal and state the speci_ic reasons for disagreement
with the decision of the Planning Director, including the basis for the applicant’s position that the
application should have been granted. In addition, a request to remove a non-hazardous heritage
tree as re_lected in the applicable Tree Replacement Plan, shall be forwarded to City Council for
consideration.
B. In each such case, the Planning Director shall set the matter for public hearing before City Council
at the earliest possible regularly scheduled meeting of City Council.
C. City Council shall review the request and render a decision either af_irming, af_irming in part,
conditionally af_irming, or reversing the determination of the Planning Director, or approving a
non-hazardous heritage tree removal request only after determining that the heritage tree:
1. Prevents substantial economically viable use of the property;
2. Prevents reasonable use of or access to the property;
3. Is dying or dead;
4. Is diseased and restoration is not practicable or the disease may be transmitted to other
trees;
5. Poses a high risk of property damage or personal injury that cannot reasonably be mitigated
without removing the tree (Reasonable mitigation may include lightening protection
measures.);
6. Is located on public property, street or easement;
7. Prevents the opening of necessary vehicular traf_ic lanes in a street or alley; or
8. Prevents the construction of utility or drainage facilities that may not feasibly be rerouted
due to physical constraints.
D. If heritage tree removal is permitted after an appeal pursuant to the provisions of this section, the
applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions of this Subchapter, including tree mitigation,
unless the appeal determines the heritage tree is hazardous.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
12.11 PENALTY
Violations of this Subchapter 12 that occur within the City are punishable in accordance with Subchapter
1 of this Chapter 157, but shall be punishable by a _ine of not less than $300 nor more than $500 per
violation. An offense under this Subchapter is hereby declared to be a strict liability offense and the
culpable mental state required by Chapter 6.02 of the Texas Penal Code is hereby speci_ically negated.
Each violation of this Subchapter, including without limitation, each protected tree that is unlawfully
removed or damaged shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. Criminal prosecution shall not
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 218/320
preclude civil action available at law by the City to recover for the damage or loss of the tree as
determined by industry-accepted appraisal valuations. The criminal penalty established herein shall not
apply to violations of this Subchapter that occur in the City’s extraterritorial jurisdiction. However, the
City is entitled to appropriate injunctive relief, such other rights to relief as provided in Texas Local
Government Code §§ 212.003 and 212.018, and other remedies established at law to redress such
violations.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 13. LIGHTING STANDARDS
13.1 PURPOSE
Lighting standards are established to regulate outdoor lighting in order to reduce light pollution and
mitigate glare and light trespass for the safe, orderly, and healthful development of the City. These
standards also promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the city and promote energy
conservation while providing a sense of safety and security.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.2 APPLICABILITY
The provisions and standards set forth in this Subchapter shall apply to all developments within the City
and ETJ. At no time shall light sources be oriented to direct light toward a neighboring property, right-ofway,
or be installed in a manner which may otherwise be considered a nuisance.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.3 LIGHTING DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Lighting shall be used to provide safety while accenting key architectural elements and emphasizing
landscape features. Light _ixtures shall be treated as an integral design element that complements the
overall design of a project. This may be accomplished through style, material, or color. All lighting
_ixtures designed or placed so as to illuminate any portion of a site shall meet the following
requirements.
13.3.1 Fixtures / Luminaries
A. Light sources shall be completely concealed from above and on all sides in an opaque housing and
shall be oriented in a direction that minimizes visibility from streets or adjacent properties. All
lighting _ixtures shall be full cutoff in design to direct light downward and minimize the amount of
light spilled into the night sky and onto adjacent properties, unless otherwise permitted within this
Subchapter.
B. Lighting shall be oriented so it does not direct glare or illumination onto streets in a manner that
may distract or interfere with the vision of drivers, cyclists, or pedestrians on such streets.
C. Light poles and _ixture heads shall be generally consistent in style and color throughout a
development to establish uniformity. Deviations may be approved by the Planning Director when a
speci_ic theme or increased energy ef_iciency is desired.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 219/320
13.3.2 Fixture Height
A. Lighting _ixtures may be up to 30 feet in height within an on-site parking area and may be up to 15
feet in height within a pedestrian area. However, on sites larger than one acre, parking area lighting
that is located more than 100 feet from any property line may be up to 35 feet in height.
B. Lighting _ixtures located within 50 feet of any property that has a residential zoning district or a
residential use shall not exceed 15 feet in height.
13.3.3 Light Source / Lamp
All lighting, including parking lot lighting, shall utilize energy ef_icient technology to the greatest extent
practical, including the use of solar powered and light emitting diode (LED) lamps. Where more
traditional lighting is desired, the use of incandescent, _luorescent, metal halide, and color corrected
high-pressure sodium lamps are allowed. In order to maintain uniformity within a site, the same light
source or lamp shall be used for the same or similar types of lighting throughout a site and overall
development, unless more energy ef_icient technology is proposed, and only when approved by the
Planning Director.
13.3.4 Mounting
Lighting _ixtures shall be mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is contained on-site and does
not cross any property line of the site where practically feasible.
13.3.5 Limit Lighting to Periods of Activity
When a nonresidential development is adjacent to a conforming residential zoning district or residential
land use, sensor technologies, astronomical time clocks, or other means to activate lighting during times
when it is needed may be required by the Planning Director to promote compatibility between the
different land uses.
13.3.6 Exterior Lighting Controls
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 220/320
Lighting not designed for dusk-to-dawn operation shall be controlled by either a combination of a
photosensor or an astronomical time switch. Lighting designed for dusk-to-dawn operation shall be
controlled by an astronomical time switch or photosensor. All time switches shall be capable of retaining
programming and the time setting during loss of power for a period of at least 10 hours.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.4 NONCONFORMING FIXTURES
Except where otherwise required, all lighting _ixtures existing and legally installed and operative before
the effective date of this Code are exempt from the requirements of this Subchapter. Whenever a
nonconforming _ixture is replaced or removed, or the average level of illumination is modi_ied to a
higher level, the replacement _ixture or level of illumination shall meet the requirements of this
Subchapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.5 ILLUMINATION REQUIREMENTS
A. Subject to the limits below, all exterior site lighting shall be designed so that the level of
illumination, as measured in foot-candles (fc), at any one point meets the requirements in the
following table.
Table 13.5
Type of Lighting
Illumination Level
Minimum Average Maximum
Architectural Lighting 0.0 1.0 5.0
Building Entrance 1.0 5.0 15.0
Vehicular Canopy Area Lighting
(and Structured Parking)
2.0 10.0 15.0
On-Site Parking Area 0.2 1.5 10.0
Walkways, Landscape or Decorative Lighting 0.2 0.8 5.0
B. Minimum and maximum foot-candle levels are measured from the pavement within the lighted
area. The average level is the overall, generalized ambient light level throughout the site, and shall
be measured as a not-to-exceed value calculated using only the area of the site intended to receive
the illumination. The minimum light level may be reduced by twenty percent (20%), by the Planning
Director, if it is determined to adversely impact the development or adjacent properties. Calculation
zones for the types of lighting identi_ied in Table 13.5 shall extend ten (10) feet beyond the
property line where required and shall adhere to the calculation zone methodology as provided
below:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 221/320
1. An architectural lighting calculation zone shall be measured at the light source(s) around the
perimeter of the building and extended ten (10) feet horizontally from the light _ixture(s).
2. A building entrance calculation zone shall be measured at a minimum of _ifteen (15) feet
from the building entrance(s), and includes any areas underneath awnings or building
extensions covering pedestrian plazas and/ or walkways.
3. A vehicular canopy area calculation zone shall be measured at ten (10) feet outwardly
extended around the perimeter of the canopy.
4. An on-site parking area calculation zone shall be measured only within the paved parking
area, inclusive of drive aisles and landscape islands, peninsulas and medians contained within
the paved parking area.
5. A calculation zone for walkways, landscaping or decorative lighting shall be measured as
follows:
a. Walkway lighting shall be measured within the dimensions of the walkway.
b. Landscape lighting shall be measured _ive (5) feet from the proposed light _ixture(s).
c. Decorative lighting, not included within any of the calculation zones above, shall be
measured _ive (5) feet from the proposed light _ixture(s). Decorative lighting includes
pedestrian scale lighting not attached to building elevations or included within the onsite
parking area calculations.
C. The maximum illumination permitted at any lot line, without crossing such lot line, is set forth
below. Where a development is uni_ied with shared parking, the maximum illumination levels will
apply only to the exterior lot lines of the projects (any interior lot lines shall be exempt from this
paragraph). The calculation zone(s) shall be measured ten (10) feet beyond the property lines in
order to ensure excessive light spillage does not occur.
1. The maximum illumination at any lot line adjacent to any residentially zoned property, or
property with a residential use, is 0.5 foot-candles.
2. The maximum illumination at any lot line adjacent to a street is 5.0 foot-candles.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.6. NONCONFORMING FIXTURES.
13.6.1 Architectural Lighting
A. Wall-mounted _lood lamps, including wall pack lighting or similar security lighting, shall be
completely shielded on the top and on all sides to minimize any off-site visibility and to focus light
to the ground surrounding the structure.
B. Fixtures used to accent building architectural features and landscaping shall be full cutoff light
_ixtures that are downcast in order to minimize light spill into the night sky.
C. For art features and _lag illumination, luminaires may cast light upwards, but must be shielded so
that light illuminates only (1) the area immediately around the art, _lag pole, or other _lag
supporting structure, or (2) the projection from a structure on which the _lag or art is mounted.
13.6.2 Canopy Area Lighting
A. Except as provided in subsection (B) below, all development that incorporates vehicular canopy
area lighting shall use _ixtures that are recessed into the canopy ceiling. The _ixture covers shall be
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 222/320
_lush with the surface of the canopy ceiling and provide a cutoff or shielded light distribution.
B. As an alternative to recessed canopy ceiling lights, indirect lighting may be used. In this case, light is
directed upward onto a canopy and then re_lected down from the underside of the canopy. Light
_ixtures shall be shielded so that direct illumination is focused exclusively on the ceiling of the
canopy and does not spill into the sky.
C. Lights may not be mounted on the top or sides of the canopy. In addition, the exterior sides of the
canopy may not be illuminated.
D. Automated teller machines (ATM) are permitted to use up to 15 foot-candles of illumination when
located underneath a canopy.
13.6.3 Pedestrian Lighting
A. Within multi-family and condominium developments, pedestrian scale lighting shall be provided
generally at 100’ intervals along internal pedestrian corridors and walkways to guide pedestrians
to buildings, gathering places and parking areas. Lighting may be provided through freestanding
_ixtures such as decorative lamp poles, bollard lights or architectural building mounted _ixtures
that do not exceed 15’ in height. Parking lot lighting may count towards meeting the requirement
when the walkway is illuminated.
B. Within nonresidential common developments, such as commercial strip centers with outlining pad
sites, pedestrian scale lighting shall be provided generally at 100’ intervals along internal
pedestrian corridors and walkways which connect two or more building entrances. Lighting may
be provided through freestanding _ixtures such as decorative lamp poles, bollard lights or
architectural building mounted _ixtures that do not exceed 15’ in height. Parking lot lighting may
count towards meeting the requirement when the walkway is illuminated.
C. Fixtures shall be placed in a manner to best illuminate walkways and sidewalks, as approved by the
Planning Director.
D. Light _ixtures that exceed 15’ in height shall be shielded and full cutoff in design. Fixtures that are
15’ or less in height shall be shielded to minimize light spill into the sky.
E. Alternative luminaries may be used as approved by the Planning Director.
13.6.5 Structured Parking Lighting
Pedestrian and vehicular entrances shall utilize the building entrance light levels per Table 13.5.
Vehicular parking shall utilize the vehicular canopy area lighting when such parking is located under a
roof or canopy. The top level of all parking structures shall utilize the standard on-site parking lighting
requirements per Table 13.5. All other applicable lighting standards provided in this Subchapter shall
apply.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.7 PROHIBITED LIGHT SOURCES
Except as otherwise provided, the following light sources and light _ixtures shall not be used where the
light emitted is visible from adjacent lots or streets:
1. High-pressure sodium, low-pressure sodium, mercury vapor, or neon light sources.
2. Cobra-head or similar type of _ixtures having dished or drop down lenses.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 223/320
3. Searchlights or other high-intensity narrow-beam _ixtures.
4. Lighting _ixtures that have _lashing, rotating, moving, pulsing, or alternating colored sources, except
typical holiday lighting used between November 1 and January 31.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.8 STREET LIGHTS
An illumination plan identifying the location, type, height, and intensity of proposed streetlights shall be
included in the subdivision and construction plans and shall conform to the Engineering Design Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.9 ATHLETIC FIELD AND GOLF DRIVING RANGE LIGHTING
The installation of athletic _ield lighting requires the approval of City Council and, except as otherwise
provided, shall comply with the following provisions and be evaluated subject to their context. Areas
ancillary to athletic _ields, whether public or private, shall provide lighting for parking and pedestrian
areas in order to maintain safety, cleanup, and maintenance, with such lighting subject to Section 13.5 of
this Subchapter.
13.9.1 Fixtures/Luminaries
A. All _ixtures and luminaries shall be constructed with a die-cast aluminum housing, mounted on
galvanized steel poles set on an engineered concrete base, and be maintained in good working
condition in conformity with the provisions of this Code.
B. Only full cutoff or shielded, directional light _ixtures shall be permitted. Lighting shall be oriented
not to direct illumination or glare onto streets in a manner that may distract or interfere with the
vision of drivers, cyclists, or pedestrians on such streets.
1. Shielded, directional _ixtures refers to a technique or method of construction which causes
all of the light emitted to be directed to the surface or area to be illuminated in such a way
that the emanating source of light is not visible from any angle except those angles that exist
between the _ixture and the target to be illuminated. The emanating source shall not be
visible from any adjacent properties or roadways to minimize light pollution.
2. Lamp systems utilizing 1000 to 1500 watts, or an equivalent, shall be permitted. Only
incandescent, _luorescent, LED, or metal halide lamps may be used.
3. Utility lines providing electricity to lights shall be placed underground. Where overhead
utility lines exist, transformers shall be pad mounted and screened.
13.9.2 Fixture Height
A. The maximum height for any athletic _ield lighting _ixtures shall be not more than 60 feet.
B. Lighting _ixtures shall not exceed 15 feet in height when located within 50 feet of any residential
zoning district or residential land use.
13.9.3 Lighting Period
A. The illumination of any athletic _ield or recreational facility, public or private, only is allowed
between sunrise and 10:00 p.m.
B. Athletic _ield lights require the installation of an on-site control switch, with a timer(s), to allow
lights to be operated at the site and to allow individual _ields to be lighted separately.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 224/320
13.9.4 Illumination Requirements
A. Where the predominant use is recreation and/or team practices, all athletic _ield lighting shall be
designed so that the level of illumination, as measured in foot-candles (fc), at any point complies
with the following table.
Table 13.9.4 Athletic Field Illumination
Type of Lighting
Illumination Level
Average Maximum
Athletic Field Lighting 25.0 30.0
B. The maximum illumination at any lot line adjacent to, or across the street from, any property with a
residential zoning designation or residential use is 0.5 foot-candles.
C. The maximum illumination at any property line adjacent to a street is 5.0 foot-candles.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
13.10 SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS
All submissions shall contain the items speci_ied in this section, and any other information the Planning
Director may request as necessary to complete the review process and con_irm compliance with this
subchapter:
A. For all site development applications: provide photometric plan for a typical luminaries used
showing candela tabulation as de_ined by Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) recommendations.
B. In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 13.10(A), the following is required for athletic
_ields: a site plan, drawn to a scale of one-inch equaling twenty feet showing buildings, landscaping,
parking, and all proposed exterior _ixtures including lamps, supports, re_lectors, and other devices.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 14. PARKLAND STANDARDS.
14.1 PURPOSE
A. Intended to ensure the City creates a comprehensive network of trails that provides links to parks,
homes, schools and community facilities ensures multi-modal access throughout the City.
B. Provide for pedestrian corridors with the integration of hike and bike trails within _loodplain areas.
C. Preserve environmentally sensitive and ecologically diverse areas.
D. Maintain and achieve a contiguous hierarchy of public parks and facilities, open space, and hike
and bike trails that serve the recreational needs of all residents, employees, and visitors of
P_lugerville.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 225/320
E. Establish public parkland design and physical characteristic policies consistent with the Parks,
Recreation and Open Space Master Plan.
F. Establish policies for the conveyance of public parkland.
G. In order to serve a diverse demographic and an expanding population, focus on the development
of public community parks that ultimately serves the population equitably.
H. Expand the community and regional park system.
I. Maintain or exceed existing level of service in accordance with the City’s Parks, Recreation, and
Open Space Master Plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.2 SCOPE
14.2.1 This Subchapter shall apply to the following:
A. Residential subdivisions within the City Limits; and
B. Residential subdivisions within the City’s extra-territorial jurisdiction (ETJ), subject to the
following:
1. Whenever the residential subdivision is also subject to County regulations that include
parkland and open space standards the most stringent standards, whether it is the City’s or
County’s, shall apply; and
2. Whenever the residential subdivision is also subject to regulation by the county and a special
district (including but not limited to municipal utility districts) and such regulation include
parkland and open space standards the most stringent standards, whether it is the City’s, the
County’s or the special district’s requirements, shall apply.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.3. PUBLIC PARKLAND DEDICATION REQUIREMENTS
14.3.1 General
Public parkland shall be dedicated and conveyed to the City for residential subdivisions in accordance
with the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan, and the provisions stated herein; as applicable.
The acceptance of any conveyance or dedication offered to the City pursuant to this Subchapter must be
_irst approved by the City Council and the prior approval of any department head, board or commission
of such conveyance or dedication shall not be binding on the City Council.
14.3.2 Calculation
A. The amount of land required to be dedicated for parkland will be calculated at a rate of not less
than six and six-tenths (6.6) acres of parkland per 1,000 ultimate residents or an equivalent ratio
thereof. The required acreage shall be rounded to the nearest one tenth. The following formula
shall be used to determine the amount of parkland to be dedicated:
6.6 X (Number of Units) X (Persons/Units) = Acres to be dedicated
1000
B. The number of persons per unit shall be based on data compiled by the city and shall be
reviewed and adjusted as necessary. The following _igures represent the average number of
persons per unit by current density categories, and shall be used to calculate parkland dedication:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 226/320
Table 14.3.2 Persons per Unit
Gross Density per Residential Development
(Dwelling Units per Acre) Persons per Unit
From 0 to 6 3.0
Over 6 to 10 2.7
Over 10 to 25 2
More than 25 2*
* For high density residential development above 25 dwelling units per acre, the developer may provide a
demographic study to provide proof that the occupancy rate of the development averages less than 2 persons per
unit. In such event, the Administrator is authorized to reduce the gross density/persons per unit ratio.
C. Unless the density of multi-family or condominium developments is identi_ied on the permit
application subject to this Subchapter, it shall be assumed that the highest density authorized
under this Chapter is the development’s density unless the applicant provides by plat note, or
other binding written memorialization acceptable to the Administrator, the actual density that the
project shall not exceed.
D. When an area of less than three (3) acres is required to be dedicated as public parkland, the city
may elect to accept the land offered for dedication or require a fee in-lieu of public parkland as
alternative compliance in accordance with Section 14.5.
14.3.3 Phasing
Dedication of public parkland is required to be identi_ied on a preliminary plan for residential
development. Dedication and conveyance of public parkland may be provided in phases in accordance
with the approved preliminary plan; provided that the dedication for each phase meets or exceeds the
parkland dedication requirements of this Subchapter for that phase of development. The Administrator
is authorized to allow phasing of parkland dedication below the requirement for each phase of
development if the Administrator _inds the proposed phasing of parkland dedication of the ultimate
dedication meets or exceeds the requirements of this subchapter and provides a more effective means of
parkland dedication than would have otherwise been provided through the standard phasing of
dedication.
14.3.4 Applicant’s warranty
A. Applicant shall warrant that any land to be dedicated to the City as public parkland under this
subchapter shall:
1. Be free of _ill material unless the placement of _ill material is found to be bene_icial to the
parkland by the Director of Parks and Recreation and approved in writing by the Director of
Parks and Recreation and the City Engineer; and
2. Be free of construction debris on the land; and
3. Be free of any physical disturbance including but not limited to soil excavation, site grading,
removal or damage to vegetation, or other physically disturb the site; unless such
disturbance is authorized in writing by the Director of the Parks and Recreation and the City
Engineer.
4. Be free of any easements or other dedications, encumbrances or restrictions, not approved
by the Administrator; and
5. Be free of any hazardous substances and/or underground storage tanks (U.S.T.'s). .
B. The City shall:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 227/320
1. Be subject to providing applicant with waiver for claim for injury during such inspection and
assurance that any disturbance to applicant’s land during such inspection is restored, have
the right to inspect the land to verify compliance with the warranties required in this
subsection; and
2. Have the right refuse acceptance of any land that the City _inds to be in violation of the
warranties required in this subsection.
14.3.5 Criteria for public parkland dedication
In order to ensure proper design and location of public parkland, the dedication of public parkland shall
conform to the following criteria for size, dimension, location, access and character.
A. Size, Dimensions and Access.
1. Shall be a minimum of three (3) contiguous acres with no more than _ifty (50% percent)
located within the 100-year _loodplain. However, the City may accept portions of the 100-
year _loodplain regardless of size.
2. Shall have minimum lot dimensions of 200 feet in length and 200 feet in depth fronting a
public street right-of-way located outside of the 100-year _loodplain, unless it is contiguous
to existing public parkland that has at least 200 feet of right-of-way frontage. However, if the
public parkland lot abuts public right-of-way on all property lines, the minimum lot
dimensions shall be 250 feet in length by 250 feet in width.
3. Park entrances shall be located along collector or higher classi_ication roadways.
4. Adequate vehicular access shall be provided for parkland operation and maintenance. For
public parkland areas not fronting a public street right-of-way or backs up to single-family
residential, an access lot encumbered by a public access easement, not less than thirty (30’)
feet in width, shall be provided to connect to the public parkland a minimum of every 1,000
linear feet along the public street. The access lot shall be owned and maintained by the home
owner’s association.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 228/320
B. Location
1. Shall be located, whenever possible, adjacent to and contiguous with existing public
parkland.
2. Shall be located, whenever possible, adjacent to and contiguous with school sites in order to
maximize the use of common facilities and functions.
3. Shall be land that is identi_ied as moderate to high priority for preservation based on the
“Travis County Greenprint” included within Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan.
4. Shall be land that is identi_ied as moderate to the most environmentally sensitive on the
“Land Sensitivity Map” included within the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan.
5. If the entire 100-year _loodplain within a site is dedicated to the City, parkland credit will be
given for one-half the area within the dedicated 100-year _loodplain. No parkland credit
may be given for the regulatory _loodway. Notwithstanding the provisions stated above,
creditable parkland within the 100-year _loodplain may not exceed 50% of the total number
acres required for public parkland dedication.
6. If the proposed public parkland is not within or contiguous to the proposed residential
subdivision, the proposed public parkland shall be located within one-half (1/2) mile radius
from the subdivision, whereby the Parks and Recreation Commission shall make a
recommendation to City Council for approval.
C. Character.
1. Preserves critical environmental areas;
2. Provides land suitable for development of recreational facilities;
3. Creates a pedestrian corridor with the integration of hike and bike trails within the creeks
per the Transportation Master Plan and Trails Master Plan;
4. Maintains or exceeds existing level of service in accordance with the Parks, Recreation, and
Open Space Master Plan;
5. Sites with protected trees;
6. Place of historical signi_icance; and
7. Land relatively undisturbed by grading or compaction.
D. Unsuitable Land The following physical land characteristics are considered unsuitable for public
parkland dedication unless the Parks and Recreation Director, _inds that the land has
recreational value that warrants its acceptance as public parkland or open space and is
consistent with the Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan.
1. Drainage ditches;
2. Detention ponds;
3. Lakes or retention ponds;
4. Narrow strips of land, except within the pedestrian corridors identi_ied in the
Transportation Master Plan and the Parks and Open Space Master Plan;
5. Steep slopes equal to and greater than 15% grade, except within the regulatory _loodplain;
6. Easements, including but not limited to, utility easements and drainage easements that may
restrict the City’s surface use and limit the ability to construct park improvements upon the
land;
7. Land containing environmental hazards as indicated by a phase one environmental
assessment, which meets the current American Society of Testing and Materials Standards
(ASTM);
8. Entry subdivision features, areas devoted to decorative landscaping, traf_ic islands, street
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 229/320
medians, and areas following development perimeter walls;
9. Land with reservation of mineral rights owned by a private entity or land used for mining,
oil or gas wells; unless a surface rights waiver, of suitable legal form approved by the City
Attorney, is provided; or
10. Land containing debris and trash due to construction related activities.
E. Utilities
Through the subdivision or site development process, public utility and electric service
infrastructure shall be extended to and through the parkland in accordance with the
Engineering Design Guidelines and the Water Master Plan, and the Wastewater Master Plan.
F. Survey corner markers
The applicant shall be obligated to place survey corner markers at all corners of the
parkland, which has been located by a licensed and professional surveyor. The markers will
be four (4) inch diameter PVC pipe recessed twelve (12) inches in the ground. They will
contain a 1/2-inch iron pipe or rebar and be _illed with concrete _lush with ground.
G. Sidewalks
Public sidewalks are required along the street frontage at a minimum of six (6’) feet in width.
H. Trails
Trails are required in accordance with Subchapter 10 of the UDC and the Trails Master Plan
may not receive credit for the Park Development Fee.
I. Waiver
The Parks and Recreation Director is authorized to grant waivers from the requirements of
this subsection (5) subject to the following:
1. The waiver request must be in writing; and
2. The request shall not be contrary to the public interest; and
3. Due to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in an
unnecessary hardship; and
4. The spirit of the ordinance is observed and substantial justice is done.
14.3.6 Conveyance Requirements
Public parkland shall be dedicated as public parkland by plat and conveyed by general or special
warranty deed as approved by the Administrator with acceptable evidence of clear title and full payment
of taxes furnished to the City, prior to or at the same time of _inal plat recordation. The applicant shall
pay all costs of transferring title of the parkland to the City, including the costs of:
A. A phase one environmental assessment, which meets the current American Society of Testing
and Materials (ASTM), without any further recommendations for clean-up, certi_ied to the City
not earlier than the 120th day before the closing date;
B. A category 1(a) land title survey, certi_ied to the City and the title company that the survey was
not prepared earlier than the 120th day before closing date;
C. A title commitment with copies of all schedule B and C documents, and an owner’s title policy;
D. A fee simple general or special warranty deed;
E. A certi_ied tax certi_icate showing full payment of taxes;
F. Taxes prorated to the closing date;
G. Recording fees;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 230/320
H. Charges or fees collected by the title company; and
I. Curing all encumbrances or exceptions to the title that preclude its use as a city park, at
grantor’s expense.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.4 PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE
14.4.1 General
A. A Park Development Fee or the construction of parkland amenities in accordance with the
alternative compliance provisions shall be required for residential subdivisions in accordance with
the standards stated herein, as applicable, and the Parks Development Manual.
B. In addition to the dedication and conveyance of public parkland, the owner or applicant shall be
required to make a cash payment for or construct park development improvements based on the
anticipated impact the development will have on the public parkland system.
C. County applicability provision. Unless otherwise authorized by a park development agreement
between the jurisdictions and/or the applicant, developments located within the City’s
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall utilize a Park Development Fee and shall follow alternative
compliance for the construction of public amenities.
14.4.2 Park Development Fee Calculation
A. The Park Development Fee is calculated at a rate of not less than $350,000 per 1,409 ultimate
residents or an equivalent ratio thereof. The following fee rates are calculated based on the
expected persons per unit consistent with Table 14.3.2 Persons per Unit.
Table 14.4.2 Park Development Fee
($350,000 / 1409) X (Persons/Units) = Park Development Fee Per Unit
Gross Density per Residential Development
(Dwelling Units per Acre) Park Development Fee per Unit
From 0 to 6 (3 pph) $745
Over 6 to 10 (2.7 pph) $670
Over 10 to 25 (2 pph) $496
More than 25 (2 pph) $496
B. Unless the density of multi-family or condominium developments is identi_ied on the permit
application subject to this Subchapter, it shall be assumed that the highest density authorized
under this Chapter is the development’s density unless the applicant provides by plat note, or be
other binding written memorialization acceptable to the Administrator, the actual density that the
project shall not exceed.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.5 ALTERNATIVE COMPLIANCE
14.5.1 General
A. Alternative compliance is not intended to subvert the public parkland standards, but is intended
to ensure the intent of the Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan is addressed through
the development process by appropriate measures.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 231/320
B. Unless, otherwise speci_ically provided for in this subsection E., alternative compliance shall be
reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Commission, who shall make recommendation to the City
Council to accept or deny the proposed alternative compliance. City Council shall make a _inal
determination whether the proposed alternative compliance is approved, disapproved or
approved with conditions. In event that the proposed alternative compliance is approved with
conditions, such conditions shall be memorialized in a written order that may be part of a
resolution or ordinance of City Council.
C. All parks shall meet all federal, state, and local regulations and guidelines as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as well as guidelines established by the Commercial Park
Advisory Council (CPAC) and the National Playground Safety Institute (NPSI).
D. Park Development Agreement (phasing). In order to ensure the ful_illment of alternative
compliance provisions pertaining to the construction of public or private amenities throughout
the development process, the City may require the applicant to enter into an agreement with the
City outlining the terms of park development.
14.5.2 Parkland Fee In-Lieu – Criteria for Approval
A. Due to the proximity of existing public parkland or the size of the development that would be
better served by a community or regional park, the developer may be required or may request
a reduction in the public parkland dedication requirement up to one hundred (100%) percent
by means of a fee in-lieu, in accordance with the parameters stated herein. The Parks and
Recreation Director may require or accept cash payment in lieu of public parkland, or a portion
thereof, within certain parameters provided below, if the development requires less than three
(3) acres of public parkland. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall review any fee in-lieu
request of public parkland that does not meet the speci_ic criteria for approval by the Parks and
Recreation Director, or if the development requires three (3) acres or more of public parkland
and provide a recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission and/or City Council.
B. The parkland fee in-lieu is established at $43,560 per acre, or a portion thereof, for the value of
platted land to be developed for residential uses that would otherwise be dedicated and
conveyed to the City as public parkland. The fee in lieu of parkland dedication is based upon the
fair market value of the land, that is developable for single family use, and that would otherwise
be required to be dedicated as public parkland for the proposed development, with all utilities
extended to and through the property and situated outside of the 100-year _loodplain. The fee
may be evaluated on an annual basis by the Planning and Zoning Commission and Parks and
Recreation Commission. Any recommendation for amending the fee amount shall be forwarded
to the City Council for approval. The price per acre for fair market value may be modi_ied upon
submittal of an appraisal meeting the property criteria outlined above that is no more than a
year old.
C. Less than three (3) Acres Required – Criteria for Approval by the Parks and Recreation Director
1. If the proposed development does not contain 100-year _loodplain, and is located within a
quarter-mile radius of existing community level public parkland totaling _ive (5)
contiguous acres or more, a full payment of fee in-lieu of public parkland may be
required; or
2. If the proposed development does not contain 100-year _loodplain, and is located within a
half-mile radius of existing community level public parkland totaling ten (10) contiguous
acres or more, a partial payment of fee in-lieu of public parkland up to 50% may be
accepted with the addition of private park area equal to the remainder of the public
parkland that would have otherwise been dedicated to the City; or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 232/320
3. Notwithstanding the aforementioned provisions, if the proposed development has an
estimated population 150 people or less based on Table 14.3.2, the Parks and Recreation
Director may accept a fee in lieu of public parkland.
4. If the development does not meet the aforementioned criteria for approval by the Parks
and Recreation Director, the request for fee in-lieu shall be reviewed by the Parks and
Recreation Commission.
5. Private park area required under this section of alternative compliance shall be entitled to
credit for public parkland dedication. The private park area may be required to meet all
the criteria for public parkland dedication per Section 14.3, including but not limited to,
dimensions, access, location, character, and unsuitable land.
D. More than three (3) Acres – Criteria for Approval by Parks and Recreation Commission
1. Reduction does not exceed 50%;
2. Reduction does not exceed ten (10) acres;
3. Development is adequately served by the proposed or existing public parkland; and
4. Consistency with intent of the City’s Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan.
14.5.3 Construction of Public Amenities in Public Parks – Criteria for Approval
A. In lieu of the Park Development Fee or a portion thereof, the applicant may make a request to
the Parks and Recreation Commission to be allowed to construct public amenities on public
parkland, in accordance with the Parks Development Manual, as amended, to be credited
towards satisfying the Park Development Fee in accordance with Section 14.4. If the
development is governed by a park development agreement, a request under this section must
also be approved by City Council.
B. Design, speci_ication, and construction of the improvements shall be subject to review and
approval by the City. Construction of the amenities, for the portion required for the _inal plat(s)
approved, must be completed within the time period prescribe in the development agreement;
or, within three (3) years of the City’s approval of the _irst _inal plat of the subdivision, when the
applicant has not entered into a development agreement. Fiscal security for the construction of
amenities shall be provided in the amount required for the park development fee, in a form
acceptable by the Administrator.
C. All parks shall meet all federal, state, and local regulations and guidelines as required by the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), as well as guidelines established by the Commercial Park
Advisory Council (CPAC) and the National Playground Safety Institute (NPSI).
D. Non-creditable items: Shrubs, sod, re-vegetation, swimming pools, subdivision signage,
administrative, professional, engineering or legal costs, development application fees, and any
public improvement required through the subdivision process.
14.5.4 Construction of Private Amenities in Private Parks – Criteria for Approval
A. In accordance with the Parks Development Manual, as amended, privately owned and
maintained parks with non-exclusive private amenities may receive up to one hundred (100)
percent credit towards ful_illing the requirements of the Park Development Fee, upon approval
by the Parks and Recreation Director.
B. In accordance with the Parks Development Manual, as amended, privately owned and
maintained parks with exclusive private amenities within developments that consist of a density
of ten (10) dwelling units per acre or greater, may receive up to one hundred (100) percent
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 233/320
credit towards ful_illing the requirements of the Park Development Fee, upon approval of the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
C. Fiscal security for the construction of amenities shall be provided in the amount required for
the park development fee, in a form acceptable by the Administrator.
D. Private amenities icluded within private parks approved to be credited towards meeting the
requirements of this section in accordance with the Parks Development Manual may remain
exclusive to the common interest owners of the development.
E. Restrictive Covenants. Private parks must be managed by mandatory homeowners association
and subject to restrictive covenants that:
Requires each property owner within the subdivision encumbered by the restrictive
covenants to pay dues and special assessments for the maintenance of the private park;
and
Prohibits the dissolution of the private park until such time as the declarant cedes control
of the homeowner’s association to purchasers of properties within the subdivision, and
then only upon amendment to the restrictive covenants approved by ¾ of the members of
the homeowner’s association.
F. The private amenities, for which receive credit for the Park Development Fee, shall be located
contiguous to existing or proposed public parkland, where practicable.
14.5.5 Combination of Alternative Compliance
A. A combination of public parkland and amenities may also be considered by the Parks and
Recreation Commission through alternative compliance.
B. In accordance with the Parks Development Manual, the applicant may seek approval from the
Parks and Recreation Commission for a reduction in the amount of required public parkland by
providing additional public amenities equal to the cost value of the land that would have
otherwise been dedicated to the City. If the development is governed by a park development
agreement a request under this section must also be approved by City Council.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.6 PAYMENTS
14.6.1 General
A. All cash payments will be deposited in an escrow account to be used by the City exclusively for the
acquisition or improvement of public parkland.
B. Such payments shall be expended by the City within ten (10) years from the date the payment is
received by the City. If the payments are not expended by the City within the allotted 10-year time
frame, the developer may request a reimbursement of said payment until one year after the tenyear
anniversary date of the payment made to the City.
14.6.2 Assessment and Payment Provided
A. Any payment for fee in-lieu of public parkland or Park Development Fee shall be assessed at the
time of preliminary plan is approved.
B. Payment of fee in-lieu of public parkland or _iscal security, if applicable, shall be provided prior to
the approval of the _inal plat.
C. Payment of the Park Development Fee or _iscal security, if applicable, shall be provided at the time
of _inal plat, unless otherwise speci_ied by a development agreement.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 234/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.7 AUTHORITY
14.7.1 Authority
Public parkland dedication shall be reviewed through the subdivision process at the preliminary plan
stage. The preliminary plan and a conceptual site plan for the construction of public amenities, if
applicable, shall be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Commission or Parks and Recreation Director,
where applicable, prior to making its recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission.
14.7.2 Preliminary Plan
The Parks and Recreation Commission and/or Parks and Recreation Director, where applicable, shall
make a recommendation regarding parkland requirements to the Planning and Zoning Commission
and/or City Council upon compliance with the parkland standards provided herein. The following items
shall be provided within the preliminary plan application and reviewed in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Subchapter 15. Subdivision Process of the UDC.
A. Proposal report identifying how the parkland dedication and park development requirements have
been satis_ied. This may include cost estimates for proposed parkland improvements.
B. Phase one environmental assessment, which meets the current American Society of Testing and
Materials (ASTM),
C. A category 1(a) land title survey, certi_ied to the City, no more than 6 months old,
D. A title commitment with copies of all schedule B and C documents
E. A 22” x 34” aerial photograph of the proposed Parkland with at least 2-inch color resolution ortho
imagery, must not be older than the current aerial photo on record at the City and must identify
creeks, ponds, drainage features and property boundary lines.
14.7.3 Final Plat
Once the City Council consents to the conveyance of public parkland by warranty deed, public parkland
included within a proposed _inal plat shall be reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission for
compliance with the approved preliminary plan and the conveyance procedures provided herein. The
following items shall be provided within the _inal plat application and reviewed in accordance with the
procedures outlined in Subchapter 15. Subdivision Process of the UDC.
A. Public parkland dedicated on a _inal plat must be labeled as “public parkland” and the label must
include the recorded deed document number.
B. General plat notes
C. If applicable, payment of parkland fee in-lieu, or a portion thereof approved by the City.
D. If applicable, payment of the Park Development Fee.
E. If applicable, all items included within Section. 14.7.4 Conveyance of Public Parkland by Deed,
below.
14.7.4 Conveyance of Public Parkland by Deed
The conveyance of public parkland may occur immediately after the recordation of the _inal plat. The
subdivider shall be responsible for all costs of transfer title to the City (or governing political
subdivision), in accordance with Section. 14.3.6, and shall provide a copy of the title policy within 90 days
of closing. The following items shall be reviewed by the City prior to the closing of title conveyance of
public parkland.
A. An environmental site assessment without any further recommendations for clean-up, certi_ied to
the City not earlier than the 120th day before the closing date;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 235/320
B. Draft of warranty deed approved by the City Attorney, and if applicable, a list of any proposed
exceptions to title provided as an exhibit included within the deed. If the legal description is
provided by metes and bounds, a survey sketch shall also be provided to accompany the metes and
bounds description within the recorded deed;
C. A title commitment with copies of all schedule B and C documents;
D. A certi_ied tax certi_icate showing full payment of taxes; and
E. HUD Settlement Statement.
14.7.5 Alternative Compliance – Construction of Public Amenities
A. If applicable, and in accordance with the alternative compliance provisions provided herein, a
conceptual plan for the construction of public amenities drafted by a licensed engineer, licensed
architect or architect shall be reviewed by the Parks and Recreation Commission.
B. A formal site plan shall be required for the construction of public amenities, to be reviewed by
staff, in accordance with the standards and procedures outlined in Subchapter 3. Procedures of the
UDC.
C. If applicable, prior to site plan approval by the City, _iscal security in an amount equal to 110
percent of the cost of the public improvements, including public amenities, in a form acceptable to
the Administrator or designee, shall be provided to the City.
D. Prior to the _inal acceptance of the public improvements by the City of P_lugerville, the subdivider
shall provide proof of the hard construction costs of such amenities by a construction bid and
invoices. In the event the subdivider does not expend the total amount required by the Park
Development Fee formula, the subdivider shall make a cash payment for the remainder.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
14.8DECISION MAKING; APPEAL PROCESS
A. Decisions under this Subchapter shall be made by the Parks and Recreation Director or the Parks
and Recreation Commission. Where this Subchapter is silent, the decision shall remain with the
Parks and Recreation Director.
B. The applicant may appeal any adverse decision to this Subchapter to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, within 30 days of such decision.
C. Within 30 days of a decision by the Planning and Zoning Commission, either the applicant or the
Parks and Recreation Director may appeal any decision of the Planning and Zoning Commission to
the City Council, whose decision on the appeal shall be _inal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 15. SUBDIVISION PROCESS.
15.1 GENERAL
15.1.1 Purpose
A. To promote the health, safety and general welfare of the community through orderly, safe, and
healthful development within the City of P_lugerville and its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction (ETJ);
B. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide for adequate and ef_icient
transportation, water, wastewater, drainage, parks, and other public improvements and facilities;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 236/320
C. To establish standards of design and procedures for the subdivision of land to further the orderly
use of land and sensible layout of development; and
D. To prevent the pollution of air and water; to reduce vehicle miles traveled through enhanced
mobility; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; and to encourage responsible use and
management of natural resources throughout the City of P_lugerville and its ETJ.
15.1.2 Authority
Under the authority of Texas Local Government Code Chapter 212, the City of P_lugerville adopts the
regulations set out herein to control the subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the City and its
ETJ.
15.1.3 Applicability
A. The regulations set out in this chapter govern every subdivision of land within the corporate limits
and the ETJ.
B. All subdivision of land for which a plat is required pursuant to Chapter 212 of the Texas Local
Government Code must comply with the requirements of this code.
C. The standards applicable to a subdivision plat and to construction of public improvements within a
subdivision are those standards in effect on the date of the _irst required application for the
subdivision, provided a valid preliminary plan exists.
D. The procedure applicable to a preliminary plan, construction plans, _inal plat, acceptance, or any
other procedure established in this code is the procedure in effect at the time the applicable
preliminary plan, construction plans, _inal plat, acceptance, or other application is _iled.
E. Approval of the _inal plat of a subdivision by the Planning and Zoning Commission (Commission),
or by the Planning Director under the minor plat procedure set out in this chapter, is required as a
condition to the subdivision of any tract of land within the City’s ETJ.
15.1.4 Exemptions
The following are exempt from the requirements of this chapter:
A. Any subdivision _iled in the County plat records on or before March 8, 1973, except subdivisions
which were in violation of regulations then in existence.
B. A subdivision recorded in the County plat records since March 8, 1973, which was approved by the
City Council or another entity having jurisdiction.
C. A division of land into parts greater than _ive acres, where each part has access and no public
improvement is being dedicated as provided in Chapter 212.004 of the Texas Local Government
Code. Where this provision is applicable, a note shall be added to the plat with reference to the
exemption allowed by Chapter 212.004, as amended, with a signature line for the Planning
Director. A copy of a recorded plat meeting this exemption shall be provided to the City of
P_lugerville Planning Department.
D. Any subdivision exempted by state law including but not limited to provisions identi_ied in Chapter
212 of the Texas Local Government Code.
15.1.5 Comprehensive Plan
Applications processed under this chapter shall comply with the City’s Comprehensive Plan as
determined by the City Council.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.2 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE SUPPLEMENTAL SCHEDULE
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 237/320
The Planning Director shall administer a Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule including
information regarding review and meeting schedules, _iling fees, plat speci_ications, standard forms,
standard plat notes, and similar information necessary to implement the subdivision process.
15.2.1 Schedule
A. The schedule of meeting dates in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule shall
establish the submittal deadlines and Commission meetings for each year.
B. The Commission shall by vote establish the schedule of meeting dates for a calendar year before
the end of the previous calendar year.
C. The Commission may amend by vote the meeting schedule any time during the year; however,
meeting dates may not be changed for which the deadline date has passed.
D. When required, complete applications received on or before the deadline date shall be considered
by the Commission on the applicable meeting date as indicated on the schedule.
E. The applicant may withdraw the application at any time and forfeit all fees paid. Such withdrawal
shall not obligate the Commission to take action on the application within the required time period.
F. The applicant may request in writing to delay the consideration of the application at any time,
provided the said request is on the waiver form provided in the Uni_ied Development Code
Supplemental Schedule, which waives the applicant’s right to having the plat acted upon as set
forth in the Local Government Code, Section 212.009(a). The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall not delay action on a plat application without the written consent of the applicant and waiver
of rights.
15.2.2 Fees
Fees required as part of an application under this chapter shall be established in the Uni_ied
Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
15.2.3 Violations
A. It is a violation of this code to subdivide or replat any land within the corporate limits of the City or
its ETJ without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or to offer for sale, or to sell or
lease, any property within a subdivision that has not been subdivided in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and Section 212 of the Texas Local Government Code.
B. If a corporation is found to be in violation of this chapter, each of its of_icers, agents, and/or
employees who were in any way responsible for such violation shall be individually and severally
liable for penalties herein prescribed.
C. The application of this section shall not apply to a duly quali_ied county clerk or deputy county
clerk acting in their of_icial capacity, nor may the provisions of this section in any way be construed
to con_lict with Section 212.017 of the Texas Local Government Code.
15.2.4 Remedies and Penalties
A. Within City’s Corporate Limits. Any individual who intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or criminally
negligently violates any provision of this chapter, is guilty of a class C misdemeanor and upon
conviction shall be subject to a _ine of not less than $1 and not more than $2000. Each day of such
violation may constitute a separate offense. Such penalty is cumulative and not exclusive of any
other rights or remedies the City may have.
B. Civil remedies applicable within both the City’s corporate limits and extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ). In addition to the criminal penalties set out in Subsection (A) above, the City may institute a
civil action, in law and or equity, in a court of competent jurisdiction against any individual who
violates any provision of this chapter; and the City may seek such equitable relief or monetary
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 238/320
relieve that may be available under the statutes, common law, and constitutions of the state and
federal governments.
C. In addition to the remedies set forth above, the City may enforce compliance with the requirements
of this chapter by:
1. Refusing to accept improvements;
2. Withholding building permits or certi_icates of occupancy;
3. Not allowing connection to or disconnection of utility service; or
4. Issuing a stop work order.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.3 SUBDIVISION PROCESS
A. A new subdivision within the City Limits and ETJ shall be subject to the following order of process
including allowances for expedited review as established in Subchapter 3:
1. Preliminary plan
2. Final plat
3. Construction plans
4. Construction of public improvements or _iscal security
5. Acceptance of subdivision as complete
6. Acceptance of public improvements for ownership and maintenance
7. Final plat recordation
B. A pre-application conference shall be required prior to the submittal of an application for all
subdivision processes, unless otherwise determined by the Planning Director.
C. The subdivision process shall begin with the submittal of a preliminary plan if the application is not
eligible as a minor plat, replat, amending plat, or vacation plat.
D. The subdivision process shall begin with the submittal of a _inal plat if a valid preliminary plan
exists or when a preliminary plan may not be required as may be the case with a minor plat, replat
or amending plat. A _inal plat shall be recorded upon the completion and acceptance of the public
improvements or _iscal security being posted in the amount of 110% of the cost of the
improvements.
E. An applicant may pursue at any time a replat, or resubdivision of land that has been previously
recorded with the County by complying with the processes outlined in this Subchapter and only
after a pre-application conference has been held.
F. An applicant may revise at any time a valid preliminary plan by complying with the process
established by this Chapter and only after a pre-application conference has been held.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.4 GENERAL PLATTING PROCEDURE
15.4.1 Pre-application Conference
Prior to the submittal of any subdivision application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the
Planning Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision.
15.4.2 Application Procedure
An application for a subdivision shall be _iled with the Planning Director by the applicant in accordance
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 239/320
with the provisions of this chapter and the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
15.4.3 Completeness Review
The Planning Director shall determine if an application for a plan or plat meets all of the criteria to be
considered complete. The Planning Director or designee may require information which is not included
in the content requirements speci_ied in this Subchapter to be provided in order to provide speci_ic
clari_ication to the subdivision. Within _ive (5) business days following the date of _iling, the Planning
Director or designee shall notify the applicant of any application de_iciencies. Upon receipt of a revised
application with all de_iciencies corrected, the Planning Director shall deem the application complete and
the applicable review shall commence.
15.4.4 Development Review Committee (DRC) Review
The DRC shall review all subdivision applications and provide written comment to the applicant
identifying necessary revisions or requested supplemental information, as speci_ied for each respective
subdivision type within this Chapter.
Upon receipt of the DRC comments, the applicant shall be responsible for revising the application
accordingly and re-submitting the application in a timely manner to meet all deadlines.
Once the DRC is satis_ied that all comments have been addressed adequately, the DRC shall provide a
recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission regarding the subdivision application as
provided in Subchapter 2.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.5 PRELIMINARY PLAN
15.5.1 Purpose
The purpose of the preliminary plan is to present a detailed illustration of the proposed subdivision in
order to facilitate a review by the DRC and the Planning and Zoning Commission of the proposed lot
layout, street and drainage system, easements, utilities, amenity or parkland lots, and other elements
relevant to this chapter.
15.5.2 Applicability
The applicant shall submit a preliminary plan for all proposed subdivisions or additions for
consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission unless the subdivision meets the requirements
for exemption as provided for in this Subchapter (15.1.4).
15.5.3 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.5.4 Application Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule
15.5.5 Preliminary Plan Content Requirements
A. In order to ensure the orderly planning of roads, utilities, drainage, parks and other public
facilities, the parent tract must be included in a preliminary plan. The preliminary plan must
substantially conform to all land use plans adopted by resolution or ordinance including but not
limited to the Comprehensive Plan.
B. See UDC Supplemental Schedule for list of content requirements.
15.5.6 Preliminary Plan Review Process
A. All preliminary plans shall be reviewed by the DRC prior to moving forward to the Planning and
Zoning Commission.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 240/320
B. No longer than 15 business days from the date of deeming the preliminary plan application
complete, the Planning Director shall present the applicant with written DRC comments regarding
the review of the preliminary plan.
C. Upon receipt of the DRC comments, the applicant shall revise the plans accordingly and provide to
the Planning Director for review any supplemental information the DRC requested.
D. The review process shall continue as stated above until the DRC is satis_ied that all comments have
been addressed adequately. Failure to submit a revised application within 45 calendar days from
the date the application was deemed complete or date of last correspondence from the Planning
Director (whichever is later), will void the subdivision application and require new fees.
E. DRC acceptance of the revised application must occur at least two weeks prior to the anticipated
Planning and Zoning Commission meeting as identi_ied in the Uni_ied Development Code
Supplemental Schedule.
F. If the preliminary plan is disapproved by the Commission, the applicant may adjust the plan
accordingly and restart the subdivision process no sooner than thirty (30) days after disapproval
with speci_ic written identi_ication of what has changed from the previously denied plan.
G. Within ten (10) business days after action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Planning Director shall issue to the applicant a certi_icate as required by Section 212.0115 of the
Texas Local Government Code stating the result of the preliminary plan review and the
determination by the Planning and Zoning Commission when requested.
15.5.7 Revisions to Preliminary Plan
Prior to the submittal of a preliminary plan, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
A. Minor Revisions. Minor revisions shall require an application, statement of proposal, fee, the
number of plan sets speci_ied by the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule, and any
other information requested by the Planning Director. The Planning Director may administratively
approve or deny minor revisions to approved preliminary plans and reserves the right to forward
any proposed revision to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and consideration. If the
application is determined by the Planning Director to be a major revision, the applicant may appeal
the decision through the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with the preliminary plan
process outlined in this Subchapter. Minor revisions shall be limited to those that:
1. Change lot lines within a subdivision provided lot sizes are not decreased and where a
modi_ication to the lot con_iguration does not increase the number of lots; or
2. Adjust a local street alignment, add or realign a trail or sidewalk; or
3. Change a utility or access easement; or
4. Change the phasing of a subdivision, if adequate public infrastructure is provided as
determined by the City Engineer.
B. Major Revisions. Major revisions shall require meeting all preliminary plan content requirements
and submitting a letter from the applicant outlining the need for the proposed request. A major
revision shall follow the preliminary plan process outlined in this Subchapter. The Planning and
Zoning Commission shall take _inal action regarding a proposed major revision. Major revisions
include, but are not limited to:
1. An increase in the number of residential lots; or
2. Changes to street layout; or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 241/320
3. Modi_ication of parkland, resulting in a decrease or relocation, which may require Parks and
Recreation Commission reconsideration.
15.5.8 Expiration of Preliminary Plan
A. The approval of a preliminary plan shall remain in effect for a period of two (2) years following the
date of approval, during which period the applicant shall submit and receive approval of a _inal plat
for at least a portion of the land shown on the preliminary plan. If no portion of the preliminary
plan area has been _inal platted within the two (2)-year period, the preliminary plan shall expire.
B. The applicant may submit and obtain approval of a _inal plat for only a portion of the land
contained within the preliminary plan. The preliminary plan for the balance of the property shall
expire two years after the date of approval of the _inal plat covering a portion of the property
within the preliminary plan, unless a new _inal plat for at least 10% of the preliminary plan is
approved, which will reinstate the two year extension.
C. Preliminary plans approved by a governmental entity other than the City for land that was outside
of the City’s jurisdiction at the time are invalidated on the date when the land becomes subject to
the City’s jurisdiction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.6 FINAL PLAT
15.6.1 Purpose
The purpose of a _inal plat is to present a detailed illustration of the proposed layout of the streets, lots,
easements, and any areas to be dedicated to the public in order to facilitate a review by the DRC and
Planning and Zoning Commission, and to establish an approved, legally recordable document of the
proposed subdivision. If a _inal plat does not include the entire tract of land included in the preliminary
plan, the _inal plat shall correspond to the phasing approved in the preliminary plan.
15.6.2 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.6.3 Application Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule.
15.6.4 Final Plat Content Requirements
A. The _inal plat must substantially conform to the preliminary plan and all land use plans adopted by
resolution or ordinance including but not limited to the Comprehensive Plan.
B. See the UDC Supplemental Schedule for list of content requirements.
15.6.5 Final Plat Review Process
A. A complete application for a _inal plat may be submitted for only those subdivisions for which
there exists a valid preliminary plan.
B. The Planning Director shall determine if an application for a _inal plat meets all of the criteria to be
considered complete. Within _ive (5) business days following the date of _iling, the Planning
Director or designee shall notify the applicant of any application de_iciencies. Upon receipt of a
revised application with all de_iciencies corrected, the Planning Director shall deem the application
complete and the applicable review shall commence.
C. No longer than 15 business days from the date of deeming the _inal plat application complete, the
Planning Director shall present the applicant with written DRC comments regarding the review of
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 242/320
the _inal plat.
D. The applicant may request in writing to delay the consideration of the Application at any time,
provided the said request is on the waiver form provided in the Uni_ied Development Code
Supplemental Schedule, which waives the applicant’s right to having the plat acted upon as set
forth in the Local Government Code, Section 212.009(a). The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall not delay action on a plat application without the written consent of the applicant and waiver
of rights.
E. If the plat is disapproved by the Commission, the applicant may adjust the plat accordingly and
resubmit with speci_ic written identi_ication of what has changed from the previously denied
plat.
F. Within ten (10) business days after action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Planning Director shall issue to the applicant a certi_icate as required by Section 212.0115 of the
Texas Local Government Code stating the result of the _inal plat review and the determination by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
G. Prior to a _inal plat being recorded, public improvements shall have been constructed and accepted
by the City or _iscal security provided to the City through a subdivision bond or other form
approved by the Administrator and in the amount of 110% of the cost of the public improvements
as approved by the City Engineer. Upon such acceptance of public improvements or _iscal security,
the _inal plat may be recorded. Fiscal security shall be released only upon the City’s acceptance of
the completed public improvements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.7 MINOR PLAT
15.7.1 Purpose
The purpose of the minor plat is to allow for a review by the DRC to establish an approved, legally
recordable plat of the proposed subdivision. The minor plat is intended to expedite the platting process
for qualifying subdivisions by not requiring the submission of a preliminary plan or review by the
Planning and Zoning Commission. The Planning Director may administratively approve a minor plat.
15.7.2 Eligibility
A. Plats conforming to the following criteria are eligible to be processed as a minor plat:
1. The proposed subdivision abuts a public street.
2. There are no requirements for additional off-site or on-site public improvements as determined
by the Planning Director and City Engineer.
3. No more than four lots are proposed.
4. The proposed subdivision does not meet the threshold for a TIA as required for a preliminary
plan.
15.7.3 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.7.4 Application Requirements
A. A minor plat shall be subject to the same application and content requirements as a _inal plat, in
addition to the following:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 243/320
1. The signature blocks for the Commission shall be replaced by the Planning Director’s
signature block as provided in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
2. A letter shall be provided explaining the applicant’s intentions in proposing to subdivide the
subject property as indicated on the minor plat and the proposed land use.
15.7.5 Minor Plat Review Process
A. The Planning Director shall determine if an application for a minor plat meets all of the criteria to
be considered complete. Within _ive (5) business days following the date of _iling, the Planning
Director or designee shall notify the applicant of any application de_iciencies. Upon receipt of a
revised application with all de_iciencies corrected, the Planning Director shall deem the application
complete and the applicable review shall commence.
B. No longer than 15 business days from the date of deeming the preliminary plan application
complete, the Planning Director shall present the applicant with written DRC comments regarding
the review of the preliminary plan.
C. Upon receipt of the DRC comments, the applicant shall revise the minor plat accordingly and
provide to the Planning Director for review any supplemental information the DRC requested in
continual cycles until all comments are satis_ied and the minor plat is ultimately approved by the
Planning Director.
D. Within ten (10) business days after plat approval by the Planning Director, the Planning Director
shall issue to the applicant a certi_icate as required by Section 212.0115 of the Texas Local
Government Code stating that the plat has been approved and shall cause the plat to be recorded
with the applicable County jurisdiction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.8 REPLAT
15.8.1 Purpose
The purpose of a Replat is to resubdivide all or part of property that is the subject of a recorded plat,
without the vacation of the preceding plat, and to allow for review by the DRC and Planning and Zoning
Commission.
15.8.2 Pre-application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.8.3 Application Requirements
See the UDC Supplemental Schedule.
15.8.4 Replat Review Process
A. The Planning Director shall determine if an application for a Replat meets all of the criteria to be
considered complete. Within _ive (5) business days following the date of _iling, the Planning
Director or designee shall notify the applicant of any application de_iciencies. Upon receipt of a
revised application with all de_iciencies corrected, the Planning Director shall deem the application
complete and the applicable review shall commence.
B. No longer than 18 calendar days from the date of deeming the preliminary plan application
complete, the Planning Director shall present the applicant with written DRC comments regarding
the review of the preliminary plan.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 244/320
C. The applicant may request in writing to delay the consideration of the application at any time,
provided the said request is on the waiver form provided in the Uni_ied Development Code
Supplemental Schedule, which waives the applicant’s right to having the plat acted upon as set
forth in the Local Government Code, Section 212.009(a). The Planning and Zoning Commission
shall not delay action on a plat application without the written consent of the applicant and waiver
of rights.
D. Once all comments have been addressed, not later than 15 days before the scheduled meeting date,
the Planning Director or designee shall provide the following public notice as required by Section
212 of the Texas Local Government Code for a Replat:
1. Signs, in the amount determined by the Planning Director, placed on every street right-of-way
adjacent to the land under consideration.
2. An advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation in the area, which includes the date,
time, and location of the Public Hearing and a general description of the area under
consideration.
3. Per Section 212.015 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, if in the past 5 years
any of the area to be replatted contained a residential zoning district or was limited to
residential use by deed restrictions, then in addition to the above requirements, letters to all
owners of land within 200 feet of the boundary of the proposed Replat area shall be
provided identifying the date, time and location of the public hearing, a general description of
the area under consideration, and a map indicating the general area.
E. Within ten (10) working days after action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the
Planning Director shall issue to the applicant a certi_icate as required by Section 212.0115 of the
Texas Local Government Code stating the result of the _inal plat review and the determination by
the Planning and Zoning Commission.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.9 AMENDING PLAT
15.9.1 Purpose
The purpose of an amending plat is to replace a recorded plat without vacation of that plat, and to allow
for review by the DRC and Planning Director. The Amending plat is intended to be used as a limited
means to correct minor errors or make minor adjustments to a recorded plat.
15.9.2 Eligibility
A. An applicant may submit an application for an amending plat if the amending plat is signed by the
applicant only and is solely for one or more of the purposes stated below per Section 212.016 of the
Texas Local Government Code as amended.
B. The Planning Director may administratively approve an amending plat if the application is determined
to meet all minimum requirements.
1. To correct an error in a course or distance;
2. To add a course or distance that was omitted;
3. To correct a property description;
4. To indicate monuments which were set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of
the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibility for setting monuments;
5. To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed or which
was originally shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character;
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 245/320
6. To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical errors or omission previously approved
including lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identi_ication of adjacent recorded plats;
7. To correct errors in courses and distances of lot lines between adjacent lots if:
a. both lot owners join in the application,
b. the amendment does not abolish either lot,
c. the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions, and
d. the amendment does not have a material adverse effect on the property rights of the other
owners in the plat;
8. To relocate a lot line in order to cure an unintentional encroachment of a building or other
improvement on the Lot line or on an easement;
9. To relocate a lot line between adjacent lots if:
a. all owners join in application for plat amendment,
b. the amendment does not remove recorded covenants or restrictions; and
c. the amendment does not increase the number of lots;
10. To make necessary changes to the prior plat to create six or fewer lots in a subdivision, or a
part of a subdivision, covered by the prior plat, if:
a. the changes do not affect applicable zoning or other regulations of the City;
b. the changes do not attempt to remove or amend any covenants or restrictions; and
c. the area covered by the changes is located in an area that the City has approved, after a
Public Hearing, as a residential improvement area; or
11. To replat one or more lots on an existing street if:
a. the owners of all those lots join in the application for amending the plat;
b. the amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions;
c. the amendment does not increase the number of lots; and
d. the amendment does not create or require the creation of a new street or make necessary
the extension of municipal facilities.
15.9.3 Pre-application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.9.4 Application Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule
15.9.5 Amending Plat Content Requirements
The content requirements for Amending plats are the same as that for _inal plats except the signature
blocks for the Mayor and Commission shall be replaced by the Planning Director’s signature block as
provided in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule. See the UDC Supplemental Schedule.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.10 VACATION PLAT
15.10.1 Purpose
The purpose of a vacation plat is to nullify all or part of a previously recorded plat. Application for the
vacation of a subdivision plat may be made at any time before the sale of a lot or lots in said subdivision,
or, where a lot or lots have been sold, by all the property owners in said subdivision. The vacation of a
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 246/320
subdivision plat may be considered without notice or Public Hearing and is subject to the approval of the
Planning and Zoning Commission.
15.10.2 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed Vacation plat unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.10.3 Application Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule.
15.10.4 Vacation Plat Review Process
A. A Vacation plat shall follow the same review process and schedule as a _inal plat.
B. Upon approval of the Vacation plat by the Commission, the proposed instrument of vacation shall
be recorded, or if in the ETJ, sent to the applicable county planning department for consideration.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.11 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
15.11.1 Purpose
Construction plans provide the detailed engineering required to build public improvements to serve a
subdivision as required within this Subchapter, and to the speci_ications described in the Engineering
Design Manual and Construction Standards.
15.11.2 Applicability
The applicant shall submit construction plans following the approval of a preliminary plan and _inal plat.
The City Engineer shall review and approve the plans prior to commencement of construction.
15.11.3 Application Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule.
15.11.4 Construction Plans Content Requirements
See UDC Supplemental Schedule.
15.11.5 Construction Plans Review Process
A. An application for construction plans shall be accepted only after a valid preliminary plan exists.
B. The construction plans shall include the on-site and off-site Public Improvements required to serve
one or more phases of a valid preliminary plan.
C. A complete application for construction plans shall be submitted to the Engineering Department
for review based on the approved preliminary plan. Within 30 calendar days of the City Engineer
deeming the application complete, the Planning Department shall provide the City Engineer or
designee with any comments for revision.
D. Within 30 calendar days of the Planning Director deeming the application complete, the City
Engineer or designee shall approve or deny the application and provide written comments to the
applicant regarding necessary revisions or requests for additional information. The applicant shall
submit revised construction plans or additional information, as required, no later than 60 calendar
days after receiving the City Engineer’s comments.
E. Revised construction plans shall be submitted to the City Engineer in continual cycles until all
comments are satis_ied and the construction plans are ultimately approved by the City Engineer.
F. The City Engineer or designee shall notify the Engineer of Record when the construction plans are
ready for approval, at which point the Engineer of Record shall submit within seven (7) calendar
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 247/320
days of this noti_ication the title sheet of the approved plan set, one full size (22” x 34”) and two
half size (11” x 17”) black line copies and an electronic pdf copy of the approved plans to the
Development Services Center for City Engineer signature.
G. Within 14 days of signing the approved construction plans, the City Engineer shall issue a permit to
begin construction.
H. The construction permit shall expire immediately and approval of the construction plans shall be
rescinded immediately when either of the following conditions occur:
1. Work has not started 180 days from the date the permit was issued.
2. The job is abandoned for 90 consecutive days or longer after work was started.
I. Prior to a construction permit expiring, the City Engineer may, upon written request of the
applicant, grant a one time, 180-day extension of the construction permit. All written requests shall
be submitted directly to the City Engineer and provide justi_ication for the extension request. The
provisions of subsection 15.11.5(H) above shall also apply to any approved extension of a
construction permit.
15.11.6 Plan Correction Process
A. Any changes to the approved construction plans shall be processed via correction with the City
prior to being constructed.
B. The correction shall be indicated in the revision blocks of the original cover sheet and shown on
every sheet affected by the proposed correction. The engineer of record shall submit one full size
(22” x 34”) and two half size (11” x 17”) blue line or black line copies and an electronic pdf copy of
the corrected sheets to the Development Services Center for review.
C. Within seven (7) calendar days of receiving the correction, the City Engineer or designee shall
approve or deny the correction and provide written comments to the applicant regarding
necessary revisions or requests for additional information. The applicant shall submit the revised
sheets or additional information, as required, not later than seven (7) calendar days after receiving
the City Engineer’s comments.
D. Revised Corrections shall be submitted to the City Engineer in continual review cycles until all
comments are satis_ied and the corrections are ultimately approved by the City Engineer.
E. The City Engineer or designee shall notify the Engineer of Record when the correction is ready for
approval, at which point the Engineer of Record shall submit within seven (7) calendar days of this
noti_ication, the title sheet of the approved plan set, one full size (22” x 34”) and two half size (11”
x 17”) blue line or black line copies and an electronic pdf copy of the approved plans to the
Development Services Center for City Engineer signature.
F. Once the correction is submitted for City Engineer signature, the City Engineer shall, within three
(3) calendar days, issue the signed and approved Correction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.12. CONSTRUCTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS OR FISCAL SECURITY
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing all streets, utilities, drainage, streetlights, traf_ic
control devices, and any other Public Improvements within the subdivision, and those off-site
improvements necessary to serve the subdivision, except as speci_ied in a development agreement,
if applicable.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 248/320
B. Following approval of a _inal plat, the applicant shall submit construction plans in accordance with
Section 15.16. The applicant may choose to either:
1. Construct and be granted _inal acceptance by the City for all required public improvements
prior to recordation of the _inal plat for the subject area; or
2. Provide _iscal security in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated cost of the
improvements in a form acceptable to the City Engineer. When Public Improvements are
under construction but have not been of_icially accepted by the City, the City Engineer may
allow the posting of partial _iscal security in an amount equal to 110 percent of the estimated
cost for the remaining improvements in order to allow a _inal plat to be recorded prior to
City acceptance of the improvements. The applicant shall submit a written request to the City
Engineer and shall include a current cost estimate that has been signed and sealed by the
engineer of record for review and concurrence by the City Engineer.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.13. ACCEPTANCE OF SUBDIVISION AS COMPLETE
Subdivision acceptance of Improvements shall conform to the City of P_lugerville Engineering Design
Manual and Construction Standards.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.14 FINAL PLAT RECORDATION PROCEDURE
In order for the approved plat to remain active and be recorded, the applicant shall submit the following
to the Planning Director, within 1 year of the plat being approved by the Planning and Zoning
Commission unless construction has commenced and construction remains active:
A. All parkland conveyance documentation or fee in lieu as applicable, in accordance with Subchapter
14;
B. Original tax certi_icates re_lecting all taxes paid;
C. Evidence certifying the required Public Improvements have been constructed and accepted, or that
construction plans have been approved and the posting of appropriate _iscal security has been
provided;
D. The county recordation fees;
E. Separate instrument easements or documents to be _iled concurrently with the _inal plat as
applicable; and
F. Evidence that any regional storm water detention fees, where applicable, have been provided.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.15 SUBDIVISION WAIVER
Upon written request and demonstration by the applicant, the Planning and Zoning Commission may
consider a waiver, or partial waiver from requirements of this Subchapter in speci_ic cases where:
A. Owing to special conditions of the subject property, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
Subchapter may not be physically obtainable; or
B. The requirement does not appear to be reasonably applicable in the speci_ic case; or
C. Compliance with the requirement would result in an undesirable situation; and in the
Commission’s opinion, such a subdivision Waiver would not be contrary to the public interest and
would not destroy the intent of the provisions of this Subchapter.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 249/320
15.15.1 Pre-Application Conference
Prior to the submittal of an application, a pre-application conference shall be held with the Planning
Director and applicable City staff to discuss the proposed subdivision unless determined otherwise by
the Planning Director.
15.15.2 Application Requirements
A. Completed application form.
B. A letter from the applicant addressed to the Commission demonstrating why a subdivision Waiver
is being requested.
C. Filing fee.
15.15.3 Subdivision Waiver Review Process
A. A waiver of any standard established by the Subchapter may be considered by the Commission at
any time prior to, or concurrently with the submittal of a plat application provided a Complete
Application for a waiver is submitted as determined by the Planning Director.
B. A waiver that is to be considered prior to the submittal of a plat application shall follow the
subdivision plat schedule provided in the Uni_ied Development Code Supplemental Schedule.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
15.16 SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
15.16.1 Applicability
A. The standards in this Section apply to all subdivision of land within the City and its ETJ except
where superseded by standards in an approved Development Agreement.
B. All public improvements must be constructed in compliance with the requirements of the Uni_ied
Development Code, the Tree Technical Manual, and the Engineering Design Manual and
Construction Standards.
C. Areas subject to the City’s Uni_ied Development Code may have speci_ic standards established for a
subdivision that vary from the standards established in this code by complying with the process for
a Planned Unit Development as provided in Subchapter 3. A Planned Unit Development must be
approved before the subject preliminary plan may be submitted for review.
15.16.2 General
A. A subdivision name shall be unique, shall not imply a type of development or land use, and shall
not duplicate the name of any other subdivision in the County in which it is located. Subdivision
names shall be subject to approval by the Administrator or designee.
B. Phasing of a subdivision shall be required with a preliminary plan and upheld with _inal plats to
ensure adequate public facilities needed to serve the development and community are provided in
a sequential and timely manner and not deferred to later phases. Phasing shall be determined with
the preliminary plan. If a deviation is necessary, a revision to the preliminary plan shall be
required.
15.16.3 Streets
A. All street names shall be subject to approval by the DRC and shall not duplicate the name of any
other street within the same County.
B. Where an extension of a street occurs across an intersection, the street extension shall retain the
same name as the original street segment.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 250/320
C. All streets that are stubbed out into the subject subdivision boundary shall be extended into the
subdivision.
D. The subdivision shall provide for the initial construction, improvement or extension of streets
within the subject subdivision boundary as identi_ied in the Master Transportation Plan, or the
extension of those streets in proximity of the subdivision that the Administrator determines must
be extended within the subject subdivision boundary. At no time shall a cul-de-sac be permitted
where a street stub has been provided by an adjacent subdivision unless the street is located
within the ETJ and an extension is not permitted by the applicable county.
E. No subdivision shall be permitted to decrease the level of service of an intersection without
mitigating the impact, as may be identi_ied through a TIA.
F. The classi_ication and location of streets internal to the subdivision shall be determined and
required by the Administrator as necessary to provide adequate circulation.
G. All right-of-way for the applicable classi_ication street must be dedicated as indicated in the City
Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards.
H. Local streets shall not intersect with arterial streets unless turning movements are physically
constrained to a right in / right out condition, and only when approved by the City Engineer.
I. Street design shall be in compliance with all City Engineering Design Manual and Construction
Standards.
J. Additional right-of-way width may be required by the City Engineer in order to comply with
recommendations of a traf_ic impact analysis and the Master Transportation Plan.
K. All permanent dead end streets longer than 150’ shall terminate with a cul-de-sac unless otherwise
determined by the Administrator.
L. All cul-de-sac right-of-way and radii shall conform to the City Engineering Design Manual and
Construction Standards.
M. Permanent dead end streets shall not be longer than 600 feet.
N. All temporary dead end Streets shall terminate with a temporary cul-de-sac.
O. On-street parking may be permitted within the Downtown District Overlay, commercial
subdivisions or at the discretion of the Planning Director, in accordance with the parking
dimensions provided in Subchapter 10.
P. The minimum and maximum distances between intersections of through streets along a roadway
on the same side of the street by class as measured from respective center lines shall be as
provided in Table 15.16.3
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 251/320
Q. In accordance with the adopted Fire Code all preliminary plans with lots that are greater than ½
acre are limited to 30 lots unless a secondary access point with routes to a collector or arterial
street network, which do not duplicate any segment of the route of any other access point, is
provided. For lots that are less than ½ acre in size the preliminary plan is limited to 99 lots unless
at least two permanent access points, with routes to a collector or arterial street network which do
not duplicate any segment of the route of any other access point, are provided.
R. At no time may a _inal plat create 100 lots or more, cumulatively with other _inal plats within the
same preliminary plat, that would be subject to only one access point or to multiple access points
with routes to an arterial street that duplicate a segment of the route of any other access point for
the same _inal plat.
S. Residential subdivisions shall have at least one street stubbed-out into every adjacent unplatted
property unless determined otherwise by the Administrator.
T. Street right-of-way width shall be increased by at least four (4) feet and for a minimum length of
twenty (20) feet to accommodate turnouts where neighborhood mail box units are proposed. An
ADA accessible curb ramp meeting minimum requirements per the Engineering Design Manual and
Construction Standards shall be provided directly adjacent to the turn out.
15.16.4 Alleys
Alleys shall be permitted in residential and commercial zoning districts in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. Residential alleys:
1. Shall be independent lots with shared access easements to be privately owned and maintained
by an HOA or similar governing body
2. Shall have a minimum shared access easement width of 20 feet and a minimum pavement width
of 15 feet, unless the easement will be utilized for emergency access, in which case the minimum
pavement width shall be 20 feet.
3. Shall be designed to meet all City Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards for
pavement design. Use of concrete paving is encouraged.
4. In new subdivisions, alleys shall connect to and/or be aligned with alleys in adjacent
subdivisions.
B. Commercial alleys:
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 252/320
1. Shall be designed to meet all City Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards for
pavement design.
2. Shall have a minimum pavement width of 24 feet.
C. Shall be designed so that both ends terminate only at public streets. At no time shall an alley
terminate at another alley or an arterial street unless otherwise approved through a Planned Unit
Development.
D. Shall not exceed 600 feet in length without an intersection with a public street.
E. Shall not contain gas service meters, with exception that a gas service meter may be located at the
rear of a building, outside of the required right-of-way width and accessed via an alley. Overhead
utility lines may be considered when a distribution line is necessary to serve the development and
only when approved by the Planning Director and City Engineer.
F. Shall have any above-grade utility connections, meters, junction boxes and similar facilities located
so as not to become a hazard. Where feasible such facilities shall be located near or af_ixed to a
structure.
G. Shall be designed so that any entrance to the alley off of a street right-of-way is widened to
accommodate the required pavement width plus a minimum of two feet on each side. If an alley
will be utilized for emergency access, the entrances shall meet minimum requirements for street
radii per the Emergency Service District. An easement may be considered in lieu of a lot and is
subject to the approval of the Administrator.
15.16.5 Lots
A. All lots within the City designed for a residential, commercial or light industrial land use shall
conform to the minimum lot dimensions and area as speci_ied in the respective zoning district,
unless otherwise permitted herein.
B. All lots within the ETJ designed for a residential land use should generally conform to the minimum
lot dimensions and area as speci_ied in Table 15.16.5, unless otherwise approved through a
development agreement.
Table 15.16.5 - Lot Standards
Minimum area 9,000 square feet
Minimum width 70 feet
Minimum depth 125 feet
Minimum width (cul-desac,
curved, or pie
shaped lots)
45 feet chord length
measured at the
ROW
C. A _lag lot shall only be permitted where:
1. The proposed lot con_iguration is needed to abate a topographical condition or other
unusual property accessibility constraint not created by the applicant; or
2. The lot is located within the city’s ETJ and is greater than 3 acres if not connected to a public
wastewater line. If a _lag lot is proposed to be less than three (3) acres and an onsite sanitary
sewer system is proposed, a waiver as may be allowed in 15.15 shall be _irst obtained; or
3. The unusual adjacent property boundary con_iguration constrains the arrangement of an
otherwise standard lot con_iguration
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 253/320
Where any of the above items are present, the Planning Director, may allow the proposed _lag lot
con_iguration, provided the following conditions are met:
a. The proposed lot does not circumvent the normal platting of streets for public and
emergency access;
b. The proposed lot does not prevent the extensions of streets to adjacent property;
c. The proposed lot width is not less than _ifty (50) feet in width at its frontage connection with
the adjacent public right of way; and
d. The narrow or elongated part of the proposed lot ‘pole’ does not exceed one hundred (100)
ft. in length, measured from the connecting street frontage to where the lot widens into a
‘_lag’ shape to receive a suitable building area where conforming building setback lines shall
be established; nor shall more than two (2) adjacent neck lots be connected.
D. All lots shall be numbered consecutively within each block and may be cumulative throughout the
subdivision. At no time shall the same lot number be utilized within the same block of an overall
subdivision development even if located in a separate _inal plat.
E. All lots shall front onto a public right-of-way and have a point of access to a public street. Lots
along an arterial and major collector street shall have a minimum width of 200 feet at the front lot
line and all other points. In order to maintain minimum driveway spacing along an arterial, the
minimum 200-ft lot width may not be suf_icient for an individual driveway at which point, a shared
access easement shall be provided along one lot line to accommodate for shared access to a public
street with an adjacent lot. The shared access easement may be waived by the Planning Director in
situations where the easement would not attain the minimum driveway spacing required between
driveways. As stated in Subchapter 4, commercial properties may be designed with a minimum 50
feet of frontage if a perpetual joint access easement or uni_ied development agreement is provided,
driveway spacing requirements are met and a note is placed to such on the subdivision.
F. Corner lots shall be at least ten feet wider than the width of the widest interior lot on the block
where they are located.
G. Within residential developments, a landscape lot or landscape easement shall be required between
any residential lot or residential component of a condominium or mixed-use structure with
individual residential units and an arterial street when any conforming side or rear lot line of the
subject lot or structure is generally parallel to the arterial street. The landscape lot or easement
shall have a minimum depth of 20 feet at all points as measured from the arterial right of way edge.
The landscape lot or easement shall include the adjacent residential lot’s fencing, any subdivision
perimeter fencing, subdivision signage, and street yard trees as required in Subchapter 11. The
landscape lot or easement and aforementioned improvements shall be owned and maintained in
common by a homeowner’s association or similar association.
H. Within residential developments, a landscape lot or landscape easement shall be required between
any residential lot or residential component of a condominium or mixed-use structure with
individual units and a major collector street when any conforming side or rear lot line of the
subject lot or structure is generally parallel to the major collector street. The landscape lot or
easement shall have a minimum depth of 15 feet at all points as measured from the major collector
right of way edge. The landscape lot or easement shall include the adjacent lot’s fencing, any
subdivision perimeter fencing, subdivision signage, and street yard trees as required in Subchapter
11. The landscape lot or easement and aforementioned improvements shall be owned and
maintained in common by a homeowner’s association or similar association.
15.16.6 Blocks
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 254/320
A. Block lengths shall comply with the minimum and maximum distances between intersections along
a street on the same side of the street by class established in Subchapter 10.
B. Blocks shall be numbered consecutively in a uniform manner throughout a subdivision. At no time
shall the same block designation be utilized within an overall subdivision development even if
located in a separate _inal plat.
C. All commercial and residential subdivisions shall have a minimum 15-ft wide pass through lot at
mid-block or approximate to the mid-point on any block that is 1,000 feet or greater in length. The
pass through lot shall extend the depth of the block, contain a minimum 10-ft wide hike and bike
trail designed in accordance with the City’s Engineering Design Manual and Construction
Standards, and connect to the public sidewalk. The pass through lot with improvement shall be
owned and maintained by the HOA. For commercial subdivisions, sidewalks located along internal
drives that traverse the site may be considered as a way to meet this requirement.
D. Block length shall be calculated as the distance between the centerline of two generally parallel
thru streets, in which the thru streets have two distinct points of ingress from two different
directions. Cul-de-sacs and alleys shall not be considered thru streets and shall not be used in
calculating block length. This provision shall not apply to the periphery of a new residential
development when a looped street is utilized, provided a connection is made to existing street
stubs, mid-block pass through lots as described above are provided, and new street stubs are
provided in accordance with this chapter.
15.16.7 Water
A. All water infrastructure required to adequately serve all non-drainage lots shall be provided within
the subdivision. Any existing or new water facilities shall supply the required demand at the
required pressure for both domestic use and _ire protection or provide the opportunity for a
future connection with use of a sleeve, valve and appurtenances.
B. All water infrastructure and service connections shall conform to the City Engineering Design
Manual and Construction Standards, and Water Master Plan.
C. The City Engineer shall require water infrastructure to be extended to adjacent land when the City
Engineer determines it is necessary for the ef_icient delivery of utility service and in accordance
with the Water Master Plan.
15.16.8 Wastewater
A. Onsite sanitary sewer facilities (OSSF) shall be permitted in the ETJ to serve residential lots equal to
or greater than three (3) acres when the City or other providers are unable to provide immediate
or foreseeable future wastewater service, and only when approved by the Planning Director and
City Engineer. On a case by case basis, when a single residential lot in the ETJ cannot meet the
minimum three (3) acre size requirement, the Planning Director and City Engineer may approve a
waiver to allow an OSSF provided the minimum acreage, site design and similar requirements of
the applicable county are maintained.
B. All wastewater infrastructure, including but not limited to any necessary upgrades to existing lines
or facilities shall be constructed to ensure adequate service to all non-drainage lots within the
subdivision. The subdivider shall bear all costs for extending existing public wastewater lines and
facilities to have suf_icient capacity to serve the subdivision. All wastewater facilities, lines and
service connections shall conform to the City Engineering Design Manual and Construction
Standards, Wastewater Master Plan, the speci_ications established by the subject utility company,
and the Texas Department of Health.
C. The City Engineer shall require wastewater lines to be extended to adjacent land when the City
Engineer determines it is necessary for the ef_icient delivery of utility service.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 255/320
15.16.9 Easements
A. A ten (10) foot public utility easement shall be provided adjacent to all public street frontages.
B. When necessary to adequately serve a subdivision with public utilities, additional city public utility
easements shall be dedicated as determined by the City Engineer.
C. All drainage facilities requiring dedication of a drainage easement shall adhere to City Engineering
Design Manual and Construction Standards. Any public drainage easement shall have a minimum
width of 15 feet.
D. The 100 year _lood plain shall be entirely contained within a drainage easement dedicated to the
public in accordance with the City Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards.
E. Shared access easements may be required at the discretion of the Planning Director or City
Engineer in order to ensure adequate street access and minimum driveway spacing is maintained.
Subchapter 16
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet
SUBCHAPTER 17. RESERVED.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 18. RESERVED.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 19. RESERVED.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBCHAPTER 20 DEFINITIONS
A. In this subchapter, the words “shall” and “must” are deemed as mandatory or directory, in
accordance with the intent and context of its use, and the word “may” is deemed as permissive.
B. Terms not de_ined herein will be construed in accordance with customary usage. Should any
de_inition established by ordinance be later found to con_lict with the de_inition of the same term
made by applicable Texas law, the Texas statutory de_inition will supersede the de_initions herein.
C. List of de_ined terms:
ACCESS POINT A point of ingress and egress via a public right-of-way to a lot or subdivision.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ACCESSORY BUILDING Refer to Building, Accessory.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT Refer to Dwelling Unit, Accessory.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ACCESSORY USE Refer to Use, Accessory.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 256/320
A.D.A. Americans with Disabilities Act
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ADJACENT USE Refer to Use, Adjacent.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ADMINISTRATOR The Assistant City Manager of the City of P_lugerville over Development Services
and/or his or her designee.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ALLEY A private or public way which affords access to the property thereon.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AMENITY CENTER A recreational facility, including, but not limited to, clubhouse, swimming pool(s),
playground, and open space, operated for the exclusive use of private residents or neighborhood groups
and their guests, and not the general public. For amenity centers owned by the City or other government
agency, refer to the de_inition for public parkland and public parkland facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AMENITY, PRIVATE Private recreational facilities located in private parks, including but not limited to
neighborhood swimming pools, clubhouses, tennis courts, basketball courts, practice _ields with
irrigation, and trails.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AMENITY, PUBLIC Public recreational facilities located on public parkland or within a private park in
which a public access easement is dedicated to the City and is open to the general public, including but
not limited to, playground, tennis court, basketball court, multi-purpose regulation sports _ields, and
trails. The list of creditable public amenities and speci_ications are included within the Parks
Development Manual. This de_inition shall only be used for the purposes of Subchapter 14 of the UDC.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ANIMAL ESTABLISHMENT, COMMERCIAL A facility that provides goods or care services for animals
and pets, such as boarding, grooming, and training. This de_inition does not includes animal shelters or
veterinarian clinics.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ANIMAL SHELTER A public or private facility which temporarily keeps dogs, cats or other domesticated
animals that are stray, lost or unwanted for the purpose of giving or selling the animals to the general
public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
APARTMENT HOME Refer to Dwelling – Multi-Family.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
APPLICANT Means the developer or owner of real property for which a permit application has been
submitted.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
APPLICATION The _iling of a document with the City meeting the requirements outlined in the Uni_ied
Development Code as applicable and accepted as complete by the Administrator.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 257/320
APPRAISED VALUE The Appraised Value of a property is the value as determined by the most recent
tax appraisal by the tax assessor-collector for the applicable jurisdiction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
APRON OR DRIVEWAY APRON The part of a Driveway that is situated within a street right-of-way.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ART GALLERY Refer to Museum / Art Gallery.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ARTICULATION A horizontal or vertical projection or recession of a building or Structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ARTICULATION, HORIZONTAL A wall projection or recession of a building or structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ARTICULATION, VERTICAL A vertical variation of the roo_line that may be achieved through the use of a
gabled, hipped, gambrel, or parapet roof forms.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 258/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ASSISTED LIVING A quasi-residential facility where room, board, and personal care services are
provided within a structure containing multiple living quarters for persons who are unrelated to the
proprietor of the establishment. Facilities include common dining and recreational areas. Personal care
services include assistance with routine daily activities such as dressing, movement, meals, bathing, or
other personal needs or maintenance, or administration of medication, as de_ined by the Personal Care
Facility Licensing Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code § 247, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ATHLETIC FACILITIES Privately owned indoor and/or outdoor facilities devoted to health, _itness,
recreation or organized sports. May include facilities such as, but not limited to, soccer, gymnastics and
exercise equipment.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ATHLETIC FIELD Open space devoted to outdoor sports, including but not limited to, basketball, tennis,
football, baseball, and soccer. These may include accessory structures for restrooms, concessions,
dressing, of_ices, and ticket sale booths.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUCTION SALES A business enterprise engaged in the sale of new or used goods sold to the highest
bidder where the operations are wholly enclosed within a building. The de_inition does not include the
sale or trade of animals or other livestock.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE BODY REPAIR SHOP An establishment where vehicles are repainted, exterior vehicle
body panels are repaired or replaced, window glass is repaired and replaced, and frame, bodies, or
fenders are straightened or repaired.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 259/320
AUTOMOTIVE PARKING LOT/GARAGE, COMMERCIAL A business enterprise offering the temporary
parking or storage of motor vehicles not to exceed seven (7) consecutive days in an enclosed or
unenclosed area. A fee may be charged to users of the parking area.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE PARTS SALES, INDOOR Retail sales of automobile related parts and accessories.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE REPAIR AND SERVICE An establishment used for any or all of the following: the
dispensing of sales of fuels, lubricants, and automobile accessories; automobile detailing; the sales and
installation of automobile radios; performing state vehicle inspections; and the repair or replacement of
engines, air conditioning systems, transmissions or other vehicle systems. Vehicles, which are inoperative
or are being repaired, may not remain outside for a period greater than 48 hours. This de_inition does
not include wrecker or towing services with on-site vehicle storage, or automotive body repair shops.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND RENTAL A facility which displays for sale new vehicles or previously owned
vehicles which are in condition to be driven on or off the lot. The facility may also provide a full line of
services such as repair, tune-up, paint and body repair, and auto or truck parts sales as accessory uses.
AUTOMOTIVE SALES AND RENTAL, RECREATIONAL Sales and/or leasing of new and/or used
recreational vehicles or boats, including, as an accessory use, repair work of recreational vehicles and
boats.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE SALVAGE YARD An establishment engaged in the outdoor storage, sale, exchange,
dismantling or other processing of used or waste materials intended for re-use or recycling, including
but not limited to, used vehicular parts, scrap metals, mechanical parts, tires or other similar parts. This
de_inition does not include a recycling center or wrecker and towing services.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AUTOMOTIVE USE AREA That part of a Lot utilized by motor vehicles for stopping or parking, including
but not limited to parking areas (whether striped for spaces or not), loading areas, and drive-through
lanes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
AWNING A roof-like structure that projects from a building wall to cover an entrance or other
pedestrian area.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BAIL BOND A cash deposit, or similar deposit or written undertaking, or a bond or other security given
to guarantee the appearance of a defendant in a criminal cases de_ined by the State of Teas occupations
Code Chapter 1704, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BAIL BOND BUSINESS The solicitation, negotiation, or execution of a biail bond by a bail bond surety as
de_ined under the State of Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1704, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BAIL BOND SURETY A person who a) executes bail bond as a surety of cosurety for another person; or
b) for compensation deposits cash to ensure the appearance in court of a person accused of a crime as
de_ined by the State of Texas Occupations Code Chapter 1704, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 260/320
BANK Refer to Financial Institution.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BAR/TAVERN An establishment with more than _ifty (50%) percent of total gross revenue from the sale
of any alcoholic beverages of on premise consumption.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BAY WINDOWS A window that is part of an outside wall that projects outward from the remaining
portion of the wall.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BED AND BREAKFAST A home occupation in which a house, or portion thereof, is allocated for shortterm
lodging rooms and meals are provided. A Bed and Breakfast shall not include restaurants, banquet
facilities or similar services. This de_inition is subject to the Accessory Use standards in Subchapter 4.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BICYCLE LANE A portion of the roadway which has been designated by signs, striping, and pavement
markings for the sole use of bicyclists.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 261/320
BICYCLE SHOP An establishment that sells bicycles, bicycle parts, and accessories including, but not
limited to, tools, helmets, clothing, and shoes. Facilities may also be used to offer basic repair services for
bicycles, bicycle parts and equipment.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BIORETENTION/RAIN GARDEN Landscaping features adapted to treat stormwater runoff which is
directed into shallow vegetative depressions that allow _iltration before the water enters the storm drain
system. These may be located in parking lot islands or within small pockets in residential land uses and
may be under-drained or self-contained.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BLOCK A unit of land enclosed by through-streets or by a combination of through-streets, railroad
rights-of-way, watercourses or any other barrier to the continuity of development. In cases where the
platting is incomplete or disconnected, the Planning Director shall determine the outline of the block.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BLOCK LENGTH The distance measured between the centerline of two through streets. Alleys and culde-
sacs as commonly known or otherwise de_ined herein shall not be considered through streets.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 262/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BLOCK, PEDESTRIAN A pedestrian block may follow the con_iguration of a vehicular block through the
use of trails and sidewalks provided within the cross-section of public right-of-way and major drive
aisles. However, all or a portion thereof of the pedestrian block may be comprised of a pedestrian path
traversing, around a perimeter of a site or around the perimeter of a site not in conjunction with a drive
aisle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BLOCK, VEHICULAR Similar to de_inition of a block, a vehicular block is a unit of land enclosed by
through-streets or by a combination of through-streets, public rights-of-way, and private major drive
aisles that provides for vehicular circulation through and around a development.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BODY ART STUDIO An establishment whose principal business activity, either in terms of operation or
as held out to the public, is the practice of one or more of the following: placing of designs, letters,
_igures, symbols, or other marks upon or under the skin or any person, using ink or other substances
that result in the permanent coloration of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments
designed to contact or puncture the skin; or the creation of an opening in the body of a person for the
purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration. For the purposes of this Chapter, this de_inition does
not include ear piercing.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BOARD, BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT The Board of Adjustment (BOA) of the City of P_lugerville, as created
by this UDC, appointed by the City Council, and authorized by Section 211.008 of the Texas Local
Government Code. The composition, powers and duties of the Board of Adjustment are set forth in
Subchapter 2.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BOX WINDOW A window that protrudes from a wall of a home or building with sides that are at a right
angle to the window.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 263/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BREWERY, MICRO A facility that produces less than 15,000 barrels (17,600 hectoliters) of beer per
year with more than 75% of its beer sold off-site. Microbreweries sell to the public by one or more of
the following methods: the traditional three-tier system (brewer to wholesaler to retailer to consumer);
the two-tier system (brewer to retailer to consumer); and, directly to the consumer through carry outs
and/or on-site tap-room or restaurant sales.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BREWERY, REGIONAL A facility that produces between 15,000 and 6,000,000 barrels of beer annually.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BREWPUB A restaurant-brewery that sells more than 25% of its beer on site for on premise
consumption. The beer is brewed primarily for sale in the restaurant and bar. The beer is often
dispensed directly from the brewery's storage tanks. Where allowed by law, brewpubs often sell beer "to
go" and/or distribute to offsite accounts. Note: BA re-categorizes a company as a microbrewery if its offsite
(distributed) beer sales exceed 75%.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUFFER/BUFFERING The use of berms, plant material, fences, walls, or any combination thereof placed
within a required yard for the purpose of screening certain areas from other areas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUFFERYARD An area of open space and landscaping that serves as a visual separation between a
residential land use and a more intense land use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILD To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, or alter a building or Structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDABLE AREA The area available for building on a Lot after deletion of areas not available for
building, such as any _loodplain, easement, setbacks or yard.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 264/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING A structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roofed enclosure for persons, animals
or property.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING, ACCESSORY Refer to Structure, Accessory.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING, PERIMETER A building that is at or near the edge of a property.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING HEIGHT Refer to Height, Building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING OFFICIAL The Person responsible for enforcement of the City building code and some
Development related codes and ordinances or a duly authorized designee.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILDING PERMIT A permit issued by the Building Of_icial that allows a Person to build a Structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUILD-TO LINE An alignment that establishes a certain distance from the property line to a line along
which the building shall be built.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUS DEPOT Refer to Transit Facility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
BUSINESS SERVICES Activities primarily associated with providing services not elsewhere classi_ied, to
business enterprises on a fee contract basis, including but not limited to advertising, printing and mailing
services; janitorial, of_ice or business equipment rental, leasing, or repair; or the provision of services
used by of_ice, professional, and services establishments.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CALIPER The diameter of a tree trunk at a given height. Nursery stock shall be measured six (6) inches
above the root ball for trees up to and including four-inch caliper size, and twelve (12) inches above the
root ball for larger tree sizes, as de_ined by The American Nursery & Landscape (ANSI Z60.1-2004).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CALL CENTER An of_ice facility used for collecting information by telephone, selling products or
services by telephone, or offering support or general customer service by telephone.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CAMPGROUND OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK, PRIVATE
CAMPGROUND OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK PRIVATE - Privately owned and operated
establishments that operate sites that accommodate campers and their equipment, including tents, tent
trailers, travel trailers, and recreational vehicles in a temporary, seasonal manner. They may also provide
overnight recreational camps, such as children's camps, family vacation camps, hunting and _ishing
camps, and outdoor adventures such as trail riding, water activities and hiking. These establishments
may provide facilities and services such as cabins, washrooms, food services and recreational activities.
For campgrounds or recreational vehicle parks owned by the City or other government agency, refer to
the de_inition for public parkland and public parkland facilities.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 265/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CANOPY An overhanging roof projection or covering, often supported by structural columns, over a
doorway or other pedestrian area. It may also be a standalone structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM (CIP) The list of recommended capital improvements to be
constructed during the forthcoming _ive-year period.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CARPORT A roofed structure that is open on two or more sides and designed to provide shelter for an
automobile.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 266/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CAR TITLE LOAN BUSINESS An establishment that makes small, short-term consumer loans that
leverage the equity value of a car or other collateral where the title to such vehicle is owned free and
clear by the loan applicant any an existing liens on the car or vehicle cancel the application, and where
failure to repay the loan or make interest payments to extend the loan allows the lender to take
possession of the car of vehicle. This excludes state or federally-chartered banks, savings and loan
associations, or credit unions engaged primarily in the business of making longer term loans and which
make loans that leverage the total equity value of a car or vehicle as collateral. See also Financial
Services Institution, Alternative
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CAR WASH A facility for washing and cleaning passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles, or other light
duty equipment. Facilities may be self-service in nature, or may contain automated systems that washes,
dries, and cleans automobiles, either while the vehicle is stationary or on a conveyor system. May be the
Primary Use for a site or an Accessory Use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CASITA An accessory dwelling unit designed as an attached or detached unit, with either independent
guest suite with amenities to supplement the principal structure. A “Casita” may be attached to the larger
principal structure or may be detached and located in front of the principal building, provided the
minimum setbacks are maintained, the structure has a cohesive architectural design as the principal
structure, and is a part of a private landscape courtyard that is typically gated.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CATERING ESTABLISHMENT An establishment which prepares and stores food on-site in order to
transport the food to an off-site location to be served to customers or set up in a buffet for customer
self-service.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CEMETERY / MAUSOLEUM Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the dead, both human
and animal, and dedicated for cemetery purposes including a columbarium, crematorium, mausoleum,
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 267/320
and funeral establishment, or any combination thereof.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY (CO) The of_icial certi_icate issued by the City through the enforcing
of_icial which indicates conformance with, or approved conditional waiver from, UDC requirements and
standards. Authorizes legal use of the premises for which it is issued.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CHAPTER The Uni_ied Development Code of the City of P_lugerville as Codi_ied in Chapter 157 of the
City of P_lugerville Code of Ordinances.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS An establishment that provides to the customer an amount of money that is
equal to the fact of the check or the amount speci_ied in the written authorization for an electronic
transfer of money, less any fee charged for the transaction, and where there is an agreement not to cash
the check or execute an electronic transfer of money for a speci_ied period of time, the business of
cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders or other commercial paper serving the same purpose for
compensation by any person or entity other than a retail seller engaged primarily in the business of
selling consumer goods, including consumables to retail buyers, that cashes checks or money orders or
issues money orders or money transfers for a minimum _lat fee as a service that is incidental to its main
purpose or business. This de_inition excludes a state or federally-chartered bank, savings and loan
associations, credit union, pawnshop, grocery store or gas station. See also Financial Services Institution,
Alternative.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CHURCH Refer to Place of Worship.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY The City of P_lugerville, Travis County, Texas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY CHARTER The Home Rule Charter of the City of P_lugerville, Texas, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY CODE The Code of Ordinances of the City of P_lugerville, Texas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY ENGINEER The Person appointed by the Administrator to perform general engineering functions
for the City, or the duly authorized representative of such Person.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY FORESTER A person designated to oversee the urban forestry program; all aspects of public tree
planting, and public tree care; the Public Tree Care Ordinance; relevant portions of Subchapter 11, and
relevant processes of tree preservation and landscaping throughout the development process.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY PLANNING DIRECTOR The Person appointed by the Administrator to perform general planning
functions for the City, or the duly authorized representative of such Person.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CITY SECRETARY The Person appointed by the City Manager to serve as City Secretary for the City of
P_lugerville, or the City Secretary’s duly authorized representative.s
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 268/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CIVIC CENTER A building, or a portion of a building, together with the grounds and related facilities,
primarily used by an association of persons for periodic meetings to promote special purpose activities
such as education, literature, science, government, social services, or civic improvements, and includes
lodges, fraternal organizations and social clubs.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CLINIC A group of of_ices for one (1) or more physicians, surgeons, or dentists to treat or examine
outpatients who do not remain overnight. May provide emergency services such as outpatient surgeries.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CODE This Chapter 157, the Uni_ied Development Code of the City of P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMERCIAL AMUSEMENT Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with
amusing or entertaining activities, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gates of the activity.
Activities include, but are not limited to, zoos, carnivals, expositions, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests,
rodeos, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children’s rides, roller coasters, traveling shows and similar
enterprises that operate on a temporary basis. Sexually-oriented businesses and bars/taverns are
excluded from this de_inition.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, INDOOR An establishment where commercial
recreational and entertainment uses occur entirely within an enclosed building. Examples of such uses
include, but are not limited to, roller rinks, bowling alleys, pool halls, arcades, miniature golf courses and
other similar enterprises. Sexually-oriented businesses and bars/taverns are excluded from this
de_inition.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMERCIAL RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT, OUTDOOR Facilities offering entertainment or
the playing of games to the general public for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activities takes
place outside of a building or structure. Entertainment activities may include, but are not limited to,
archery ranges, children’s rides, miniature golf courses, waterparks and other similar uses. Sexuallyoriented
businesses and bars/taverns are excluded from this de_inition.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMISSARY An establishment where food, food containers or supplies are stored, kept, handled,
prepared, or packaged for use, primarily by mobile food vendors, caterers and other establishments.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMISSION The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMON DEVELOPMENT Property developed in such a way that multiple businesses or tenants on-site
are connected via private drive aisles and often share parking areas. These sites usually have few
entrances from public roads, while access is provided to each business through on-site drive aisles or
streets. This shall include all buildings situated on lots included within an approved preliminary plan and
preliminary plans associated with the parent tract(s).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 269/320
COMMON OPEN SPACE The open space in a planned unit development set aside, designated, or
reserved for the use and enjoyment of the owners and occupants of the designated property or, if
dedicated to the City, also for the use and enjoyment of the general public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMPLETE APPLICATION An Application for any of the processes established in the Uni_ied
Development Code which includes all materials as speci_ied in their respective sections.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMPREHENSIVE MASTER PLAN The policy document, and all its components, adopted by the City
Council, or any amendment thereto, that addresses land use, growth, development, or similar issues in
and for the City of P_lugerville and its Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COMMUNITY GARDEN, PRIVATE - An area limited to _ive (5) acres of privately owned land which is
used for the growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits, and trees and is gardened collectively by
a group of people. For a community garden owned by the City or other government agency, refer to the
de_inition for public parkland and public parkland facilities.
CONDOMINIUM A dwelling unit with an arrangement under which a tenant in an apartment building or
a complex of multiple dwelling units holds the full title to a unit and has joint ownership in the common
grounds.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONSERVATION AREA Those areas designated as permanent open space in the Comprehensive Plan
and may not be developed.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONSTRUCTION The commencement and continuous work or activity pursuant to a Site Disturbance
Permit, Site Development Permit or Building Permit that includes the permanent placement and fastening
of materials to the land or Structure for which the permit has been issued. This de_inition includes
activities such as development, demolition, excavation or removal of an existing structure in preparation
for new construction, and the installation of drainage facilities. This de_inition shall include only work
begun under a valid building permit.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONSTRUCTION PLAN Drawings and technical speci_ications, including bid documents and contract
conditions, where applicable, that provide a graphic and written description of the character and scope
of the work to be performed in construction of public improvements within a development subject to the
processes outlined in Subchapter 15. Subdivision Process.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONSTRUCTION PLAN PERMIT A permit issued for the construction of public improvements, including
but not limited to, water and wastewater infrastructure, in accordance with Subchapter 15. Subdivision
Process of this Chapter and the Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONTRACTOR’S SHOP A building, part of a building, or land area for the construction or storage (inside
or out) of materials, tools, products, and vehicle _leets.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 270/320
CONVALESCENT HOME Refer to Nursing Home.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONVENIENCE STORE A retail establishment that sells primarily food products, household items,
newspapers and magazines, candy, and beverages, and a limited amount of freshly prepared foods such
as sandwiches and salads for off-premise consumption.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CONVENTION CENTER A facility that provides space for conventions, meetings, exhibitions, shows,
gatherings, presentations, or celebrations, including related incidental facilities for of_ice and
administrative use, food and beverage preparation and service, and on-site and off-site parking facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COUNTY Either Travis County or Williamson County, Texas as applicable.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
COUNTRY CLUB An area containing recreational facilities such as a golf course, swimming pool, tennis
court, and clubhouse which is available to a speci_ic recorded membership. May include adjunct facilities
such as a dining room or bar for its members.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CREMATORIUM An establishment containing a furnace for cremating human remains in preparation of
burial or storage. May be incidental to a funeral home.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE (CRZ) A circular region measured outward from the tree trunk representing the
essential area of the roots that must be maintained or protected for the tree’s survival. The Critical Root
Zone is one foot of radial distance for every inch of tree Diameter at Breast Height (DBH).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
CROWN All portions of a tree, excluding the trunk and roots.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 271/320
DATA CENTER A facility housing a collection of computer servers and associated components, such as
telecommunication, storage and backup systems that supply information to a single or multiple end
users off-site. Facilities typically require large amounts of electricity, strict temperature control and
security, and will generally have few employees present on-site.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DAY A calendar day, unless speci_ically de_ined otherwise in the Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DAY CARE FACILITY A facility arranged and conducted for the organized instruction and recreation of
children, including outdoor activities on a daytime basis; a kindergarten or nursery school.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DAY CARE FACILITY, HOME-BASED A home occupation which is arranged and conducted for the
organized instruction and recreation of less than six (6) children at a time for less than twenty-four (24)
hours a day. This use is subject to registration with the Texas Department of Protective and Regulatory
Services.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DAY CARE FACILITY, INCIDENTAL A place designed solely for the care of children belonging to
employees of the primary use. The facility shall be completely contained within the primary use and shall
not constitute more than _ifteen percent of the main use. The operating hours of the center shall be the
same as the primary use and shall not include overnight lodging, medical treatment, counseling, or
rehabilitative services. This use is subject to registration with the State prior to a Certi_icate of Occupancy
being issued for the facility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DEDICATION Shall mean the commitment of land, or an easement therein, by the owner, for the use of
the public, and accepted for such use by or on behalf of the public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DENSITY The net number of dwelling units per acre.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DEVELOPER The legal owner or owners of a lot or any land included in a proposed development, or the
holder of an option or contract to purchase, or any person having the authority to submit an application
for approval of a subdivision under these regulations (refer to Subdivider).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DEVELOPMENT Includes, but is not limited to, any of the following activities:
a. The commencement of mining, quarrying, excavation, or dredging;
b. The clearing, grading or removal of natural ground cover and/or Trees in connection with site
preparation for Construction, whether imminent or planned for the future;
c. The deposit of _ill, refuse, or solid or liquid waste;
d. The alteration or Improvement of a bed, bank, or _loodplain of a Waterway; or
e. The Construction, reconstruction, conversion, enlargement and/or relocation of a building or
structure on a lot or tract of land
f. “To develop” is to create a Development.
g. The subdividing of land as well as any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 272/320
DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT The City and Developer may enter into a legally binding agreement for
the purposes of establishing mutually agreed upon standards for the development of land located within
the Extraterritorial Jurisdiction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DEVELOPMENT AREA The boundary of the area indicated in a site plan, or other development plan,
that is the ultimate boundary of the developed site.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DEVELOPMENT SITE That area of a Lot for which there is an application pending or a grant made of a
site development permit, site disturbance permit or other development plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (DBH) A standard of measure of a tree trunk measured at a height of
four and one-half (4.5) feet above the natural grade, or the DBH measurement according to the latest
edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal as published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers,
when the tree trunk branches out at a point lower than four and one-half (4.5) feet.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DISTILLERY, MICRO A facility that produces less than 52,500 cases (4,725 hectoliters) of liquor or
other spirits per year with 75% or more of its liquor sold off-site. Micro-distilleries sell to the public by
one or more of the following methods: the traditional three-tier system (distiller to wholesaler to retailer
to consumer); the two-tier system (distiller to retailer to consumer); and, directly to the consumer
through on-site and/or carry out sales.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DISTILLERY, REGIONAL A facility that produces more than 52,500 cases (4,725 hectoliters) of liquor or
other spirits annually.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DISTRIBUTION / LOGISTICS CENTER A facility which is designed and used for the purpose of
wholesaling, storing, handling, sorting and distributing materials, goods, products and equipment,
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 273/320
excluding live animals and plants. Typical uses include mail or package distribution, freight storage and
wholesale distribution.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DISTRICT A zoning district that is located inside the City limits of the City of P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DORMER A window that projects vertically out of a sloped roof. This de_inition includes the structure
that houses the window.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DOWNTOWN DISTRICT OVERLAY The area identi_ied by Chapter 155(B) of the Code of Ordinances of
the City of P_lugerville. The district is established to promote the long-term economic growth of Old
Downtown P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRIPLINE The periphery of the area underneath a Tree that would be encompassed if perpendicular
lines were dropped from the farthest edges of the crown of the Tree.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRIVE AISLE A circulation route for vehicular traf_ic through a parking lot, site or property, and may
connect to a driveway.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 274/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRIVE AISLE, MAJOR A primary circulation route for vehicular traf_ic through a development which
provides access to two (2) or more lots. Major drive aisles typically intersect with public right-of-way or
other major drive aisles.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 275/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRIVE-THRU FACILITIES Facilities that by design, physical facilities, services, or by packaging
procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services or obtain goods while remaining in
their motor vehicles. An order box, pick up window, or separate stacking lane are typical facilities
included in a drive-thru facility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRIVEWAY The portion of a de_ined access located from a public street right-of-way designed for the
ingress or egress of vehicles into Vehicular Use Area of a site.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRY CLEANING, MAJOR An industrial facility where fabrics are cleaned with substantially non-aqueous
solvents on a commercial or wholesale basis.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DRY CLEANING, MINOR A custom cleaning shop or pick-up station not exceeding 6,000 square feet of
_loor area, including, but not limited to, dry cleaning plants having no more 1,500 square feet of _loor
area for dry cleaning equipment.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DUPLEX Refer to Dwelling, Two-Family.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING/ DWELLING UNIT A building or a portion of a building designed and used exclusively for
residential purposes accommodating one family, including those residences with a legally operating
home occupation.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 276/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, LIVE-WORK UNIT A dwelling unit, part of which may be used as a business establishment
if the dwelling unit is used as the principal residence of the business operator. Typically, the business
operation is limited to the _irst story with the residence to occupy the second and third stories.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME A residential structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, in
compliance with the rules and de_initions of the United States Department of Housing and Urban
Development, that is transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, MOBILE HOME A residential structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976,
transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes
the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY A residential structure providing complete, independent living facilities for
three or more families or households independently of each other including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation. For purposes of clarifying different product types, a
Multi-Family Dwelling shall be considered a unit that is “for rent” vs. “for sale”.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, ATTACHED A dwelling unit which is joined to another dwelling on one or
more sides by a party wall or abutting separate wall and which is designed for occupancy by not more
than one family and is located on a single lot owned and fee simple. A single family attached dwelling
shall be limited to a single common wall.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY, DETACHED A dwelling unit designed and constructed for occupancy by
not more than one family, located on a lot or separate building tract, and having no physical connection
to a building located on the same or any other lot or tract.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY A residential structure providing complete, independent living facilities for
two separate families, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY A residential dwelling unit that is no more than half the gross _loor area
of the _irst _loor of the principal structure, is integrated in appearance with the principal structure, and is
located within the principal structure setbacks. Shall only be permitted when the owner of the primary
Dwelling Unit resides in the primary Dwelling Unit.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EARTH BERM An elevated landscaped strip of ground used as a visual screen at a maximum slope of
3:1.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 277/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EASEMENT
1. In Gross Easement - Right held by one person to make use of the land of another for a limited
purpose.
2. Appurtenant Easement - A perpetual property right that runs with the land and provides the
owner of the dominant estate with the right or privilege to use the easement across the land of the
servient estate.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EASEMENT, JOINT-ACCESS An appurtenant perpetual easement which runs with the land, where each
property shares access rights.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EASEMENT, PUBLIC UTILITY Shall mean an easement dedicated by plat or separate instrument to
and/or for the use by a public utility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EASEMENT, SIDEWALK An easement for public pedestrian travel and the placement, construction,
installation, replacement, repair, maintenance, relocation, removal, and operation of public improvements
and related appurtenances, or making connections thereto.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EASEMENT, VACATION Shall mean the nulli_ication of all or a portion of an easement established in a
previously recorded plat or by separate instrument by recording the vacation instrument with the
county.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EXTERIOR INSULATION AND FINISHING SYSTEM (E.I.F.S) A type of building exterior wall cladding
system that provides exterior walls with an insulated _inished surface and waterproo_ing in an integrated
composite material system.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 278/320
ENGINEERING DESIGN MANUAL Shall mean the speci_ications, procedures, and standards approved by
the city council, as amended for the purpose of regulating the design and construction of speci_ied public
improvements, a copy of which shall be maintained by the city secretary.
(AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS)
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ENGINEER OF RECORD The professional licensed by the State of Texas to practice engineering who
certi_ied the applicable plan or plat.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ENGINEER OF RECORD The professional licensed by the State of Texas to practice engineering who
certi_ied the applicable plan or plat.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ENGINEER’S REPORT Shall mean a written report sealed by an engineer, including schematic diagrams
as appropriate, addressing and describing utility service, drainage, streets and _loodplain issues, and any
other items that may be listed in the development packet.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY SALES AND RENTAL, MAJOR A building or open area used for the sale,
rental, or indoor and outdoor storage of heavy equipment and machinery including, but not limited to,
forklifts, bulldozers, cranes, skid steers and other similar equipment.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY SALES AND RENTAL, MINOR A building or structure used for the
inside display, sale, rental, or storage of light machinery, including, but not limited to, bicycles, lawn
mowers, tools, and other small machinery.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EVENT CENTER A public or privately owned structure or area used for the purposes of public
performances, sporting events, private receptions or parties, or similar attractions that may generate
heavy traf_ic. Entertainment facilities may include concert halls, stadiums, sports arenas, racetracks,
rodeo arenas, coliseums, and convention centers. Accessory uses may include food preparation facilities,
concessions, of_ices, museums, parks, athletic training or practice facilities, stores, restaurants, heliports,
structured parking facilities, and patron transportation facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EXTRACTION, OIL AND NATURAL GAS Land used primarily for the on-site extraction of surface or
subsurface oil, natural gas or other similar naturally occurring materials which are processed and then
sold or used for commercial purposes. This term does not include the excavation or grading necessary
for the development of a lot or tract.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
EXTRATERRITORIAL JURISDICTION (ETJ) The area de_ined by the Texas Local Government Code,
Chapter 42, as applied to the City.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FAÇADE The exterior wall of a structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 279/320
FAÇADE PLANE, AVERAGE The linear calculation of the distance between the furthest building wall
recess from the property line(s) and the closest building wall projection from the property line(s),
divided by two (2).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FAÇADE, PRIMARY Any facade facing a public right-of-way, street, customer parking area or pedestrian
walkway.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FAMILY One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or a group not to exceed four (4)
persons not all related by blood or marriage, adoption or guardianship, occupying a dwelling unit and
living as a single housekeeping unit.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FARM OR RANCH - An area which is used for the growing of usual farm products, vegetables, fruits,
trees, and grain and for the raising thereon of the usual farm poultry and farm animals, such as horses,
cattle, sheep, and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating, and storing products
raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine and other
animals, and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry speci_ically prohibited by ordinance or
law.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FENCE A tangible enclosure or barrier, typically constructed of wood, steel, or iron, but not including
hedges, shrubs, trees, or other natural growth, erected for the purpose of providing boundaries,
screening, separation of areas, decorations, or control of access. This de_inition does include retaining
walls.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION An establishment for the custody, loan, exchange or issue of money, the
extension of credit and/or facilitating the transmission of funds, including automated teller machines
such as a bank or credit union. This de_inition does not include pawnshops, check cashing businesses,
payday advance businesses, money transfer businesses or other similar services.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FINANCIAL SERVICES INSTITUTION, ALTERNATIVE A check cashing business, payday advance or loan
business, money transfer business, precious metal dealer, or car title loan business. At no time may an
alternative _inance service be permitted as an accessory use unless speci_ically provided for within the
de_inition of the speci_ic alternative _inancial service use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FIRE MARSHAL The Fire Marshal used by the City as set forth in the Code of Ordinances of the City of
P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FLOOD OR FLOODING A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from the over_low of inland or tidal waters or the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FLOODPLAIN Any land area within the FEMA 100-year frequency _lood, including the _loodway, and an
approximate _loodplain susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see de_initon Flood or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 280/320
Flooding).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) The measure of the density of non-residential land uses on a speci_ic parcel,
calculated as the total building square-footage divided by the net buildable land area square-footage of
the parcel on which the building(s) is/are to be constructed. For example, on a site with 10,000 net
square feet of land area, an FAR of 1.0 will allow a maximum of 10,000 gross square feet (sq. ft.) to be
built, an FAR of 1.5 would allow 15,000 sq. ft., an FAR of 2.0 would allow for 20,000 sq. ft., and an FAR of
0.5 would allow 5,000 sq.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT, MAJOR Food Processing Establishment, Major – Manufacturing
establishments producing or processing foods for human consumption and certain related products.
Includes: (1) dairy products processing; (2) fats and oil products (not including rendering plants); (3)
meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, and byproduct processing (not including facilities that also
slaughter animals); and (4) miscellaneous food preparation from raw products, where such
manufacturing activities may not be wholly contained within the building. This de_inition speci_ically
excludes wineries, breweries, distilleries, leather tanning operations, rendering plants, and slaughter
houses. All noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare and vibration resulting from the manufacturing activity shall
be con_ined to the site for which the use is located.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT, MINOR Manufacturing establishment producing or processing
foods and beverages for human consumption and certain related products. Includes: (1) bakery
products, sugar and confectionery products (except facilities that produce goods for on-site sales with
no wider distribution); (2) fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, and related processing; (3) grain mill
products and by-products; and (4) miscellaneous food preparation from raw products, limited to aseptic
processing and packaging, canning processes, freeze-drying and/or food forti_ication. This de_inition
speci_ically excludes wineries, breweries, distilleries, leather tanning operations, rendering plants, and
slaughter houses. All manufacturing activities shall be contained entirely within the building; including
noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare and vibration resulting from the manufacturing activity are con_ined
entirely within the building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FOOD VENDOR, TEMPORARY A person or entity selling food products on a temporary and/or
seasonal basis from a temporary or mobile facility, including but not limited to snow cones, hot dogs and
similar food products.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FULL CUT-OFF LIGHT FIXTURE A lighting _ixture where no light is emitted above the horizontal plane
of the light source.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 281/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
FUNERAL HOME / MORTUARY A building used for the preparation of the deceased for burial, display
and other rituals connected therewith before burial or cremation. This de_inition includes a funeral
chapel and may include a crematory as an accessory use, but excludes mausoleums.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 282/320
GABLE The wall that encloses the ends of a pitched or sloped roof.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GARAGE A portion of a residential building or detached accessory building utilized for the purpose of
parking cars and storage of personal items. The building shall be fully enclosed with the use of structural
walls, a roof, consistent or similar _inished materials as utilized on the principal structure, and a roll-up
door(s).
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 283/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GARAGE SALE A temporary sale of used household goods at a residential dwelling unit, typically taking
place in the garage, driveway or front yard.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GAS STATION A retail outlet for the dispensing of vehicular fuels to the general public. Facilities may
include a Convenience Store and/or a Car Wash.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
G.F.A. Refer to Gross Floor Area
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GOLF COURSE A tract of land designed for playing the game of golf and improved with tees, greens,
fairways, and hazards. A golf course may include a Country Club or other clubhouse, a driving range,
putting greens, and shelters as accessory uses. This term excludes stand-alone driving ranges or
miniature golf facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GOLF DRIVING RANGE An outdoor area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls, and tees for
practicing long distance golf drives.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GOVERNMENT FACILITIES A group of uses focused on the provision of a public service. These facilities
are often public in nature and serve a wide range of needs and patrons. This de_inition includes, but is
not limited to, schools, libraries, public park facilities and of_ice government buildings.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GRADE, FINISHED The _inal altered elevation of land, soil, base or pavement during construction or
after completion of construction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GRADE, NATURAL The elevation and contours of land as they naturally exist without any cut, _ill or
other similar alterations.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 284/320
GRAY WATER Untreated wastewater that has not come into contact with toilet waste and may include
discharged water from wash basins, bathtubs, showers, clothes washers and laundry trays.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GRAY WATER SYSTEMS Wastewater that is recycled especially for reuse in accordance with the adopted
International Plumbing Code and applicable State requirements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GREEN ROOF SYSTEMS A roof of a building that is partially or completely covered with vegetation and
soil, or a growing medium, planted over a waterproo_ing membrane. It may also include additional layers
such as a root barrier and drainage and irrigation systems.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GREEN SCREEN Refer to Vegetative Screening Structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GROUP HOME A group home means a residential arrangement, other than a residential care facility,
operated by the department or a community center in which not more than 15 persons with mental
retardation voluntarily live and under appropriate supervision may share responsibilities for operation
of the living unit.(Tex. Health & Safety Code Ann. § 591.003)
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GROSS DENSITY The calculation of residential units per acre within a subdivision, including the
calculation of the area of parks and roads within the subdivision, or on an individual platted lot.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GROSS FLOOR AREA (GFA) Except as may be otherwise indicated in these regulations, Gross Floor Area
shall be construed as the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several _loors of a building, measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings, and
including outside decks and/or patios Uses for commercial purposes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
GYMNASTICS/DANCE STUDIO A facility that offers its primary _loor area for the practice of gymnastics
or dance. Such a facility may include workout or exercise equipment, gymnasiums and snack barrefreshment
services, subject to all other provisions of this chapter governing such services.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HAZARDOUS WASTE Waste identi_ied or listed as a hazardous waste by the administrator of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) under the federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended
by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, or so classi_ied by any federal or
state statute, rule, order or regulation.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HEALTH/FITNESS CENTER A facility that is open to the general public and offers its primary _loor area
for the playing of organized sports, such as basketball, soccer, gymnastics or dance, for fees, whether in
structured league arrangements or in "free play" setting. Such a facility may include spas, workout or
exercise equipment, gymnasiums or restaurant and snack bar-refreshment services, subject to all other
provisions of this chapter governing such services.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 285/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HEIGHT, BUILDING The vertical distance from the average _inished grade at the base of a building to
the average height of the highest roof structure of the building, as measured at the top plate or at the
point of average height for pitched roofs. Refer to illustration below.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HERITAGE TREE Any tree measuring twenty-_ive inches (25”) or larger at DBH. The following species
are excluded from the Heritage tree classi_ication: Chinaberry, Hackberry, Ashe juniper (Cedar), Chinese
tallow, Willow, Ligustrum, Mimosa, and Cottonwood or any other tree that is determined by the
Administrator to be diseased or dying due to natural causes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HOME OCCUPATION An occupation, profession, activity or use that is clearly incidental and secondary
to use of a residential dwelling unit which does not alter the exterior of the property, is conducted wholly
or in part with a primary structure or accessory structure by a member of the household who resides
on the premises and fully complies with the provisions of this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HOSPITAL An institution, licensed by the state department of health, providing primary health services
and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury,
deformity, and other abnormal physical or mental conditions, and including as an integral part of the
institution, related facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, or training facilities. The institution
may include ancillary uses such as a cafeteria or restaurant, medically related heliports, nursing homes,
extended care clinics, physical therapy, employee exercise facilities, employee housing, temporary patient
or patient family housing, and shops for medical equipment, pharmaceutical supplies, and gifts, child
care centers and medical of_ices.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HOTEL A facility offering transient lodging accommodations on a daily rate to the general public with
units accessed via internal hallways and which can provide additional services, such as meeting rooms,
restaurants and recreational facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
HOTEL, RESIDENCE A multi-unit facility offering extended stay lodging consisting of ef_iciency units or
suites with complete kitchen facilities suitable for long-term occupancy. Access to the units is required via
internal hallways. Meeting rooms, club house, restaurants and other recreational facilities intended for
the use of the residents and their guests are permitted. This de_inition does not include a boarding
house.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 286/320
HOUSEHOLD SERVICE AND REPAIR An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of repair
services to individuals and households rather than _irms. Typical uses include appliance repair,
locksmiths, watch or jewelry repair, or musical instrument repair. This use excludes automotive and large
equipment servicing or repair.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
IMPERVIOUS COVER A surface which will not allow rainfall to pass into the ground, including
impermeable concrete, asphalt paving, compacted base material, and brick pavers on a compacted base.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
IMPROVEMENT Structure and all appurtenances of every type, whether temporary or permanent,
including but not limited to buildings, outbuildings, sheds, patios, swimming pools, garages, storage
buildings, gazebos, signs, fences, gates, walls, decks, landscaping, landscape improvements, poles,
mailboxes, and antennae.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
INDUSTRIAL USE, HEAVY A use engaged in the basic processing and manufacturing of materials or
products or parts, predominantly from extracted raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or
manufacturing processes using _lammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes
that potentially involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
INDUSTRIAL USE, LIGHT A use engaged in the manufacture of _inished products or parts
predominantly from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabrication, assembly,
treatment, packaging, incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding basic
industrial processing.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
INDUSTRIAL WASTE Waste resulting from any process of industry, manufacturing, trade, or business
from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of the waste with water or normal
wastewater, or distinct from normal wastewater.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
JOINT-USE DRIVEWAY A common drive shared by 2 or more lots for purposes of providing vehicular
access to each lot.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
KENNEL A commercial animal establishment where household pets, or other domesticated animals, are
housed, bred, boarded, trained or kept on a temporary basis. Typical uses would be a kennel, animal
hotel and/or lodging or animal training centers. This de_inition does not include animal shelters or pet
stores.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LANDFILL A controlled area of land upon which solid waste is disposed of and buried in accordance
with standards, rules, or orders established by an administrative agency of the State of Texas. Types of
waste that are excluded in this de_inition include hazardous, industrial and demolition waste.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LANDSCAPED AREA An area which has been enhanced by the use of plant material, planters, natural
and water forms. The use of smooth concrete or asphalt is not permitted within the required landscape
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 287/320
area.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LANDSCAPE ISLAND A landscape area completely surrounded by a parking area and/or a vehicular use
area.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LANDSCAPE MEDIAN A linear landscape area between two (2) rows of parking, between two (2) drive
aisles or between a row of parking and a drive aisle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LANDSCAPE PENINSULA A landscape area surrounded on two (2) or three (3) sides by a parking area
and/or vehicular use area.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 288/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LAUNDROMAT A facility where patrons wash and/or dry clothing and other fabrics in self-serve
machines operated by the patron.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LEGAL DESCRIPTION The identi_ication of a lot, tract, or parcel of land by means of a deed reference, a
metes and bounds description and, when applicable, a plat reference.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LIBRARY An institution for the collection, display, and distribution of books, objects of art or science,
and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency, and which facilities are open to the general
public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LINER BUILDING A building that wraps around a parking Lot or parking Structure in order to mask it
from the street.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 289/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LIQUOR STORE A retail establishment permitted by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission (TABC) to
sell liquor, malt and vinous liquors on premise to consumers for off-premise consumption.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOADING DOCK A portion of a building used for the receiving, parking, loading and unloading of trucks
or other vehicles that deliver or transfer products and goods. These are typically above grade and
located behind the building and screened from public view.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOADING, OFF-STREET An off-street space on the same Lot with a building or group of buildings for
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT A parcel of land described and recorded as a lot in the records of Travis County or Williamson
County, Texas; or, in the event any lot or lots or land acreage is recorded as subdivided or cut up into
smaller or different parcels of land, or, in the event any parcel of such lot or lots or land acreage is used
for the purpose of placing on any such parcel a principal building and its accessory buildings, each such
parcel of land will become a separate lot for the purpose of this chapter, and the boundaries of each lot
will be determined and de_ined so as to contain suf_icient area to include the principal building and its
accessory buildings to be erected thereon and the open spaces required under the chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, CORNER A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT COVERAGE The percent of a lot which is covered by a roof, _loor, or other structure, which is not
open to the sky, and which prevents the in_iltration of water into the soil.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, DEPTH The distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot
line.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 290/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE A lot having frontage on two (2) streets which do not intersect. On a Double
Frontage Lot, both street lot lines shall be deemed Front Lot Lines.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, INTERIOR A lot surrounded by adjacent lots on at least two (2) sides, and is not a corner lot.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, THROUGH Refer to Lot, Double Frontage.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT, WIDTH The average distance between the side lot lines of a lot, measured at right angles to the
front lot line established at the right-of-way.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT LINE, FRONT The boundary of a lot that abuts a public street right-of-way. On lots which abut more
than one street, the front lot line is the boundary which abuts the street having the least dimension,
except in the case of a double frontage lot.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT LINE, REAR The boundary of a lot which is the most distant from and is, or is most nearly parallel
to the front lot line.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 291/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOT LINE, SIDE The boundary of a lot which is neither a front lot line nor a rear lot line.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOUNGE A facility which offers patrons a relaxing environment where food, tobacco and alcohol may be
consumed and purchased. A Lounge differs from a Bar/Tavern or Restaurant as a Lounge shall not
receive more than 50% of its total sales from food and alcohol sales.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) An alternative comprehensive approach to stormwater
management that emphasizes conservation and use of on-site natural features to protect water quality.
This approach implements engineered small-scale hydrologic controls to replicate the pre-development
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 292/320
hydrologic regime of watersheds through in_iltrating, _iltering, storing, evaporating, and detaining runoff
close to its source.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MACHINE SHOP A facility or workshop where metal, or a similar material, is cut, shaped, or otherwise
altered by machining tools in order to produce or repair equipment, tools, or other objects.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MAJOR THOROUGHFARE A street, inclusive of an arterial or major collector, that is designed to
accommodate large amounts of traf_ic over a long distance.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MANUFACTURED HOME A prefabricated type dwelling that is constructed off-site, typically in a factory,
and transported to a site. For purposes of this de_inition, a manufactured home dwelling shall include
“mobile home”, “modular home” and any similar pre-fabricated home delivered to a site. This de_inition
does not include pre-fabricated components including but not limited to trusses, walls or similar for site
built construction.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MANUFACTURED HOUSING PARK A tract of land designed or being used to accommodate one (1) or
more transient portable dwelling units designed to be moved on wheels from location to location by
automobile, truck, or similar prime mover.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MANUFACTURING Facilities used for the mechanical, biological, or chemical transformation of materials
or substances into new products, including the assembling of components, the manufacture of products,
and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, or resins. This de_inition includes _inished
products as well as semi-_inished products or materials that are intended to go through additional
processes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MASONRY Consists of clay brick, natural and manufactured stone, granite, marble, architectural
concrete block, stucco, tilt wall concrete panels and other similar materials. This de_inition does not
include EIFS or other similar materials.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MASSAGE THERAPY, LICENSED A facility that offers the manipulation of soft tissue by hand or through
a mechanical or electrical apparatus for the purpose of body massage, therapy or treatment, and that is
licensed under Chapter 455 of the Texas Occupations Code.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MASTER PLAN The City’s comprehensive plan adopted by City Council by ordinance, amended from
time to time, to represent the City’s vision for development that identi_ies, policy, goal, and action items
that ultimately guides the City’s decision-making process for a multitude of programs, including but not
limited to the 2030 Comprehensive Plan, Water Master Plan, the Wastewater Master Plan, the Parks,
Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan, Transportation Plan, and Trails Master Plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 293/320
MAUSOLEUM Refer to “Cemetery / Mausoleum.”
Effective on: 2/25/2015
19.138
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MEASUREMENT Distances between driveways, streets and trees measured on center from the
respective feature.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MICROWAVE AND SATELLITE RECEIVING STATION, COMMERCIAL Those technical facilities associated
with the commercial receipt and distribution of microwave or satellite transmissions, including, but not
limited to, those facilities related to a commercial cable television operation. This de_inition does not
include an of_ice from which the operation of a business can be conducted.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MINI-WAREHOUSE / PUBLIC STORAGE An establishment offering small, individual storage units for
rent or lease and are restricted solely to the storage of items such as motor vehicles, trailers, boats,
bulky household goods and various personal property. There is no conduct of sales, business or any
other activity within the individual storage units.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MINING Land used for the on-site extraction of surface or subsurface rock, stone, gravel, sand, minerals
or other naturally occurring materials for economic use. This term does not include the excavation or
grading necessary for the development of a lot or tract.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MONEY TRANSFER BUSINESS An establishment, other than a bank or _inancial institution that engages
in or facilitates the transmission of funds to or from a location outside the United States and its
territories for a fee. See also Financial Services Institution, Alternative.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MORTUARY Refer to “Funeral Home / Mortuary.”
Effective on: 2/25/2015
MUSEUM / ART GALLERY An institution for the collection, preservation and display of books and
objects of art or science, and which is sponsored by a public or quasi-public agency, and which facilities
are open to the general public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NONCONFORMING LOT A nonconforming lot is a lot of record that does not meet the minimum area or
dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the lot is located. Those nonconforming lots
lawfully existing on the effective date or applicability of this Code or subsequent amendments thereto
shall be considered legal nonconforming lots.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
19.143
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 294/320
NONCONFORMING SITE A site lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this chapter or
amendments thereto, or which was subsequently annexed to the City, and which does not conform to the
development regulations associated with site including, but not limited to site access and circulation,
parking requirements for the speci_ic land use, landscaping, and lighting.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE A building or structure lawfully occupied at the time of the effective
date of this chapter or amendments thereto, or which was subsequently annexed to the City, and which
does not conform to the zoning regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NONCONFORMING USE A use of land that is not permitted within the zoning district assigned to the
property upon which the use is located. In addition, a use located in a zoning district in which it could
lawfully locate with the approval of a Speci_ic Use Permit but lacking such a permit or a use allowed with
land use conditions per Subchapter 4 that does not conform to such conditions shall also be considered
nonconforming. Those nonconforming uses lawfully existing and located on the property on the effective
date or applicability of this Code or subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered legal
nonconforming uses.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NON-EXCLUSIVE (PARKLAND) A park which is readily accessible to the general public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NURSERY, INDOOR/OUTDOOR SALES Land and/or facilities, such as greenhouses, that are used to
raise _lowers, shrubs, trees, grass, and other plants for sale.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
NURSING HOME Any home, place, institution or facility which provides licensed and professional shortterm
or chronic care, or both, for a period in excess of 24 consecutive hours for four (4) or more
patients not related by blood or marriage to the operator, who by reason of illness or in_irmity, are
unable to properly care for themselves. This de_inition does not include assisted living facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL The use of a site for the provision of administrative, executive, management.
This use includes administrative of_ices and services including real estate, insurance, property
management, personal and/or family counseling, investment, title companies, personnel, travel, and
secretarial.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OFFICE, GOVERNMENT The use of a site for the provision of government services, included
administrative and management services. This use includes, but is not limited to, of_ices pertaining to
government services such as secretarial, economic development, _inancial, legal, public works and
utilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OFFICE, MEDICAL A facility for examining and treating patients with medical conditions on an
outpatient basis, including ambulatory care or similar medical services that generally require a stay of
less than 24 hours.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OFFICE/ SHOWROOM A building that primarily consists of sales of_ices and sample display areas for
products and/or services delivered or performed off-premises. Catalog and telephone sales facilities are
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 295/320
appropriate. Incidental retail sales of products associated with the primary products and/or services are
permitted. Warehousing facilities shall not exceed 50% of the total _loor area. This de_inition does not
include contractor’s shop and storage yard.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OFFICE/ WAREHOUSE A building, or a portion of a building which is a structurally separate and
functionally distinct unit, primarily devoted to storage, warehousing and distribution of goods,
merchandise, supplies, and equipment. Accessory uses may include retail and wholesale sales areas,
sales of_ices, and display areas for products sold and distributed from the storage and warehousing
areas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OPEN AREA That part of a lot, including courts or yards, which is open and unobstructed from the
ground to the sky.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OPEN SPACE An area or tract of undeveloped land which is intended to remain generally in its natural
state, except for those uses allowed under the provisions of this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OPEN STORAGE FACILITY A facility used primarily for the purpose of outdoor storage of any
equipment, machinery, commodities, raw or semi-_inished materials, or building materials. (Primary Use)
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OPERATION Any physical action resulting in a change in the location, form, or physical properties of a
material, or any chemical action resulting in a change in the chemical composition or chemical or
physical properties of a material. The following are given as examples without limitation of the generality
of the foregoing: heat transfer, calcination, double decomposition fermentation, pyrolysis, electrolysis,
combustion material handling, evaporation mixing, absorption, _iltration, _luidization, screening, crushing,
grinding, demolishing, shoveling, bagging, etc.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ORCHARD, PRIVATE - A private enterprise establishment used for the growing of fruit- or nutproducing
trees which may provide for on-site retail sales and wholesale sales and distribution of such
orchard produce and products. For an orchard owned by the City or other government agency, refer to
the de_inition for public parkland and public parkland facilities.
OUTDOOR AMPHITHEATER, PRIVATE – A private enterprise establishment used for the purposes of
public performances which may generate heavy traf_ic. An amphitheater typically includes a stage
structure or area and a substantial amount of parking. For an amphitheater owned by the City or other
government agency, refer to the de_inition for public parkland and public parkland facilities.
OUTDOOR DISPLAY AND SALES The outdoor display or sale of _inished products actively available for
sale for less than 24 hours a day. This de_inition does not include products in shipping boxes, crates, on
pallets, or other shipping containers, which shall be considered Outdoor Storage.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OUTDOOR HOME ACCESSORIES Outdoor home accessories are products or goods that may be typically
be found outside of a single family dwelling unit. This includes pergolas, sheds, pots, sprinklers, gnomes,
playscapes, grills and other related items. For the purpose of this de_inition, at no time shall a pool or
spa, either above or below ground, be considered an outdoor home accessory.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 296/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OUTDOOR STORAGE The outdoor storage of products or goods that have a large size, mass, or volume
that occur on site for more than 24 hours such as, but not limited to, heavy equipment, freight or
commercial motor vehicles, trailers, construction materials, and raw, processed or packaged materials
including any products on pallets, in shipping containers or in crates.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OUTPARCEL A parcel of land generally located on the perimeter of a larger parcel of commercial land
and often subordinate to the larger parcel for access, parking and drainage purposes otherwise known
as a pad site.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 297/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OVERHEAD DOOR A large door or roll-up door that extends above six (6) feet in height and is used for
giving vehicles access to a building, for loading and unloading freight or materials, or for personal access
to storage or self-storage areas in a building. These are typically at the same grade as the building. This
de_inition does not include Service Bay.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OVERLAY DISTRICT An area that is zoned for particular uses in addition to the regular uses speci_ied in
this Code and may have additional development regulations associated with the district.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
OWNER The Person who has legal title to a particular property or a lessee, agent, employee, or other
Person acting on behalf of, and with the authorization of, such title holder.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARK An area devoted towards open space and recreation not otherwise de_ined by this chapter. This
de_inition includes, but is not limited to trails, structures and uses that are designed for recreation,
educational and sport activities. Inclusive of private parks and public park or parkland
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARK, PRIVATE Land, located within a subdivision, owned and maintained by a private entity such as a
property owner’s association and to which use of the facility is restricted to the residents of that
subdivision. This de_inition may include an amenity center.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKLAND, PUBLIC Land dedicated, owned and operated by the City, a Municipal Utility District, a
Water Control and Improvement District, or the County, and which is available to the general public for
use as a park or recreational purposes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARK, COMMUNITY PUBLIC Public parkland totaling a minimum of _ive (5) acres or more, which may
include an assortment of public amenities, including but not limited to, a playground, trail, restrooms,
and sports and recreational facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARK AND RIDE Refer to Transit Facility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARK DEVELOPMENT FEE A development fee associated with residential developments’ responsibility
to provide payments to the City, for the construction of Public Amenities within Public Parkland from
time to time, that represent the development’s impact on the public parkland system. The formula is
included within Subchapter 14. Public Parkland Standards and the Parks Development Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING MODULE Refer to Parking Row.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING STRUCTURE An above grade, ramp access, open-air structure speci_ically designed to
accommodate vehicle parking.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING LOT An open area or garage used for the temporary parking of motor vehicles when such use
is not accessory to any other use.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 298/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARENT TRACT The original tract from which a parcel was taken.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING ROW, INTERNAL A parking row not adjacent to a public right-of-way or major drive aisle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING ROW, PERIPHERAL A parking row adjacent to a public right-of-way or major drive aisle and
contains a minimum of one (1) landscape median adjacent to the public right-of-way or major drive aisle.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 299/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PARKING SPACE A part of a Vehicular Use Area designed to be used for parking of a motor vehicle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PAWN BROKER A person engaged in the business of (a) lending money on the security of pledged
goods; or (b) purchasing goods on condition that the goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the
seller for a _ixed price within a _ixed period as de_ined by the state of Texas Finance Code Chapter 371,
as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PAWN SHOP A location at which or premises in which a pawnbroker regularly conducts business as
de_ined by the State of Texas Finance Code Chapter 371, as amended.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PAYDAY ADVANCE OR LOAN BUSINESS An establishment that makes small consumer loans, usually
backed by postdated check or authorization to make an electronic debit against an existing _inancial
account, where the check or debit is held for an agreed upon term or until the applicant's next payday,
and then cashed unless the customer repays the loan to reclaim such person's check. See also Financial
Services Institution, Alternative.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PEDESTRIAN AREA Any area which is intended to be occupied, traversed, or otherwise used primarily
by pedestrians, including sidewalks, walkways, trails, building entrances, plazas, and other areas.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PEDESTRIAN SPACE A building entrance area which includes decorative elements including, but not
limited to, stained and sealed pavement, seating facilities, pedestrian scale lighting, landscaping,
architectural planters and art. Refer to Subchapter 9 for development requirements.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE FACILITIES Those facilities, including but not limited to rights-of-way,
sidewalks, paths and trails, designed for use by both pedestrians and bicyclists as proposed in the City’s
Master Plans.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PEDESTRIAN CORRIDOR Walkways, such as paths or sidewalks, which are designed to accommodate
pedestrian traf_ic by emphasizing convenience and safety.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PEDESTRIAN REFUGE A traf_ic control device intended to provide for safe pedestrian travel across a
roadway or driveway. Refer to the Engineering Design Manual and Construction Standards.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PERIMETER ROADWAY The roadway(s) that creates the boundary of a subdivision.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PERSON Any person, _irm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or
company.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 300/320
PERSONAL SERVICES An establishment which offers specialized goods and services purchased
frequently by the consumer, such as a barbershop, beauty shop, dressmaker, fortune teller, licensed
massage therapy shop, nail salon, portrait studio, shoe shop, tailor, or other similar shops offering
custom service. A Body Art Studio is speci_ically excluded from this de_inition.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PET STORE Pet store means a retail establishment primarily selling live animals generally kept as
household pets, i.e. dogs, cats, birds or _ish and associated goods for the maintenance of such animals.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLACE OF WORSHIP A building or group of buildings maintained for the practice of worship and
religious training of religions, and includes the on-site housing of ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns, and
similar staff personnel.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of P_lugerville
as created by City Charter, with functions and duties identi_ied in this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLANT MATERIAL Grass, Trees, Shrubs, _lowers, vines, and other ground cover.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT A map as a formal document representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location of
individual properties along with any streets, alleys, squares, parks or parts of a tract intended to be
dedication to public use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, ADMINISTRATIVE A plat that may be issued by the Administrator under this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, AMENDING A change to a recorded plat to correct minor errors or make minor adjustments.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, FINAL A plat for all or a phased portion of a subdivision that is presented to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for approval and acceptance of dedications.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, MINOR A plat for all or a phased portion of a subdivision that does not require the submission of
a preliminary plan.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, RECORDED A _inal plat that has been duly approved by the City of P_lugerville per the Subdivision
Code and _iled in the Of_icial plat Records of the County.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAT, VACATION A recorded plat which is vacated through the procedures described in this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAYGROUND A facility, typically located within a public or private park, which provides equipment for
children to play on or around. Typically includes amenities such as climbing structures, swing sets, slides,
and others.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PLAYSCAPE Refer to Playground.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 301/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PORTABLE BUILDING SALES A site on which factory-manufactured portable buildings, such as
manufactured homes, are displayed and offered for sale or order to the general public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE A required meeting between a subdivider, owner, and City staff to
discuss a proposed subdivision or development prior to the submittal of an application. A preapplication
conference may be waived at the discretion of the Planning Director.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRECIOUS METAL DEALER Any person or entity engaged in purchasing articles made of or containing
gold, silver, platinum, or other precious metals or jewels of any description for the purpose of reselling
the items in any form. See also Financial Services Institution, Alternative.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRELIMINARY PLAN A plan which identi_ies the proposed layout of the subdivision that is presented to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for consideration and approval.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRELIMINARY PLAN, VALID A preliminary plan that was approved by the City of P_lugerville and has
not expired or been withdrawn, superseded or replaced.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRINT SHOP, MAJOR An establishment used for bulk printing, binding, cutting or copying of materials
including books, magazines, newspapers, posters, photos, signs or drawings by means of a printing
press, lithography, offset printed, blue printing, photographic reproduction techniques, or other similar
methods, for either distribution or sale.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PRINT SHOP, MINOR An establishment which primarily reproduces, in printed form, individual orders
from a business, profession, service, industry or government organization. Offset, letterpress, and
duplicating equipment are used, but no rotary presses or linotype equipment are used. Related services
might include faxing, digitizing, graphic reproducing, and report assembling.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PROTECTED TREE Any tree, including a multi-trunk tree, measuring eight inches (8”) or larger at DBH.
The following species are excluded from protected status: Chinaberry, Hackberry, Ashe juniper (Cedar),
Chinese tallow, Willow, Ligustrum, Cottonwood, Mimosa or any other tree that is determined by the
Administrator to be diseased or dying due to natural causes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PUBLIC PARK FACILITIES - Singular or a group of uses within a public park, owned by the City or
another government agency, that provides for passive and/or active amenities and appurtenances
including, but not to, playground equipment, sports _ields, restrooms, pavilions, amphitheater, parking,
trails, garden, orchard, campgrounds, etc.
PUBLIC HEARING A meeting of a public body, for which notice is given to the public and members of
the public are allowed to address the public body regarding the issue being discussed within reasonable
time limits for each speaker or an overall time limit.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS The components of a water, wastewater, transportation, or drainage system,
whether owned and maintained by a governmental entity, a private corporation, partnership, or
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 302/320
proprietorship, that are designed to serve the general public.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
PUBLIC PLAZA A citywide plaza for concentrated public use and gatherings.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RADIO / TELEVISION TOWERS Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving any
portion of the radio spectrum below eight hundred (800) megahertz, excluding noncommercial
antennae installations for home use of radio or television.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RECEPTION HALL A facility used to host gatherings of people, typically within large rooms, for
meetings, parties, or other events.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RECREATION CENTER, PUBLIC An area containing a building or complex of buildings housing
community recreation facilities owned, operated, or leased for operation by a public entity.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
Recreational Vehicles Sales and Service, New/Used. Sales and/or leasing of new and/or used
recreational vehicles or boats, including, as an accessory use, repair work of recreational vehicles and
boats.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RECYCLING CENTER A facility designed for the collection and temporary storage of recyclable items for
transport to a reprocessing plant or reclamation center. De_inition does not include a junkyard,
Automotive Salvage Yard, or a government-owned facility.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RECYCLING PLANT A facility in which recoverable resources such as paper, newspapers, magazines,
books, glass, metal cans and other products are recycled, reprocessed and treated to return such
products to a condition in which they may again be used for production. De_inition does not include a
junkyard or Automotive Salvage Yard.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
REPLAT The resubdivision of all or any part of an existing subdivision, which does not require the
vacation of the entire preceding plat, but not including an amending plat.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CENTER A use engaged in research and development, testing,
assembly, repair, and manufacturing in the following industries: bio-technology, pharmaceuticals, medical
instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and
instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. Of_ice, warehousing, wholesaling, and
distribution of the _inished products produced at the site are allowed as part of this use. Such uses shall
not violate any odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise radiation, vibration, or similar pollution standard.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RESIDENTIAL For purposes of this chapter, residential means single family, duplex and multi-family
dwellings.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 303/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RESIDENTIAL UNIT Either one Dwelling Unit or one Lot that is designed to accommodate one family at
a time for residential occupancy, including facilities for sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. One
dwelling unit located on one or more Lots is considered one Residential Unit.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RESUBDIVISION Any change to a previously approved or recorded subdivision plat (refer to Replat).
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RESTAURANT An establishment which serves prepared food to the general public with designated
dining areas, which receives more than 50% of total gross revenue from the sale of food, and which is
not designated nor used for the service of food to automobiles on the premises.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RETAIL SALES AND SERVICES Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general
public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such
goods.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
REVEAL The vertical part of a jamb of a door or window that is visible between the edge of the door or
window and outer wall of a building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
REVIEW CYCLES A review cycle constitutes one complete submittal of required application contents and
staff requested items, and one staff review report generated that identi_ies required amendments to the
plan set and miscellaneous information necessary for staff to review such application. A submittal that
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 304/320
does not require staff comments, where all comments have been cleared, shall not constitute a review
cycle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
REZONING An action of the City Council, by ordinance, which changes the zoning district in which a
particular tract of land is located.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RIGHT-OF-WAY (ROW) A strip of land acquired by Right-of-Way Reservation, dedication or
condemnation and intended for use as a public way. The ROW normally incorporates the roadway, curbs,
parking strips, sidewalks, lighting and drainage facilities, other utilities, and may include special features
(required by topography) such as grade separation, landscape areas, viaducts or bridges.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RIGHT-OF-WAY RESERVATION Decision by a private owner to withhold speci_ic real estate from further
development pending acquisition by a public entity.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
RIGHT-OF-WAY WIDTH The shortest distance between the property lines abutting both sides of a street
right-of-way.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ROOFLINE The Roo_line shall be the lower edge of the eave or gable on a pitched roof or the
uppermost height of a parapet wall.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 305/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ROUNDABOUT A traf_ic control device that provides for the safe and ef_icient movement of vehicular
traf_ic through an intersection.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SCHOOL, BOARDING Facilities offering education services that meet state requirements for primary,
secondary, or higher education and provide dormitories, dining facilities, and other accessory uses for
the boarding of students.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SPECIAL EXCEPTION A use of property permitted in a zoning district upon a _inding be the Board of
Adjustment that such use is allowable because conditions speci_ied in this ordinance (as those upon
which the exception is permitted) are found to exist with regards to the property that is the subject of
the request for Special Exception.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SCHOOL, BUSINESS or TRADE A school offering instruction and training in a service or art such as a
secretarial school, barber college, beauty school, commercial art school, or dance or music school.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SCHOOL, COLLEGE or UNIVERSITY An educational institution of higher learning, offering general and
specialized courses that are certi_ied by the State Board of Higher Education, or by a recognized
accrediting agency, and that lead to a degree. Facilities may include student dorms or housing, sports
facilities, theaters, and maintenance facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SCHOOL, PUBLIC Facilities that are used to provide instruction or education by primary schools or
secondary schools that are in a public school district or are institutions of higher education that receive
public funding. Does not include trade or business schools.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 306/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SCHOOL, PRIVATE, or PAROCHIAL An educational institution having a curriculum equivalent to public
schools and meets the same license and certi_ication requirements of public schools. A private or
parochial school shall not include specialty schools, such as dancing, music, beauty, mechanical, trade
swimming, or commercial schools.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SEASONAL PRODUCTS, SALES The sale of Christmas trees, _irewood, snow cones and other food
vending items may be allowed during their normal and generally accepted season. This de_inition
includes indoor and outdoor arts and crafts shows, exhibits and sales, and sales by temporary food
vendors.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SELF-SERVE KIOSK, OUTDOOR Equipment or machinery used by the general public to extract money
or other goods. Typical uses include ATM machines, movie rental machines or prize machines.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SERVICE BAY An automotive service bay is a singular automobile space, within or underneath a
structure, that provides a technician, customer, and/or automated system adequate space to safely and
ef_iciently service one vehicle. Service bay(s) would be included within car washes and automotive repair
and service facilities. This de_inition does not include overhead doors.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SERVICE COURT A vehicular use area associated speci_ically with loading docks and/or delivery
receivable areas for multiple buildings or tenant spaces within one building for of_ices, commercial,
and/or industrial uses.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SERVICE STATION, FUEL Any building or premises used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at
retail of any automobile fuel or oil. If the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale is secondary to another
use, the premises will be classi_ied as to the primary use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SETBACK, BUILDING A distance which represents the minimum distance a structure must be located
from the property line, and establishes the minimum required front, side, or rear yard space of a lot.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 307/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SETBACK, BUILDING HEIGHT A distance which represents the minimum distance the height of the
structure, greater than 20 feet in height, must be located or setback from the property line based on the
land use of the structure and the zoning district. Refer to Subchapter 4 for the building height standards
according to its district and land use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS An establishment providing, featuring or offering employees or
entertainment personnel who appear on the premises while in a state of nudity or simulated nudity and
provide live performances or entertainment for customers; or provides, features or offers non-live,
sexually-explicit entertainment, materials, or items for sale or rental to customers; or provides materials
or items that are intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual grati_ication to its customers. For
further de_initions and regulations, see Chapter 112: Sexually Oriented Businesses.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SHOOTING RANGE, INDOOR A public or private facility where a pistol, ri_le, silhouette, or other similar
range is used for discharging _irearms for a sporting event, practice, instruction in the use of the
_irearms or the testing of _irearms.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SHRUB Any self-supporting woody evergreen or deciduous perennial usually less than 12 feet in height
without a central stem.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 308/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SIDEWALK A paved area, generally parallel to, and usually separated from, the street, and used as a
pedestrian walkway.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SIGHT DISTANCE The length of street measured along the centerline, which is continuously visible from
any point three (3) feet above the centerline.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SIGHTLINES Refer to the Engineering Design Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SIGHT TRIANGLE The triangular area formed by an invisible diagonal line at the corner of either two
intersecting street right-of-way lines, the edge of street lines, the edge of a driveway or combination of
two thereof within which no obstruction may be placed which would block the sight lines for vehicular
traf_ic. Refer to the Engineering Design Manual.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 309/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT A permit issued under Subchapter 3 of this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SITE PLAN A plan, drawn to scale, depicting the existing conditions and proposed improvements of a
legally platted lot. The plans will typically include the location of buildings, parking areas, landscaping,
and other private improvement details.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SLOPE The number of feet of vertical elevation change per one hundred (100) feet of horizontal
distance. Also referred to as “percent grade.”
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SMALL ENGINE REPAIR SHOP A business that repairs, adjusts, tunes or modi_ies gasoline engines of a
small horsepower motor commonly used to power grass trimmers, lawn mowers, chain saws and similar
equipment. This repair service may also conduct work on electric motors commonly used in power tools,
lawn maintenance equipment, and small household appliances. This term does not include work allterrain
vehicles, jet skis, or similar vehicles and does not include storage or repair work conducted
outside of a building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS Equipment that converts and then stores or transfers energy from
the wind into usable forms of energy. This includes the base, blade, foundation, generator, nacelle, rotor,
monopole, transformer, vane, wire, inverter, batteries or other component used in the system. The rotor
may operate in a vertical or horizontal direction, system listed as UL 1741, comply with the approved
International Building Code and noise ordinance in effect at the time, and shall have a capacity of 1 kW
or less. Setbacks and height shall be as provided in Subchapter 4 of this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 310/320
SPECIAL EXCEPTION See Subchapter 8
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SPECIFIC USE PERMIT (SUP) A permit issued under Subchapter 3 of this Chapter.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SQUARE FOOT DIMENSIONS The area contained within a square when measured one foot (1’) wide by
one-foot (1’) long.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STABLE, COMMERCIAL A stable and related open pasture where horses are quartered for owners on a
fee basis.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STOP WORK ORDER An order issued by the City of P_lugerville to the owner to cease and desist with
work being performed on a site.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITIES – A public or private facility used for the purposes of providing
stormwater management, by use of a pond or catch basin within a well-de_ined area where storm water
is diverted to, and detained, for a period of time after a rain event, and is released at a speci_ic rate. This
de_inition shall also include stormwater retention facilities.
STREET A public thoroughfare which affords a primary means of access to abutting property, including
all land within the right-of-way thereof.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREET, COLLECTOR Refer to the Transportation Master Plan for the de_inition and classi_ications.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREET, LOCAL Refer to the Transportation Master Plan for the de_inition and classi_ications.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREET, ARTERIAL Refer to the Transportation Master Plan for the de_inition and classi_ications.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREET, OFFSET The separation of two streets on opposite sides of an intersecting Street as provided
in the Engineering Design Manual.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 311/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREET, THROUGH A street which has two distinct points of ingress and egress from two generally
opposing cardinal directions and which only terminates into another through street. An alley and cul-desac
as commonly known or otherwise de_ined herein shall not be considered through streets.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STREETSCAPE YARD A space designated within the street yard intended to enhance the pedestrian
experience with improvements, including but not limited to, a sidewalk, street trees, pedestrian scale
lighting, signage, and furniture.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STRUCTURE Buildings as well as other things constructed or erected on the ground, attached to
something having location on the ground, or requiring Construction or erection on the ground.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY A structure or building which is subordinate and secondary to a principal
structure, is located on the same lot, contributes to the comfort, convenience, and necessity of the
occupants of the principal structure, and may be construed as temporary or permanent.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 312/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STRUCTURED PARKING Refer to Parking Structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STRUCTURE, PRINCIPAL The primary or main building on a Lot which is occupied by the primary use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
STUCCO Exterior cement plaster, applied in accordance with the requirements of the International
Building Code, as amended and adopted by the City.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBDIVIDER The owner, applicant, developer, or a duly authorized agent of the owner of record of the
land intended for subdivision.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SUBDIVISION The division of any lot, tract, or parcel of land with the City’s corporate limits or its
Extraterritorial Jurisdiction into two or more parts for the purpose of development, or for the purpose
of laying out any lots or sites, or for the purpose of laying out any lots, Streets, Alleys, access easements,
drainage easements, public utility easements, Parks, or other land intended for public use or for the use
of any purchaser, owner, occupant or tenant of a lot or site fronting thereon or adjacent thereto, or of
the use and bene_it of any Person being served thereby or having the use or bene_it thereof. Subdivision
includes a replat and the development of a condo regime or manufactured housing park. Subdivision
does not include a division of land speci_ically excluded from the de_inition under applicable state laws.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SWIMMING POOL, PUBLIC A swimming pool constructed for use by the general public, including those
operated as a business and those constructed and maintained by the City or county.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
SWIMMING POOL, PRIVATE A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a
one-family, two-family or multi-family subdivision and located, fenced and built in accordance with all
applicable standards. A private swimming pool is not operated as a business nor maintained in a manner
to be hazardous or obnoxious to adjacent property owners.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
T.A.S. Texas Accessibility Standards
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TATTOO SHOP Refer to Body Art Shop.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
THEATER An establishment charging admission to the general public for the privilege of observing a
live, televised, or motion picture performance indoors.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TOTAL CONSTRUCTION COST The direct cost to the applicant of all construction contracts for the
subdivision, items of construction, including labor, materials, and equipment necessary to complete all
work for _inal acceptance by the City.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TOWNHOME/TOWNHOUSE A dwelling unit, generally having two or more _loors, which is joined to a
similar dwelling unit on one or more sides by a common party wall or abutting separate wall, and which
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 313/320
is designed for occupancy by not more than one family. A Townhouse may be known as a row house or
single family attached unit. For purposes of clarifying different product types, a Townhome shall be
considered a dwelling unit that is “for sale” vs. “for rent”.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TRANSIT FACILITY Any structure or use that is primarily used, as part of a transportation system, for
the purpose of loading, unloading, or transferring passengers or accommodating the movement of
passengers from one mode of transportation to another.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE A woody plant usually having one well de_ined stem or trunk and a more or less de_initely formed
crown, and usually attaining a mature height of at least twelve (12) feet.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE, LARGE A tree species listed in the Approved Tree List in Subchapter 11 as having a mature height
of 40 feet or more. (Type A Tree)
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE, MEDIUM A tree species listed in the Approved Tree List in Subchapter 11 as having a mature
height of 25-40 feet. (Type B Tree)
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE CANOPY The horizontal extension of a tree’s branches in all directions from its trunk.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE LINE Three or more Protected Trees situated with reference to one another as to appear to be in
a line or following a fence line.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE PROTECTION PLAN A plan identifying the proposed methods of protecting trees during
construction that may include protection details, standards, notes, and construction plans as determined
by the administrator in accordance with Section 2.3 of the Tree Technical Manual.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE REMOVAL An act that causes or may be reasonably expected to cause a tree to die, including, but
not limited to, damage in_licted upon the root system by: (i) machinery, (ii) storage of materials, (iii) soil
compaction, (iv) substantially changing the natural grade above the root system or around the trunk, (v)
excessive pruning, or (vi) placing an Impervious Cover over more than 50% of the area within the
Dripline.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE REPLACEMENT PLAN A plan showing the proposed type and location of replacement trees on
site and shall include an irrigation plan (if applicable) for the proposed replacement trees. The plan may
be included within the proposed landscape plan if proposed replacement trees are located on site of
proposed Development.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE, SMALL A tree species listed in the Approved Tree List in Subchapter 11 as having a mature
height of 8-25 feet. (Type C Tree)
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 314/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE SURVEY A drawing of the proposed preliminary plan or site plan showing the size, location,
species, tree numbers (tags), Critical Root Zone of all existing Protected Trees and Signi_icant Stands of
Trees, any Protected Tree proposed for removal or transplant, a table summarizing all Protected Trees
and the total number of caliper inches of Protected Trees, in accordance with generally accepted
methods such as those provided in Section 1 of the Tree Technical Manual. Tree Surveys shall be
prepared by a certi_ied arborist, registered landscape architect or registered professional land surveyor.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE TECHNICAL MANUAL A manual approved by City Council that includes standards and
speci_ications based on generally accepted arboricultural practices, techniques and procedures which
shall serve as guidelines for trees, including but not limited to tree selection, planting, pruning, alteration,
soil standards, treatment, protection, and removal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TREE TECHNICAL MANUAL A manual approved by City Council that includes standards and
speci_ications based on generally accepted arboricultural practices, techniques and procedures which
shall serve as guidelines for trees, including but not limited to tree selection, planting, pruning, alteration,
soil standards, treatment, protection, and removal..
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TRUCK / BUS / LARGE VEHICLE REPAIR A facility that provides all types of repair, maintenance and
reconditioning of trucks, buses, RVs, and other large vehicles.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TRUCK SALES, HEAVY TRUCKS A facility offering sales services for commercial trucks, including tractor
and trailer units, to the general public. This de_inition does not include sales of consumer automobiles or
trucks, or light duty _leet vehicles such as small trucks and vans.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TRUCK TERMINAL A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck is assembled and/or
stored for shipping in interstate and intrastate commerce by motor truck. A motor freight terminal is a
truck terminal.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
TXDOT Texas Department of Transportation
Effective on: 2/25/2015
UNDERGROUD PARKING Parking located below grade within a building.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE This Chapter 157 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of P_lugerville.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
USE, ACCESSORY A use that is clearly incidental and secondary to the primary use and that is under the
same ownership as and located upon the same lot as the primary use, and which does not change the
character thereof.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
USE, ADJACENT A use that exists immediately next to another use.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 315/320
USE, PRIMARY (USE) The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is designed,
arranged, oriented, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and will include any manner of such
activity with respect to the standards of a zoning ordinance.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
USE, TEMPORARY A use that is established for a fixed, often short-term, period of time with the intent
to discontinue the use upon the expiration of the time.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
UTILITIES A structure or facility used by a public, semi-public, or private utility agency to store,
distribute, or provide a utility service such water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping
stations, electric power lines, fuel or gas pipelines, telephone lines, roads, cable telephone line, _iber optic
cable, storm water systems and drainage ways, and railroads or other utilities. The de_inition does not
include Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VARIANCE means permission given by the Board of Adjustment to use property in a manner that would
be otherwise prohibited within the zoning district where the property is located; and is only proper in
speci_ic cases where the Board of Adjustment makes _indings, as required elsewhere in this code, that in
essence constitute a determination that a literal or rigid interpretation of the zoning ordinance would
cause unreasonable and unnecessary hardship.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VEGETATIVE SCREENING STRUCTURE A welded wire trellising system with the ability to combine
distinctive trellis panels in order to create a multi-dimensional structural frame that can support the
healthy growth of vines. The wire trellis system may not include chain-link fencing material. Vines may
either be deciduous or evergreen, except for screening requirements established by Subchapter 11, in
which case all Plant Material shall be evergreen and planted every four (4’) feet along the base of the
structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VEHICULAR SALES AND RENTAL, RECREATIONAL A business establishment for the sale and rental of
bulky recreational vehicles, including but not limited to, RVs, jet skis, boats, campers, or other similar
vehicles, which may be stored and displayed outdoors. This de_inition does not include Truck and Trailer
Rental.
Any other similar establishment, in which all business operations including storage and display or
merchandise are wholly enclosed within the principle building, may be classi_ied under Retail Sales and
Service.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VEHICULAR USE AREA That part of the lot utilized by motor vehicles for stopping, idling, and parking,
including but not limited to parking areas (whether striped for spaces or not), loading areas, and drivethrough
lanes.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VICINITY MAP A drawing located on a Site Plan, preliminary plan and _inal plat which illustrates the
relationship of the proposed subdivision or site plan to the established street systems, other nearby
developments, landmarks or community facilities for the purpose of locating and orienting the area
under consideration.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 316/320
VETERINARIAN CLINIC A facility where a licensed veterinarian maintains treatment facilities for the
boarding and medical or surgical treatment of diseased or injured animals such as dogs, cats or other
domesticated animals.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
VINEYARD, PRIVATE - A private enterprise establishment used for the growing of grapevines, typically
producing grapes used in winemaking, which may provide for on-site sales and wholesale sales and
distribution of such produce and products.
WAIVER Waiver means a total or partial exemption from a speci_ic requirement of this Code when such
waiver is authorized by a provision of this Code, requested by an applicant and determined by the
Administrator or the Administrator’s designee, warranted pursuant to the Code provision authorizing a
grant of waiver.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WAIVER, ARCHITECTURAL A speci_ic type of waiver that either the Administrator or the Planning and
Zoning Commission has authority and discretion that allows architectural design standards within the
Uni_ied Development Code to be altered, reduced or otherwise changed.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WALL An upright structure forming an exterior surface of a building, an interior partition to separate
spaces, or as a standing barrier around space for screening or security purposes. This de_inition does
not include fence structures.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WATERWAY Any open channel which carries surface water drainage at a rate of over _ive (5) cubic feet
per second in a twenty-_ive (25) year frequency storm event.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WINE BAR A bar or restaurant that offers wine as the primary selection of drinks, instead of beer or
liquors. Patrons are often allowed to taste the wine before purchasing. The wine may be produced onsite
for sale in the bar and restaurant. Where allowed by law, wine bars may sell wine "to go" and/or
distribute to offsite accounts.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WINERY, MICRO Agricultural processing facilities used to produce 10,000 cases of wine or less per
year. The processing activities may include, but are not limited to, wholesale sales, crushing, fermenting,
blending, aging, storing, bottling, and administrative of_ice functions. Facilities may include space for
retail sales, wine tasting, indoor event rooms and a small outdoor picnic area as part of the operations.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WINERY, REGIONAL Agricultural processing facilities used to produce more than 10,000 cases of wine
per year. The processing activities may include, but are not limited to, wholesale sales, crushing,
fermenting, blending, aging, storing, bottling, and administrative of_ice functions.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WING WALL For the purposes of screening service courts or other types of required screening
prescribed in this Chapter, a wing wall is self-supporting structure or architecturally integrated into the
principal structure with the use of masonry consistent with the primary masonry materials utilized on
the principle structure.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 317/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY (WTF) An unstaffed facility composed of one or more of
the following components: antenna, equipment enclosure, security barrier, and/or communication tower.
The facility is used for the transmission and reception of radio, microwave, or electromagnetic signals
used for commercial communication by a wireless communication service provider.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY (WTF), ATTACHED A wireless telecommunication facility
(WTF) that is attached to a monopole, self-enclosed monopole, building or other permanent structure.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITY (WTF), MONOPOLE A wireless telecommunication
facility constructed as a freestanding structure which consists of a single vertical pole, _ixed into the
ground and/or attached to a foundation with no guy wires, containing one or more externally mounted
antennas and associated ground based equipment and supporting utilities.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WORK For purposes of retaining valid construction plans, work shall mean disturbance of existing
topography and ground cover with machinery and workforce labor such as clearing, grubbing, grading,
utility or drainage infrastructure installation, and tree removal. The installation of erosion control
measures beyond silt fence does not constitute work for the purposes of this de_inition.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
WRECKER / TOWING SERVICES An establishment engaged in the temporary outdoor storage of
vehicles that have been towed, carried, hauled, or pushed from public or private property for
impoundment licensed by the State of Texas; but does not include long-term vehicle storage or salvage
yard operations. In the context of Wrecker/Towing Services temporary outdoor storage means storage
of a motor vehicle not more than 60 days, unless a longer period is required by the Texas Occupation
Code Ch. 2303, Subchapter D, as amended or re-codi_ied, for the disposition of a temporary stored
vehicle.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
YARD, REAR The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a rear site lot line, extending across the
dimension of a site between the side site boundaries.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 318/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
YARD, SIDE The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a side lot line, extending across the dimension
of a site between the front and Rear Yards.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 319/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
YARD, STREET/FRONT The area of a site formed by a line parallel to a Street Line, extending across the
dimension of a site that is adjacent to a street between the side site boundaries.
9/8/2020 Unified Development Code - Document Viewer
online.encodeplus.com/regs/pflugerville/doc-viewer.aspx#secid--1 320/320
Effective on: 2/25/2015
ZONING DISTRICT MAP OF THE CITY The of_icial zoning map of the City to be _iled with the City
Secretary.
Effective on: 2/25/2015
