7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/508
City of Rockdale
Code of Ordinances
Including Supplement No. 6
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through
Ordinance No. 2018-09-10(4B) adopted 9/10/18.
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
ARTICLE 1.01 CODE OF ORDINANCES*
Sec. 1.01.001 Adoption
There is hereby adopted the Code of Ordinances of the City of Rockdale, Texas, as compiled, edited and
published by Franklin Legal Publishing, Inc. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.002 Designation and citation of code
The ordinances embraced in this chapter and the following chapters, articles and sections shall constitute and be
designated the “Code of Ordinances, City of Rockdale, Texas,” and may be so cited. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.003 Catchlines of articles, divisions and sections
The catchlines of the several articles, divisions and sections of this code are intended as mere catchwords to
indicate the contents of the article, division or section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such
articles, divisions and sections, nor as any part of the articles, divisions and sections, nor, unless expressly so
provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such articles, divisions and sections, including the catchlines, are
amended or reenacted. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Headings of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.024.
Sec. 1.01.004 Definitions and rules of construction
In the construction of this code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following
rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city
council:
Generally. Words shall be construed in their common and usual significance unless the contrary is clearly
indicated.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/508
Citation. The word “citation” shall mean an ordinance violation notice and notice to appear before the city
municipal court, as provided for in article 1.05. (Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 2, adopted 5/9/11)
City and town. Each means the City of Rockdale, Texas.
City administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or other city officers. The term “city
administrator,” “city manager,” “city secretary,” “chief of police” or other city officer or department shall be
construed to mean the city administrator, city manager, city secretary, chief of police or such other municipal
officer or department, respectively, of the City of Rockdale, Texas.
Computation of time. Whenever a notice is required to be given or an act to be done a certain length of time
before any proceeding shall be had, the first day is excluded and the last day is included. If the last day of any
period is a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a
Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday.
State law reference–Computation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.014.
Council. Whenever the term “council” or “city council” or “the council” is used, it shall mean the city council of
the City of Rockdale, Texas.
State law reference–References to municipal governing body and to members of municipal governing body, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code, sec. 21.002.
County. The term “county” or “this county” shall mean the County of Milam, Texas.
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision of this Code of Ordinances requires or authorizes an officer or
employee of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such officer or
employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the act or duty unless the terms of the
provision specifically designate otherwise.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms,
partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males.
State law reference–“Gender” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(c).
Joint authority. Words purporting to give authority to three (3) or more officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons, unless it is otherwise declared.
State law reference–Grants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.004.
May. The word “may” is permissive.
State law reference–Construction of word “may,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Month. The word “month” shall mean a calendar month.
State law reference–“Month” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Must and shall. Each is mandatory.
State law reference–Construction of words “must” and “shall,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.016.
Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural, and any word importing the plural
number shall include the singular.
State law reference–“Number,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(b).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/508
Oath. The word “oath” shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation
may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words “swear” and “sworn” shall be equivalent to the
words “affirm” and “affirmed.”
State law reference–“Oath,” “swear” and “sworn” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Official time standard. Whenever certain hours are named in this code, they shall mean standard time or daylight
saving time, as may be in current use in the city.
State law reference–Standard time, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.016.
Or, and. The word “or” may be read “and,” and the word “and” may be read “or,” as the sense requires it.
Owner. The word “owner,” applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in
common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety of the whole or of a part of such building or
land.
Person. The word “person” shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships,
organizations, business trusts, estates, trusts, and bodies politic and corporate, as well as to individuals.
State law reference–“Person” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Preceding, following. The terms “preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.
Property. The word “property” shall mean and include real and personal property.
State law reference–“Property” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.005.
Real property. The term “real property” shall mean and include lands, tenements and hereditaments.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Registered. The word “registered” [as used in article 1.05] shall mean registered in accordance with chapter
1952 of the Texas Occupations Code. (Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 2, adopted 5/9/11)
Sidewalk. The word “sidewalk” shall mean that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent
property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
Signature or subscription. A signature or subscription shall include a mark when a person cannot write.
State law reference–“Signature” and “subscribe” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
State. The term “the state” or “this state” shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word “street” shall have its commonly accepted meaning and shall include highways, sidewalks,
alleys, avenues, recessed parking areas and other public rights-of-way, including the entire right-of-way.
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present.
State law reference–“Tense,” V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.003(a).
V.T.C.S., V.T.P.C., V.T.C.C.P., V.T.C.A. Such abbreviations refer to the divisions of Vernon's Texas Statutes
Annotated.
Written or in writing. The term “written” or “in writing” shall be construed to include any representation of
words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/508
State law reference–“Written” or “in writing” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
Year. The word “year” shall mean a calendar year.
State law reference–“Year” defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.011.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.005 Severability of parts of code
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and
phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of
this code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in the code of
any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Severability of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 312.013.
Sec. 1.01.006 Repeal of ordinances
The repeal of an ordinance or any portion thereof shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive
any ordinance which has been previously repealed. (Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Effect of repeal of statutes, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 311.030.
Sec. 1.01.007 Amendments or additions to code
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature, and amendments to such ordinances, hereafter enacted or
presented to the city council for enactment, shall be drafted, so far as possible, as specific amendments of, or
additions to, the Code of Ordinances. Amendments to this code shall be made by reference to the chapter and
section of the code which is to be amended, and additions shall bear an appropriate designation of chapter,
article and section; provided, however, the failure to do so shall in no way affect the validity or enforceability of
such ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.008 Supplementation of code
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this code shall be prepared and printed whenever
authorized or directed by the city council. A supplement to the code shall include all substantive permanent and
general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period
covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the code. The pages of a supplement shall be so
numbered that they will fit properly into the code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become
obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the
code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this code, all portions of the code which have been repealed shall be
excluded from the code by omission thereof from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization
authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of
ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code.
For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/508
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for articles, sections and other subdivisions
of the code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to articles, sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the
code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing article or section or other
subdivision numbers;
(4) Change the words “this ordinance” or words of the same meaning to “this chapter,” “this
article,” “this section,” “this subsection,” etc., as the case may be; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance
material inserted into the code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or
effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the code.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.01.009 General penalty for violations of code; continuing violations
(a) Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be
unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in this code or such ordinance the doing of any act is
required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the
violation of any such provision of this code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding
five hundred dollars ($500.00).
(b) A fine or penalty for the violation of a rule, ordinance or police regulation that governs fire safety, zoning
or public health and sanitation, including the dumping of refuse, may not exceed two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(c) Unless otherwise specifically stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is
punishable by a fine that does not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) does not require a culpable mental
state, and a culpable mental state is hereby not required to prove any such offense. Unless otherwise specifically
stated in this code, any violation of this code or of any ordinance that is punishable by a fine that exceeds five
hundred dollars ($500.00) shall require a culpable mental state.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the
laws of the state.
(e) Unless otherwise stated in this code or in any ordinance, each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(f) In the event that any such violation is designated as a nuisance under the provisions of this code, such
nuisance may be summarily abated by the city. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue
other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law references–Penalties for violations, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 54.001; penalty for class C misdemeanor,
V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 12.23; requirement of culpability, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 6.02.
ARTICLE 1.02 ADMINISTRATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.02.001 Additional city policies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/508
(a) The following policies have been determined to be inappropriate for inclusion in this Code of Ordinances:
(1) Fair Park policies;
(2) Airport policies;
(3) Civic center policies;
(4) Police procedure and policy manual;
(5) Emergency medical services (EMS) policies and procedures;
(6) Economic development board policies;
(7) Library policies;
(8) Personnel policies manual;
(1996 Code, art. 1.1600)
(9) Code of conduct and ethics policy; and (Ordinance 2016-09-12(7A) adopted 9/12/16)
(10) Code of conduct - procurement policy. (Ordinance 2018-04-09(8B) adopted 4/9/18)
(b) Such policies are, however, specifically saved from repeal and shall be maintained on file in the office of
the city secretary.
(c) Each of these policies shall be subject to amendment by resolution adopted by a majority vote of the city
council.
(1996 Code, art. 1.1600)
Sec. 1.02.002 Annexation plan
It is the intention of the city not to annex property or area which is not already excepted from the annexation
plan requirements of Texas Local Government Code section 43.052. (Ordinance adopted 5/8/00)
State law reference–Municipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 43.
Sec. 1.02.003 Copying charges for public records
The following service charge for copying governmental and public records shall be as follows:
(1) For readily available information on standard size pages (up to 8-1/2" x 14"), the copying
charge shall be the amount shown in the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code.
(2) For information that is not readily available, the copying charge shall be the amount shown in
the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code plus actual labor costs incurred by the city in
providing the requested information. In this section, “not readily available” shall mean that the pages
to be photocopied are located in a remote storage facility or in two or more separate buildings that are
not physically connected with each other.
(3) In addition to the copy charge, the costs of materials, labor, and overhead shall be charged for
photocopy requests that exceed fifty pages.
(4) In addition, the city may also add any postal expenses that may be necessary to transmit the
reproduced documents to the requesting party.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/508
(5) The city secretary shall establish the copying or reproduction charge for nonstandard sized
pages or documents (maps, books, etc.).
(Ordinance 04-02-09 (10), sec. 1, adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Charges for providing copies of public information, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 552.261 et seq.
Secs. 1.02.004–1.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Payments by Credit Card or Check*
Sec. 1.02.041 Authorized
(a) The city council hereby authorizes the treasurer of the city and his or her designees to accept payment by
credit card of the fees, fines, court costs, and other charges set forth the fee schedule in appendix A of this code
(hereinafter “bill”).
(b) The city council hereby authorizes the treasurer of the city and his or her designees to accept payment by
check of any fees, fines, court costs, or other charges of the city, except as otherwise provided in the city's
ordinances.
(Ordinance adopted 11/10/03, sec. 2 (1.1901))
Sec. 1.02.042 Processing fee for payment by credit card
A processing fee is hereby established and shall be paid by every person who pays a bill by credit card. The
processing fee shall be five percent (5%) of the bill. (Ordinance adopted 11/10/03, sec. 2 (1.1902))
Sec. 1.02.043 Service charge for dishonored credit cards and checks
(a) If, for any reason, a payment by credit card is not honored by the credit card company on which the funds
are drawn, a service charge as provided in appendix A to this code, in addition to the processing fee and bill,
shall be collected.
(b) If, for any reason, a payment by check is not honored by the bank on which the funds are drawn, a service
charge as provided in appendix A to this code, in addition to the bill, shall be collected.
(Ordinance 12-08-03-2 adopted 1/12/04)
Sec. 1.02.044 Effect of dishonored credit card or check; presumption of nonpayment
(a) If a payment by check or credit card is dishonored, the bill will be presumed to have never been paid, and
the person responsible for making the payment will be subject to any consequences or penalties set forth in this
Code of Ordinances or state law for nonpayment of the bill. If payment for a license or permit is dishonored, the
permit or license shall be deemed to have never been issued.
(b) The treasurer and his or her designees shall not accept payments by credit card or check for one year,
beginning on the date of the second dishonored payment, from any person whose credit card or check has been
dishonored twice for bill payments. The period for not accepting payment by credit card or check shall begin on
the date of the second dishonored payment and end one year later.
(Ordinance adopted 11/10/03, sec. 2 (1.1904))
Sec. 1.02.045 Disposition of fees and charges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/508
The treasurer and his or her designees shall deposit the processing fees and service charges in the general fund of
the municipality. (Ordinance adopted 11/10/03, sec. 2 (1.1905))
Secs. 1.02.046–1.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Claims Against City*
Sec. 1.02.071 Council consideration required prior to suit
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein
shall aver and prove that previous to the filing of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for
redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that the same was by vote of the city
council refused. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1502)
Sec. 1.02.072 Service of notices
All notices required by this division shall be effectuated by serving them upon the city secretary or city manager
at 505 W. Cameron, Rockdale, Texas, 76567, and all such notices shall be effective only when actually received
in the office of the person named above. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1503; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.02.073 Waiver of provisions
Neither the mayor, a city council member, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority
to waive any of the provisions of this division. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1504)
Sec. 1.02.074 Notice to be sworn
The written notice required under this division shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries
or by someone authorized by him to do so on his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required herein shall
not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the city council as
a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1505)
Sec. 1.02.075 Exceptions
The notice provisions required herein shall not be applicable in cases in which the plaintiff can demonstrate
good cause, actual notice by the city, or civil rights violations. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1506)
ARTICLE 1.03 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND CIVIL DEFENSE*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.03.001–1.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Management Program
Sec. 1.03.031 Organization
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in
accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management council may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/508
(c) The director shall be responsible for a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city
and for carrying out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this division. He/she may delegate authority for
execution of these duties to the council, but ultimate responsibility for such execution shall remain with the
director.
(d) The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and
employees of the city so designated by the director in the emergency management plan, as well as organized
volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such officers and
employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1201)
Sec. 1.03.032 Powers and duties of emergency management director
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) Conduct an ongoing survey of actual or potential hazards which threaten life and property
within the city and an ongoing program of identifying [and requiring or recommending the
implementation of measures which] would tend to prevent the occurrence or reduce the impact of
such hazards if a disaster did occur.
(2) Supervision of the development and approval of an emergency management plan for the city,
and shall recommend for adoption by the city council all mutual aid arrangements deemed necessary
for the implementation of such plan.
(3) Authority to declare a local state of disaster. The declaration may not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven (7) days except by or with the consent of the city council. Any order
or proclamation declaring, continuing, or terminating a local state of disaster shall be given prompt
and general publicity and shall be filed promptly with the city secretary.
(4) Issuance of necessary proclamations, regulations or directives which are necessary for carrying
out the purposes of this division. Such proclamations, regulations, or directives shall be disseminated
promptly by means calculated to bring the contents to the attention of the general public and, unless
circumstances attendant on the disaster prevent or impede, promptly filed with the city secretary.
(5) Direction and control of the operations of the city emergency management organization as well
as the training of emergency management personnel.
(6) Determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the
emergency management organization of the city.
(7) Maintenance of liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional or federal
emergency management organizations.
(8) Marshaling of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city
to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(9) Supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the
representatives of the state and of other local political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and
execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which the city is located and with
other municipalities within the county, for the county-wide coordination of emergency management
efforts.
(10) Supervision of, and final authorization for, the procurement of all necessary supplies and
equipment, including acceptance of private contributions which may be offered for the purpose of
improving emergency management within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/508
(11) Authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for
public shelter and other purposes.
(12) Survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could
be used during a disaster, as provided for herein.
(13) Other requirements as specified in the Texas Disaster Act of 1975 (V.T.C.A., Government
Code, chapter 418).
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1202)
Sec. 1.03.033 Emergency management plan
A comprehensive emergency management plan shall be developed and maintained in a current state. The plan
shall set forth the form of the organization, establish and designate divisions and functions, assign
responsibilities, tasks, duties, and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of
this division. As provided by state law, the plan shall follow the standards and criteria established by the state
division of emergency management. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall
conform to the recommendations of the state division of emergency management. When approved, it shall be the
duty of all departments and agencies to perform the functions assigned by the plan and to maintain their portion
of the plan in a current state of readiness at all times. The emergency management plan shall be considered
supplementary to this division and have the effect of law during the time of a disaster. The 1987 Milam County
Emergency Plan shall be adopted and any future revisions shall be adopted by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1203)
Sec. 1.03.034 Interjurisdictional program
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge and the mayors of the other cities in the county in
the formation of an emergency management council of the county, and shall have the authority to cooperate in
the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and in the appointment of a joint emergency management
council, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a county-wide program of emergency management
insofar as said program may affect the city. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1204)
Sec. 1.03.035 Override
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this division shall be in
effect, they shall supersede and override all existing ordinances, orders, rules, and regulations insofar as the
latter may be inconsistent therewith. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1205)
Sec. 1.03.036 Liability
This division is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace,
health, and safety, and neither the city, the agents and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver,
firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out,
complying with or attempting to comply with any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the
provisions of this division shall be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of said activity. Any
person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to
the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or
parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice
enemy attack or natural or man-made disaster shall, together with his successors in interest, if any, not be civilly
liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license,
privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1206)
Sec. 1.03.037 Commitment of funds
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/508
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management
activity authorized by this division without prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any
right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city council
unless during a declared disaster. During a declared disaster, the mayor may expend and/or commit public funds
of the city when deemed prudent and necessary for the protection of health, life, or property. (1996 Code, sec.
1.1207)
Sec. 1.03.038 Offenses; penalty
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency
management organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this division, or to do
any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this division.
(b) It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other
means of identification as a member of the emergency management organization of the city, unless authority to
do so has been granted to such person by the proper officials.
(c) Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a warning signal, or
the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division and shall be subject to the
penalties imposed by this division.
(d) Convictions for violations of the provisions of this division shall be punishable by fine as provided for in
the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1208)
ARTICLE 1.04 RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 1.04.001 Definition of city records
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape,
electronic media, or other information-recording media, regardless or physical form or characteristic and
regardless of whether public access to it is open or restricted under the laws of the state, created or received by
the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law or in the transaction of public business are hereby
declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained, and disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of this article or procedures authorized by it and in no other manner. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1401)
Sec. 1.04.002 Additional definitions
Department head. The officer who by ordinance, order, or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the
city that creates or receives records.
Essential record. Any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of operations of the city in
an emergency or disaster, to the re-creation of the legal and financial status of the city, or to the protection and
fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record. Any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as
permanent.
Records control schedule. A document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer
listing the records maintained by the city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that
the records management program may require.
Records liaison officers. The persons designated under section 1.04.010 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/508
Records management. The application of management techniques to the creation, maintenance, retention,
preservation, and disposal of records for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of
recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the management of filing and
information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and spaceeffective
storage of inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and
correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and other records storage systems.
Records management committee. The committee established in section 1.04.006 of this article.
Records management officer. The person designated in section 1.04.005 of this article.
Records management plan. The plan developed under section 1.04.007 of this article.
Retention period. The minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording, or receipt of a record, or the
fulfillment of certain actions associated with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1402)
Sec. 1.04.003 City records declared public property
All municipal records as defined in section 1.04.001 of this article are hereby declared to be the property of the
city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his or her position, any personal or property right to
such records, even though he or she may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction,
removal from files, or use of such records is prohibited. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1403)
Sec. 1.04.004 Policy
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical, and effective controls over
the creation, distribution, organization, maintenance, use, and disposition of all municipal records through a
comprehensive system of integrated procedures for the management of records from their creation to their
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Texas Local Government Records Act and accepted
records management practice. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1404)
Sec. 1.04.005 Designation of records management officer
The city manager shall designate an individual, employed by the city, to serve as records management officer of
the city. In the event of the resignation, retirement, dismissal, or removal by action of the city manager of the
individual so designated, the city manager shall promptly designate another individual to serve as records
management officer. The individual designated as records management officer shall file his or her name with the
director and librarian of the state library within thirty days of the date of designation, as provided by state law.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1405)
Sec. 1.04.006 Records management committee
(a) A records management committee consisting of the following positions is hereby established. The
committee shall consist of:
(1) The city attorney;
(2) The city manager;
(3) The city secretary;
(4) The city librarian;
(5) The superintendent of streets;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/508
(6) The chief of police;
(7) The superintendent of water/sewer;
(8) The city judge; and
(9) The tax assessor-collector.
(b) The committee shall:
(1) Assist the records management officer in the development of policies and procedures governing
the records management program;
(2) Review the performance of the program on a regular basis and propose changes and
improvements if needed;
(3) Review and approve records control schedules submitted by the records management officer;
(4) Give final approval to the destruction of records in accordance with approved records control
schedules; and
(5) Actively support and promote the records management program throughout the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1406)
Sec. 1.04.007 Records management plan to be developed; approval of plan; authority of plan
(a) The records management officer and the records management committee shall develop a records
management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain policies and procedures
designed to reduce the cost and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential
records of the municipal government, and to properly preserve those records of the municipal government that
are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management officer to carry out his or
her duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city council, the records management plan shall be binding on all offices,
departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus, boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and
records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed, or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head
do not exempt the department head or the records in the departments head's care from the application of this
article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the department head as a basis
for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1407)
Sec. 1.04.008 Duties of records management officer
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its
implementation;
(2) Plan, formulate, and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards, and procedures;
(3) In cooperation with department heads, identify essential records and establish a disaster plan
for each municipal government office and department to ensure maximum availability of the records
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/508
in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense;
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of
the municipal government;
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies;
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, [establish] a uniform filing system and forms design
and control system for the city;
(7) Provide records management advice and assistance to all municipal departments by preparation
of a manual or manuals of procedure and policy and by on-site consultation;
(8) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the state library and
archives commission to determine if the records management program and the municipal
government's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations;
(9) Disseminate to the city council/city manager and department heads information concerning
state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records;
(10) Instruct records liaison officers and other personnel in policies and procedures of the records
management plan and their duties in the records management program;
(11) Direct records liaison officers or other personnel in the conduct of records inventories in
preparation for the development of records control schedules as required by state law and this article;
(12) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction, or other disposition of
the municipal government [records] is carried out in accordance with the policies and procedures of
the records management program and the requirements of state law;
(13) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control
schedules, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and
space savings as the result of such disposal or disposition;
(14) Report annually to the city manager for submission to the city council on the implementation
of the records management plan in each department of the city, including summaries of the statistical
and fiscal data compiled under subsection (13); and
(15) Bring to the attention of the city manager noncompliance by the department heads or other
municipal personnel with the policies and procedures of the records management program or the
Local Government Records Act.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1408)
Sec. 1.04.009 Duties and responsibilities of department heads
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures
established in the city for the efficient and economical management of records and in carrying out the
requirements of this article;
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs, and
duties for which the department head and his or her staff are responsible; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/508
(3) Maintain the records in his or her care and carry out their preservation, microfilming,
destruction, or other disposition only in accordance with the policies and procedures of the records
management program of the city government and the requirements of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1409)
Sec. 1.04.010 Designation of records liaison officers
Each department head shall designate a member of his or her staff to serve as records liaison officer for the
implementation of the records management program in the department. Persons designated as records liaison
officers shall be thoroughly familiar with all the records created and maintained by the department and shall
have full access to all records of the city maintained by the department. In the event of the resignation,
retirement, dismissal, or removal by the action of the department head of a person designated as records liaison
officer, the department head shall promptly designate another person to fill the vacancy. A department head may
serve as records liaison officer for his or her department. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1410)
Sec. 1.04.011 Duties and responsibilities of records liaison officers
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, records liaison officers shall:
(1) Conduct or supervise the conduct of inventories of the records of the department in preparation
for the development of records control schedules;
(2) In cooperation with the records management officer, coordinate and implement the policies and
procedures of the records management program in their departments; and
(3) Disseminate information to department staff concerning the records management program.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1411)
Sec. 1.04.012 Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads and records liaison officers, shall
prepare records control schedules on a department-by-department basis listing all records created or received by
the department and the retention period for each record. Records control schedules shall also contain such
information regarding the disposition of municipal government records as the records management plan may
require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management
officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state
and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department and the records
management program of the city.
(c) Before its adoption, a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by
the department head and members of the records management committee.
(d) Before its adoption, a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director
and librarian as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to
make it acceptable for filing. The records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the
director and librarian.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1412)
Sec. 1.04.013 Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/508
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 1.04.007
shall be implemented by department heads and records liaison officers according to the policies and procedures
of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule may be destroyed unless an
open records request is pending on the record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending lawsuit,
or the department head requests in writing to the records management committee that the record be retained for
an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the
destruction must be obtained by the records management officer from the records management committee.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1413)
Sec. 1.04.014 Destruction of unscheduled records
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction
has been approved in the same manner as a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records
management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian an approved destruction
authorization request. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1414)
Sec. 1.04.015 Records center
A records center, developed pursuant to the plan required by section 1.04.007, shall be under the direct control
and supervision of the records management officer. Policies and procedures regulating the operations and use of
the records center shall be contained in the records management plan developed under section 1.04.007. (1996
Code, sec. 1.1415)
Sec. 1.04.016 Micrographics
Unless a micrographics program in a department is specifically exempted by the order of the city council, all
microfilming of records will be centralized and under the direct supervision of the records management officer.
The records management plan will establish policies and procedures for the microfilming of the municipal
government records, including policies to ensure that all microfilming is done in accordance with standards and
procedures for the microfilming of local government records established in rules of the state library and archives
commission. The plan will also establish criteria for determining the eligibility of records for microfilming, and
protocols for ensuring that a microfilming program that is exempted from the centralized operations is,
nevertheless, subject to periodic review by the records management officer as to cost-effectiveness,
administrative efficiency, and compliance with commission rules. (1996 Code, sec. 1.1416)
ARTICLE 1.05 ISSUANCE OF CITATIONS BY NON-PEACE OFFICERS*
Sec. 1.05.001 Exclusions
(a) The authority, responsibility and duties of peace officers to issue citations pursuant to article 14.06(d) of
the Code of Criminal Procedure and/or section 543.003 of the Transportation Code is not obviated or in any way
eliminated by the provisions of this article.
(b) A citation issued pursuant to this article does not relate to the issuance of a citation by a peace officer
pursuant to article 14.06(d) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or section 543.003 of the Transportation Code.
(Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 3 (1), adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. 1.05.002 Authority to issue
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/508
Pursuant to this article, and the scope of their assigned duties, a citation may be issued by any registered code
enforcement officer of the city for offenses alleged to occur on or after the date of enactment. (Ordinance 2011-
05-09 (6A), sec. 3 (2), adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. 1.05.003 Form and contents
A citation issued under this article must be in a form approved by the municipal court clerk that includes the
following information:
(1) The name, address, date of birth, or driver's license number and physical description, and
telephone number of the person cited;
(2) The offense for which the person is charged;
(3) The date and location of the offense;
(4) An appearance date;
(5) A statement requiring the person receiving the citation to appear at municipal court on or
before the appearance date indicated on the citation;
(6) A statement of the person's promise to respond to the citation, pursuant to article 27.14 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, by the appearance date indicated on the citation, including a place for
the person cited to provide the person's signature; and
(7) The signature of the person issuing the citation.
(Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 3 (3), adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. 1.05.004 Pleading subsequent to issuance
(a) All pleas arising from the issuance of a citation under this article shall be made pursuant to article 27.14 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure.
(b) Refusal of the person cited to sign a citation issued under this article shall in no way affect the validity of
the issued citation.
(Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 3 (4), adopted 5/9/11)
Sec. 1.05.005 Related offenses and penalty
(a) Violation of promise to appear. A person issued a citation as authorized by this article commits an offense
if the person fails to appear or enter a plea pursuant to section 1.05.004 on or before the appearance date
indicated on the citation.
(b) Interference with or obstruction of issuance. A person commits an offense if the person interferes with or
obstructs the issuance of a citation under this article.
(c) Providing false information. A person commits an offense if the person gives a false or fictitious name,
address, or other information to an individual authorized to issue a citation under this article.
(d) Penalty. A violation under this section is a misdemeanor offense punishable upon conviction by a fine not
to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Each day shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2011-05-09 (6A), sec. 3 (5), adopted 5/9/11)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/508
ARTICLE 1.06 DISCRIMINATION
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.06.001 Nondiscrimination policy
The city will comply with the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (P.L. 88-352) and subsequent amendments, and will not
discriminate in its policies because of race, color, creed, national origin, religion, sex or age. However, it must be
recognized that in observance of certain job classifications and performance of the duties of certain positions,
qualifications must be set that may limit or restrict in certain cases the field of applicants to those who qualify
for that particular position. It is also recognized, by virtue of certain state laws, that these restrictions be placed
on positions that require certain educational and experience qualifications. It is also the policy of the city to
comply with the Equal Employment Opportunity legislation and [the city] shall be cited as an equal opportunity
employer. (1996 Code, art. 8.600)
Secs. 1.06.002–1.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fair Housing*
Sec. 1.06.031 Fair Housing Standards
The city shall follow the provisions of the Texas Fair Housing Act as amended from time to time. (Ordinance
adopting Code)
ARTICLE 1.07 LIBRARY†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 1.07.001–1.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Library Board
Sec. 1.07.031 Created
A board, which shall be known as the library advisory board of the city is hereby created. Same shall consist of
nine (9) members. One (1) shall be the administrator of the city library (“librarian”) with eight (8) to be
appointed by the mayor on the advice and consent of the city council. Such members shall hold office for three
(3) years, upon creation of such board. The first three (3) members in order of appointment shall hold office for
three (3) years, the next three (3) members in order of appointment shall hold office for two (2) years, and the
other two (2) members shall hold office for one (1) year. Thereafter, three (3) members shall be appointed each
year. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as originally appointed except that such appointee shall serve
only during the unexpired term of the member whose place he takes. Members shall be eligible for
reappointment and shall be residents of the city and a qualified voter therein. Such members shall serve without
compensation, but shall be entitled to reimbursement for expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
Sec. 1.07.032 Duties; meetings
(a) It shall be the duty of such board to advise, recommend, and advocate for the library of the city. The board
supports the work of the library established on the tract of land conveyed by E. M. Scarbrough and R. H. Hicks
and known as the Lucy Hill Patterson Memorial Library (“library”).
(b) Such board may recommend general rules and regulations covering the operations of such department,
which shall be considered and approved by the city council. The board may appoint a budget and finance
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/508
committee to assist the librarian in the preparation of an annual budget for consideration and approval by the city
council.
(c) The board may recommend the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, furniture, and books and other items
needed in such library from time to time. Such recommendations shall be made to the city council for its
consideration and approval.
(d) Said board shall serve in an advisory capacity with the architect to be selected by the city council to draw
plans for the library in the event of any new construction which may be deemed necessary to provide library
services to people of this community.
(e) All formal meetings of the board shall be open to the public. The librarian shall assist such board but shall
not be entitled to a vote. The mayor of the city shall be an ex-officio member of such board but shall not vote
thereon.
(Ordinance 2016-04-11(8D) adopted 4/11/16)
ARTICLE 1.08 CIVIC CENTER
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.08.001 Department created
There is hereby created a civic center department for the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.201)
Sec. 1.08.002 Rates; deposit; contract stipulations
(a) Rates. Rates for use of the civic center are as provided in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(b) Amount of deposit; payment of deposit and rental fee. The deposit is as provided in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code. The entire deposit and rental fee is to be paid prior to use, or if use is on a weekend or
holiday, to be paid before 5:00 p.m. on the last working day prior to the usage.
(c) Stipulations to be added to contract.
(1) In the event of damage in excess of the cleaning and damage deposit, the person signing the
rental contract will be responsible and agree to pay the additional expenses for cleanup and/or
repairs.
(2) A liability awareness statement shall be added to the contract pertaining to responsibility for
accident, injury or damages occurring at the civic center or en route after the function, resulting from
consumption of alcohol served at the civic center.
(Ordinance adopted 3/11/96)
Secs. 1.08.003–1.08.030 Reserved
Division 2. Civic Center Board
Sec. 1.08.031 Created
There is hereby created a civic center board for the city, which initially shall consist of twenty-two (22) members
to be appointed by the mayor on the advice and consent of the city council. The initial board shall hold office
until such time as the civic center is completely constructed and put into operation. Thereafter, the civic center
board shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor on the advice and consent of the city
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/508
council. Of the nine (9) appointed members, three (3) shall serve for a period of one (1) year, three (3) for a
period of two (2) years, and three (3) for a period of three (3) years. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment for
unexpired terms only. The nine-member board shall be eligible for reappointment and shall be residents of the
city and qualified voters therein. Such members shall serve without compensation. (1996 Code, sec. 8.202)
Sec. 1.08.032 Powers and duties of initial board
The initial civic center board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To prepare and recommend to the city council a comprehensive plan for a civic center located
in the city, looking to the present and future development and growth of the city.
(2) To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time such changes in the plan or
any part thereof as may be deemed necessary by the city council or by the civic center board.
(3) To prepare and recommend to the city council from time to time plans and/or recommendations
for specific improvements pursuant to such plan.
(4) To arrange and conduct any form of publicity relative to its activities for the general purpose of
public understanding.
(5) To recommend to the city council the employment of necessary help, whose salaries, wages
and other necessary expenses shall be provided for by an adequate appropriation made by the city
council from public funds. If said civic center board shall deem it advisable to secure technical advice
or services, it may be done upon authority from the city council and appropriations by the city
council therefor.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.203)
Sec. 1.08.033 Subsequent powers and duties of board
After completion of the construction of the civic center, the nine-member civic center board herein provided for
shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) To assist the city in the maintenance and operation of the civic center.
(2) To recommend the equipment, furnishings, fixtures, furniture and other items needed in such
civic center from time to time. Such recommendation shall be made to the city council for its
consideration and approval.
(3) To recommend one or more employees, who shall be appointed by the mayor subject to the
advice and consent of the city council, to operate the day-to-day business of the civic center. It shall
also recommend the salary to be paid to such person or persons, and such recommendation shall be
made to the city council for its consideration and approval.
(4) Such civic center board shall recommend general rules and regulations covering the operation
of such civic center, which shall be considered and approved by the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.204)
Sec. 1.08.034 Submission of budget
The civic center shall operate on the same fiscal year as the city. The civic center board shall submit its annual
budget to the city council for all anticipated revenues and expenditures. Said budget shall be submitted no less
than one (1) month prior to the expiration of the fiscal year for the city council's consideration and approval.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.205)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/508
Sec. 1.08.035 Recommendation of rules and regulations
The civic center board shall recommend general rules and regulations covering the operation of such civic
center, which shall be considered and approved by the city council. (1996 Code, sec. 8.206)
Sec. 1.08.036 Open meetings; mayor to be ex-officio member
All formal meetings of the civic center board shall be open to the public. The mayor of the city shall be an exofficio
member of such board but shall not vote therein. (1996 Code, sec. 8.207)
ARTICLE 1.09 PARKS AND RECREATION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 1.09.001 City property; removal of trash
Damage to, or removal of, city property or equipment from city parks is prohibited. All trash must be either
removed from the park or placed in trash receptacles at the park. (Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 5, adopted
9/10/12)
Sec. 1.09.002 Hours of operation
(a) All city parks open at dawn daily and close at 11:00 pm daily and all persons must vacate the park by that
time with the exception of Fair Park during the annual Rockdale Fair. Any peace officer licensed by the state is
authorized to remove any person who refuses to leave the premises when asked to do so by the officer.
(Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 6, adopted 9/10/12)
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person, company, corporation, group or association to use equipment for
skateboarding, in-line skating or BMX recreation in a city park or on property owned by the city after dark on
any night of the week. Such presence shall remain prohibited until dawn of the following day, and the stated
hours of use shall not pertain to any council-approved scheduled event. The above-stated hours may be adjusted
or changed by the city manager, after presenting sufficient reasoning to the council for the change.
(c) Any person, company, corporation, group or association found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to punishment by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this
code.
(Ordinance 2010-03-08 (5B), sec. 2, adopted 3/8/10; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 1.09.003 Prohibited items and activities
The following are prohibited at all city parks. A violation may result in denial of future reservation requests by
the applicant or responsible party:
(1) Excessive noise.
(2) Fireworks.
(3) Open fires except in barbeque grills.
(4) Harm to wildlife.
(5) Abandoned vehicles.
(6) Dumping.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/508
(7) Destruction of vegetation.
(8) Sound amplification. It shall be a violation for any person to engage in using sound
amplification equipment of any kind without consent of the city manager.
(9) Motor vehicles. It shall be a violation for any person to operate or park any motor vehicle,
including but not limited to motorcycles, motor scooters or mini bikes, in or through any park, except
in designated parking areas only. Vehicles parked in unauthorized areas are subject to towing at the
owner's expense.
(Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 7, adopted 9/10/12)
Sec. 1.09.004 Municipal swimming pool
(a) No child under the age of seven (7) years will be admitted unless accompanied by a parent, or other adult
over twenty-one (21) years of age, for supervision. (1996 Code, art. 1.900)
(b) A fee shall be charged for admission to and use of the municipal swimming pool pursuant to the fee
schedule set forth in appendix A of this code.
(c) A fee shall be charged for rental of the pool pursuant to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this
code. In addition to the rental fee, lifeguard expenses shall be paid by the person renting the pool. For 10 to 20
persons, a minimum of one American Red Cross certified lifeguard must be on duty at all times; for 21 to 40
persons, a minimum of two American Red Cross certified lifeguards must be on duty at all times.
(Ordinance adopted 5/15/03, sec. 3)
(d) The council designates the responsibility of implementation of rules and regulations to insure citizen and
employee safety, minimize liability, maintain appropriate care of property and equipment and establishing hours
of use to the city manager or city manager's designee. (1996 Code, art. 1.900)
Sec. 1.09.005 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions or terms of this article, shall be subject to the same penalty as
provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code and upon conviction, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each and every day
on which a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 8, adopted
9/10/12)
Secs. 1.09.006–1.09.030 Reserved
Division 2. Pavilions at Veterans Park and Fair Park
Sec. 1.09.031 Availability
Reservation of pavilions at Veterans Park and Fair Park is available on a first-come, first-served basis; however,
reservation of Fair Park during the Rockdale Fair is not allowed and reservation of the pavilion at Veterans Park
during the Rockdale Tennis Open is not allowed. (Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 3, adopted 9/10/12)
Sec. 1.09.032 Reservation procedures
A reservation request form must be submitted to the city manager at least one week prior to the scheduled event.
The city may deny a reservation request based upon the applicant's past misuse of city facilities and/or failure to
use said pavilions after an approved request. Once the reservation is approved, the applicant or responsible party
must have a copy of the approved form with him on the date(s) and time(s) of the event. Misrepresentation by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/508
the applicant as to the intent, type, or nature of activity to be held at the facility is grounds for denying future
reservation requests from said applicant. No person or organization may reserve a pavilion more than one time
each calendar quarter for three days each time. Nothing herein prevents the use of a pavilion without
reservations; however, any person with reservations is entitled to exclusive use of the facility over a person
without a reservation. (Ordinance 2012-09-10(6B), sec. 4, adopted 9/10/12)
ARTICLE 1.10 CEMETERY*
Sec. 1.10.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to effectively maintain all sections of the city cemeteries and to provide maximum
service in a graceful environment.
Sec. 1.10.002 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
Cemetery. A cemetery within the city limits and owned by the city.
City. The City of Rockdale, Milam County, Texas.
Contractor. Any individual, association or corporation, other than the city, engaged in the undertaking or funeral
business, the placing, erecting or repairing of any memorial, or performing any work on cemetery grounds.
Designated agent. That person or business entity designated by resolution of the city council to be the city's
agent under this article. Nothing herein prohibits the city from naming more than one designated agent for
purposes of this article.
Disinterment. The unearthing of the remains of a deceased human being.
Interment. The entombment or burial of the remains of a deceased human being.
Memorial. Any marker, monument, headstone, footstone or other structure placed on any lot or space for
identification or in memory of the interred.
Monument. Those markers placed on the head line of a grave space or spaces.
Owner. The owner of record or purchaser of a space or lot, or the designated representative or successor in
interest.
Space. The area normally designated for a single or double-stacked interment.
Sec. 1.10.003 Management and control of cemeteries
(a) All city-owned and operated cemeteries and all the facilities and equipment located therein shall be under
the management and control of the city manager and shall be part of the parks department of the city. The
director of public works shall be responsible to the city manager for administration and implementation of the
policies established by the city for the operation and management of a cemeteries. The terms “authorized
representative of city” and “city official” shall mean the director of public works or his/her designee as
designated in writing.
(b) The city shall provide for the continuing care, maintenance, operation, and improvements to the
cemeteries. In general, this shall include: road construction and maintenance, mowing, pruning, landscaping,
removal of plat material, policing of the grounds, level graves for easy maintenance, pest control, and other such
maintenance as may be necessary to keep the cemeteries presentable at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/508
(c) Cemetery care does not include the purchase, erection, repair, or replacement of markers, headstones,
monuments, curbing, maintenance of trees, shrubs, flowers, or any other items on a grave space. Use of city
water in city cemeteries shall be at the discretion of the city manager.
Sec. 1.10.004 General
(a) City cemeteries are set apart for the burial of the residents of this community and the surrounding area
subject to the rules established in this article, this code, and any applicable federal and state laws.
(b) All spaces in the cemeteries owned and operated by the city shall be conveyed to the purchaser by
warranty deed for the purpose of burial only. The rights of the purchaser therein are subject to such rules and
ordinances as may be enacted or amended from time to time by the city council.
(c) The rules and regulations herein contained are designed for the protection of the rights of all grave space
owners. The rules adopted have been determined to be reasonable, necessary, and incidental to achieve the
aforestated objectives.
(d) All burials conducted by funeral homes outside of the city must be approved through the city manager or
Phillips and Luckey Funeral Home.
(e) All grave services performed within city cemeteries shall comply with state laws and shall be in
compliance with this section and all other sections of this article.
(f) City cemeteries are divided into sections, each section containing lots, generally each lot being twenty feet
(20') feet by thirteen feet six inches (13'6") in size, and each lot generally containing four (4) grave spaces. Each
grave space shall be five feet (5') by thirteen feet six inches (13'6") in size.
(g) Each grave space shall contain only one (1) casket. A grave owner may elect to bury up to, but no more
than, two (2) urns per grave space. Urns shall not be placed in a grave space which contains a casket.
(h) The cemeteries shall provide a pauper's burial area and a baby land area where it is determined necessary
and appropriate.
(i) Baby land plots are three feet (3') by six feet (6').
(j) Records giving full data on all interments shall be kept in the city files, shall be the official record, and
shall be open to authorized persons. The data is to include the section, lot, and grave location and the name, age,
and the date of interment of each grave occupant.
(k) The city shall establish final grade to match the surrounding area on spaces after an appropriate amount of
time has lapsed after burial to allow for settling.
Sec. 1.10.005 The sale of lots
(a) Lot sales will be managed by the city or its appointed agent.
(b) All cemetery spaces must be paid in full before an interment can be approved by the city.
(c) The city manager or his/her designate is hereby authorized and directed to make, execute, and deliver all
deeds conveying lots or portions thereof to the purchasers of same. Deeds may be delivered to purchaser only
upon full payment of the purchase price, which must be paid prior to interment. All deeds so conveying lots or
portions thereof within city cemeteries shall be subject to the terms of this article.
(d) Baby land plots are provided at no cost. Pauper gravesites are provided at no cost so long as monuments
are no larger than one foot (1') by two foot (2') by six inches (6") placed upon the plot. Subsequent placement of
monuments larger than the aforementioned size will be evidence that a fee to purchase the burial plot can be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/508
afforded and therefore shall be assessed for the burial plot. Approval must be obtained from the city manager or
his/her agent prior to placement of any marker, headstone, or monument in Pauper or Baby Land sections.
Sec. 1.10.006 Fees and permits
(a) The fees are as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(b) No person, firm, or corporation shall perform grave digging services in city cemeteries without first
having obtained a permit from the city secretary. Such person, firm, or corporation shall make application that
shall include the following:
(1) Name of the person making application, name of business, name of owner of business, and
address of business.
(2) Proof of general liability insurance for at least three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00).
(c) No person or contractor will be allowed to construct curbing in city cemeteries without first obtaining a
permit from the city secretary.
Sec. 1.10.007 Public street; speed limit
(a) Automobiles, trucks and other vehicles shall not be driven through the cemetery grounds at a speed greater
than 5 miles per hour and must, at all times, be kept on paved or gravel streets. Exemption shall be made for
city-owned vehicles or contractors of the city performing maintenance at the cemetery including tree and shrub
removal or installation, and licensed monument contractors setting grave markers.
(b) No person shall be permitted to enter or leave cemetery grounds by vehicle except by established
entrances and exits. All applicable state and local vehicle traffic laws and ordinances shall continue in full force
and effect in all cemeteries.
Sec. 1.10.008 Rights of ingress and egress; removal of objects
(a) The city reserves the right to enlarge, reduce, replat or change the boundaries or grading of the cemeteries
as it deems appropriate. The city also reserves unto itself, and those lawfully entitled thereto, a perpetual right of
ingress and egress over, around and through lots for the purpose of passage to and from other lots, and to
accomplish all necessary maintenance and preservation of said lots.
(b) The city reserves the right to enter upon any lot and remove any objectionable thing that may have been
placed there contrary to these rules and regulations.
Sec. 1.10.009 Plants, decorations and containers
(a) The planting of any type of horticultural product shall be prohibited without prior approval of the city
manager or his/her designate. Those individuals receiving permission to plant horticultural products in the
cemeteries shall hold the city harmless in the event the plantings die or are damaged. Cut flowers or artificial
flowers may be used at any time if placed in a vase incorporated into the design of the monument. No trees shall
be planted on lots or city property unless written permission has been obtained from the city manager.
(b) Holders such as clay or plastic pots, wire, frames, etc., containing flowers or other decorations may be
removed as soon as the flowers or decorations fade or wither, and the right is reserved by the city to make such
removal. Any artificial plants or flowers shall be removed no later than 90 days after the date they are placed on
a grave.
(c) Placing of potted plants, cut flowers or baskets is permitted adjacent to the headstone only on special
occasions. To improve the appearance and to aid in maintenance of the cemeteries, all potted plants, flowers and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/508
baskets will be removed from graves when they become wilted or unsightly and will be disposed of. A saddle
arrangement may also be place on this type of marker, headstone, or monument.
(d) If any existing tree, shrub, or plant situated on any space shall become detrimental, unsightly or impede
access to adjacent spaces, walks or roads, the city may prune or remove in whole or in part said material, and the
city's decision to remove and/or prune shall be final.
(e) All work on the spaces will be done by the employees of the city, except when permission is otherwise
granted for individuals to plant, and then the work will be inspected and approved by the city.
(f) Coverings and ledgers shall be permitted in city cemeteries upon the approval of the city manager or
his/her designate. For the purpose of this article, a covering means any material other than turf that may be
placed over the grave. A ledger is any marker, headstone, or monument that may be placed in such a way as to
cover the grave space.
Sec. 1.10.010 Vandalism
It shall be unlawful to vandalize any cemetery property, memorials or graves, and anyone apprehended doing so
shall be subject to prosecution according to local and/or state laws.
Sec. 1.10.011 Sale or transfer of property
(a) The sale, transfer, or assignment of any space in the municipal cemeteries by any owner or purchaser shall
not be binding upon the city until the sale has been approved in writing by the city manager or his/her designate,
and a new deed containing the approval of the city manager from the seller to the new purchaser is executed and
delivered to the city. This procedure is required in order that the city may at all times have a complete and
accurate record of all owners.
(b) The resale of lot(s) cannot be more than the original price paid or current price charged by the city,
whichever is greater.
(c) The sale, transfer, or assignment of any space exceeding eight (8) spaces must be approved in writing by
the city manager or his/her designate.
(d) The city manager or his/her designate may enter into contracts with prospective purchasers of cemetery
grave spaces. Such contracts shall not exceed twelve (12) equal payments made on a monthly basis consistently.
Should default occur in the timely payment of any installment, the purchaser shall forfeit all interest in any space
subject to the contract and shall forfeit all prior payments. Forfeited spaces may be placed for sale to other
purchasers.
(e) The city may, at its option, accept exchanges of interment rights when desired by owners, subject to prior
written approval of an authorized representative of the city. When such an exchange is made, the original
document conveying interment rights must be surrendered to the city, along with any other documentation which
the city may require.
Sec. 1.10.012 Structures
No structure of any kind, including but not limited to curbing, fencing, benches, flagpoles, etc., shall be
permitted upon any space or lot without the written permission of the city manager. An exception will be made
for those that were in place before the current policies and procedures were implemented. Monuments approved
by the city are exempt from this provision.
Sec. 1.10.013 Items prohibited
No glass containers of any type shall be permitted in the cemetery. The buying, selling, possessing or use of
alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs in any cemetery is prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/508
Sec. 1.10.014 Hours cemetery open to public
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, company, corporation, group or association to enter or remain in any
city cemetery after dusk on any night of the week. Such presence shall remain prohibited until dawn of the
following day.
(b) Any person, company, corporation, group or association found to be in violation of this section shall be
subject to punishment by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this
code.
(c) The city reserves the right to close any cemetery or portion thereof on a temporary basis at any time
without prior notice to lot or space owners.
Sec. 1.10.015 Actions prohibited
(a) No person shall, in any cemetery, capture, attempt to capture, hunt, molest, injure, trap, administer or set
out any trap or harmful substance for any wild or domestic animal, reptile, bird, or fish, nor remove or have in
his possession the young, eggs, or nest of any animal, reptile or bird, except:
(1) With permission of the city; or
(2) Any person may kill on sight a reptile known to be deadly or poisonous.
(b) All persons are forbidden to hunt fowl or other animals in, or from within, the cemeteries.
(c) No money shall be paid by a corporation, partnership, or individual to any cemetery employee for any
service he/she may render to said corporation, partnership, or individual. The persons employed by the city shall
work solely for the city of with regard to functions at the cemetery. Visitors and plot owners shall refrain from
engaging or directing them to work on certain spaces or lots. All orders, inquiries or complaints about the
operation of the cemeteries shall be filed or directed to the public works department at its office.
(d) No person shall mark, deface, injure, displace, remove, or tamper with any cemetery property, structures
or grounds.
(e) No person shall construct or erect any kind of building or structure, permanent or temporary, within the
cemetery grounds unless he/she has first obtained permission from the city.
(f) No person shall dump, deposit or leave any bottles, glass, ashes, paper, boxes, cans, dirt, rubbish, waste,
garbage refuse or other debris upon cemetery grounds.
Sec. 1.10.016 Animals and pets
No person shall:
(1) Ride a horse or other animal in any cemetery. This prohibition shall not apply to a duly
authorized mounted police officer in the performance of his official duties.
(2) Permit any dog owned or possessed by him/her to run at-large, nor permit any such dog in a
cemetery unless it shall, at all times, be restricted or kept on a leash. This prohibition shall not apply
to a police service dog (K-9 units) while under the supervision of a duly authorized police officer in
the performance of official duties.
(3) Abandon any animal in any cemetery area.
Sec. 1.10.017 Memorial and monument regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/508
Regulations for the installation and care of memorials and monuments are as follows:
(1) Memorial and monument dealers shall abide by all rules and regulations of the cemeteries as
set forth by the city.
(2) For the protection of all lot owners, any person erecting or repairing memorials or monuments
must first obtain permission from the city official who manages the cemetery.
(3) The city reserves the right to ensure that the size of the monument and placement on the lot of
the memorial are in accordance with the rules set forth by the city.
(4) Memorial or monument dealers engaged in placing memorials or other structures are prohibited
from: scattering their construction materials and supplies over adjoining spaces, blocking roads or
walks, or leaving their materials and supplies on the ground longer than necessary. Damage done to
spaces, walks, trees, shrubs, or any other city property shall be repaired or replaced at the monument
dealer's expense to the satisfaction of the city.
(5) Work of any nature may be stopped if proper preparations have not been made; or when work
is being done in such a manner as to endanger life or property; or when there is evidence of
misrepresentation; or when work is not being executed according to specifications when a request on
the part of the city is disregarded; or when any person employed in the work violates any rule or
regulation of the cemetery.
(6) All interments shall have a memorial or monument reflecting, at a minimum, the full name of
the deceased and the date of death.
(7) All memorials or monuments shall be installed and maintained at the owner's expense.
(8) Grave space must be paid in full prior to placing a marker, headstone, or monument.
(9) Monuments, headstones, and markers:
(A) Monuments for single standard grave spaces shall not exceed four feet (4') in height,
forty-eight inches (48") in length and sixteen inches (16") in width. These maximum
dimensions shall also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. A base must be set a
minimum of four inches (4") above ground level. The back of the monument shall be set on the
head line of the space at equal distance from the side boundaries, and the monument shall be
located on undisturbed ground. At least one foot (1') in width of undisturbed ground shall be
left at the head of the grave plot for the erection of monuments. No more than one monument
shall be permitted per single space.
(B) Family or companion monuments shall only be placed on a minimum of two (2) standard
spaces, provided that such a monument shall not exceed four feet (4') in height; eighty-four
inches (84") in length; and sixteen inches (16") in width. These maximum dimensions shall
apply to any other design that incorporates a base. If such a base is included, it can be set at
least four inches (4") above ground.
(C) Monuments in “Baby Land” shall not exceed twenty-four inches (24") in height, sixteen
inches (16") in width, and thirty-two inches (32") in length. These maximum dimensions shall
also pertain to any design that incorporates a base. If such a base is included, it can be set at
least four inches (4") above ground. No more than one monument shall be permitted per single
grave space.
(D) Foot markers shall be set on the foot line of the space, and shall not exceed thirty inches
(30") in length, twelve inches (12") in height, and sixteen inches (16") in width. No marker
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/508
shall be set flush with the ground. Only one-foot marker per space shall be allowed. (This rule
shall not apply to historical markers that are duplicated in a family plot.)
(E) Curbing shall be permitted in city cemeteries. The curbing shall not be more than eight
inches (8") in width with a sixteen-inch (16") header. Multiple lot curbing over 25 feet may be
required to step down elevation on multiple lots. Before construction begins, one must obtain a
permit from the city and then the city or a designated agent of the city will mark all corners
before any work can begin.
(F) No cross fencing or plot perimeter fencing shall be permitted.
(G) Any ornaments or vases are to be permanently affixed to the monument or marker and
shall not exceed the maximum dimensions allowed for the monument or foot marker.
(H) Memorials or monuments shall be made of granite, marble, cast bronze installed on a
granite or concrete base, or slate.
(I) Surface vaults are permitted in city cemeteries with issuance of a permit by the city.
(J) Mausoleums and crypts may be built in city cemeteries but must be built and sealed by an
approved contractor in that field. Before construction begins, one must obtain a permit from the
city.
(10) Special consideration and a variance to the policies and procedures may be applied for by the
owner(s) of an area/plot with eight or more contiguous spaces. A plan and/or design must be
submitted to the city manager and the city cemetery advisory board for review and approval. The
owner(s) must have an approval/variance before commencing any work. The city must respond to the
variance request within 30 days.
Sec. 1.10.018 Memorial and monument foundation requirements
The following are rules and regulations concerning memorial or monument foundation requirements:
(1) Memorial or monument foundations shall be at least as wide and long as the base. The
foundation shall be at least six inches (6") in depth with footings on either end or post holes on either
end, whichever the monument company prefers.
(2) Each monument company shall set the memorial on a dry poured foundation. This will ensure
future ease of re-leveling.
(3) Another acceptable method that can be used is the prepoured concrete pad method which is
used by some companies. If this method is used, post holes with dry sacrete shall be required on
either end of the foundation. The post holes shall be at least six inches (6") deep. These are the
minimum requirements to be used.
(4) All costs of memorials, vases, city fees, future death dates on companion or pre-need
memorials, and maintenance of said memorials shall be at the lot owner's expense.
(5) No monument shall be erected without prior permission, and no monument shall be erected
without the completion of plotting the location by the city official in charge of the lots and
maintenance of the cemetery.
(6) The city official in charge of these duties shall meet with the monument company either prior
to or at the time of installing the memorial.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/508
(7) Visible foundations will not be required for flat marker sections, but shall have a concrete
foundation pad directly underneath the marker.
(8) Monument companies shall be responsible for the fabrication and installation of all foundations
required.
(9) A memorial will be required for all interments and shall be installed within a period of time not
exceeding two years from date of death.
Sec. 1.10.019 Rules and regulations
The following are rules and regulations for the interments, disinterments and reinterments within all cemeteries:
(1) Written authorization from the owner or purchaser of record of a lot or his/her designated
representative, successor in interest or other proper legal authority, will be required before an
interment or reinterment is allowed. In certain cases the city may require gravesites to be physically
located by the family or its representatives and authorization signed by the space owner or purchaser
or legal representative of the space owner or purchaser prior to opening the space for interment,
disinterment or reinterment. This gives the city or its contractor the right to open the grave space
selected by the family.
(2) Proper authorization as required by the state or any public authority having jurisdiction in the
matter must be presented to the city at the time an interment, disinterment or reinterment is effected.
The city shall not be liable for the accuracy of the data contained in said authorization or for the
identity of the person to be interred or disinterred.
(3) All interments, disinterments and reinterments shall be performed by a licensed funeral
director, the city employees or its contractors or other persons as provided by state and local laws. In
the event that a funeral home or its contractor is in arrears for charges owed to the city for cemetery
services performed by the city or cemetery-related fees and permits required of the funeral home or
its contractors, and these said charges remain unpaid for a period of 30 days from the date services
were rendered or fees or permits were required, the city may prohibit the opening and closing of any
other gravesite requested by such funeral home or its contractors until such time as the debt is paid in
full.
(4) Interment of human remains is allowed only in areas dedicated for gravesites.
(5) Only the remains of human beings shall be interred in any cemetery owned or operated by the
city.
(6) Traditional interment shall be no more than one per space.
Sec. 1.10.020 Reservations and corrections
(a) The city reserves the right to correct errors associated with interments or sale of property. In the event such
error shall involve interment, the city reserves the right to remove and inter the remains to such property of equal
value and similar location as may be substituted and conveyed in lieu thereof. Should an error develop in the
sale of property, the city may correct such error by selling property of equal value in similar location insofar as
possible.
(b) The right to revise and/or add to the cemeteries a section or sections from time to time, including the right
to modify or change the location of or any part thereof or to remove or re-grade roads, drives and walkways is
expressly reserved. The rights to lay, maintain and operate, or to alter or change pipelines or gutters for water
sprinkler systems and drainage is expressly reserved, as is the right to use cemetery property, not sold to
individual owners for cemetery purposes, including the interring and the preparation of anything necessary,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/508
incidental or convenient thereto. The cemetery reserves to itself and to those lawfully entitled thereto, a
perpetual right of ingress and egress over spaces for the purpose of passage to and from other spaces.
(c) No easement is granted to any owner in any road, drive or walkway within the cemeteries, but such road,
drive or walkway may be used as a means of access to the cemeteries and their buildings as long as the city
devotes such roads, drives and walkways to that purpose.
(d) The city disclaims responsibility to space owners or purchasers, their personal representatives or
successors in interest, for loss or damage to cemetery spaces, memorials or monuments by any cause, natural or
otherwise, direct or indirect beyond reasonable control of the city.
(e) The statement of any employee of the city or its contractors shall not be binding upon the city except as
such statement agrees with the document conveying the right of interment and these rules and regulations.
(f) The city reserves the right at any time and from time to time to change, amend, alter, repeal, or add to these
rules and regulations or any part thereof or to adopt any new rule or regulation or any temporary exception with
respect to said cemeteries or anything pertaining thereto, without prior notification.
(g) In all matters not specifically addressed by these rules and regulations, the city reserves the right to do
anything which, in its judgment, is deemed reasonable pertaining to the cemeteries, and such determinations
shall be binding upon space owners and all other parties concerned.
Sec. 1.10.021 Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, agent or employee thereof who violates any of the provisions of this article shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof; shall be punished by a fine as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that any violation of this article
continues, shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ordinance 2016-07-11(9A) adopted 7/11/16)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE 2.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 2.01.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abuse. To mistreat through intent to abuse or reckless neglect of any animal in a manner that causes or is likely
to cause stress or physical injury or as otherwise stated in this chapter.
Animal. Any living creature other than hominids. Unless indicated otherwise, the term shall include livestock,
fowl, reptiles, amphibians, and wildlife, as well as dogs, cats and other creatures commonly owned as pets.
Animal control division, animal control authority, or animal control officer. The animal control division of the
city's police department, its animal control officers and/or peace officers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/508
Animal shelter or city kennel. A facility designated by the city council to be used for the impoundment of
animals taken up by the animal control officers, or other similar facility that may be temporarily contracted or
designated by the chief of police for animal impoundment under the provisions of this chapter.
Animal welfare group. An association or nonprofit corporation who has as one of its purposes the providing for
the welfare and/or protection of animals of any kind.
Authority. The local rabies control authority as defined in this section.
Brand. A mark made on the skin of any animal which indicates the ownership of the animal, typically used with
livestock.
Cat. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the feline species of animals.
Chief of police. The chief of police or the chief of police's designee responsible for the administration of this
chapter.
Circus. A commercial variety show featuring animal acts for the public at a fee or a part of a charity.
Commercial animal enterprise. Shall include but not be limited to enterprises such as kennels, pet shops, riding
stables, animal auctions, performing animal exhibitions, zoological parks, circuses, animal training services,
grooming shops, petting zoos, aviaries or any similar entrepreneurial relationship regarding animals.
Dangerous wild animal. Shall have the same meaning as defined in chapter 822, Texas Health and Safety Code,
subchapter E.
Day. A workday excluding Saturday, Sunday, and city holidays.
Distance between structures. Where a minimum setback or distance between any enclosure for an animal and a
residence is required, shall mean the most direct line distance between the two structures, unless otherwise
provided.
Dog. The male and the female of any domesticated member of the canine species of animal.
Domestic animal. Any animal whose physiology has been determined or manipulated through selective breeding
and does not occur naturally in the wild, any animal which can be vaccinated against rabies with an approved
rabies vaccine, and any animal which has an established rabies quarantine observation period.
Estray. Has the same meaning as defined in chapter 142, Texas Agriculture Code, defining estray as stray
livestock, stray exotic livestock, and stray exotic fowl.
Exotic species. Any animal or reptile, fish, or bird, born or whose natural habitat is considered to be outside the
continental United States, including nonvenomous reptiles and fish.
Fish. Any of the cold-blooded animals that extract oxygen from water through the use of gills.
Fowl. Includes all birds, e.g., chickens, turkeys, pheasants, quail, guineas, geese, ducks, peafowl and other
domestic feathered creatures and nondomestic feathered creatures, regardless of age or sex.
Governmental entity. An agency or political subdivision of the state or an agency or department of the federal
government.
Habitual offender or habitually. An owner who has received two or more final convictions of this chapter, or the
owner of an animal who has been the subject of impoundment in the animal shelter three or more times during a
12-month period, or any combination of convictions and impoundment totaling three incidents.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/508
Harbor. To possess while in the act of keeping and caring for an animal, or of providing premises to which the
animal returns for food, shelter or care for a period of three days or longer.
Kennel. An establishment designed or used for the selling, breeding, or overnight boarding of animals where
more than three dogs and two cats or three cats and two dogs or a combination of five other animals are to be
boarded, sold, or bred.
Livestock. Includes, regardless of age, sex or breed, horses and all equine species, including mules, donkeys and
jackasses; cows and all bovine species; sheep and all ovine species; llamas; goats and all caprine species; and
pigs and all swine species.
Local rabies control authority. The senior animal control officer, or an officer he designates to act in his place
when he is temporarily unable to act for any reason.
Marine animal. Any animal, other than a mammal or bird, that lives in a marine environment.
Multi-pet owner. A person who keeps or harbors five or more cats or dogs or any combination of five or more
cats and dogs. Puppies and kittens under four months of age shall not be counted for purposes of this definition.
Neutered. Any animal, male or female, rendered incapable of breeding or being bred, i.e., castration in the male
and spaying or ovariectomy in the female.
Nonregisterable dangerous dog. Any dog which:
(1) When unprovoked, severely attacked or inflicted serious injury or death to a person, whether on
public or private property; or
(2) Has been deemed nonregisterable by the animal control officer and upheld or unchallenged by
any court of jurisdiction.
Owner or presumed owner. Any person who has purchased or who owns, keeps, maintains, harbors or has care,
custody or control of one or more animals. Ownership may be determined by identifying an adult resident of the
premises upon which the animal is kept, maintained, harbored or otherwise resides, and such adult shall
constitute the owner of the animal upon such premises. Each actual resident of the premises shall be the owner
or presumed owner and charged with responsibility for the animals thereon maintained or harbored.
Performing animals. Any spectacle, display, act or event in which animals perform.
Person. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
Poison. A substance having an inherent harmful property which renders it, when taken into the system, capable
of destroying animal life.
Policy or policies. The policies and procedures adopted consistent with this chapter and applicable to the animal
control division of the city's police department.
Premises. A definite portion of a legal lot of real estate or land, together with any appurtenances or buildings.
Prohibited animals. Any animal prohibited by state or federal law and including any individual species and/or
subspecies of the following animals: antelope, lions, tigers, ocelots, bobcats, lynx, cougars, leopards, cheetahs,
jaguars, hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, ferrets born in natural habitats, binturong, ostriches, emus, elephants,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/508
Vietnamese potbelly pigs, miniature pigs, apes or such other nondomestic species of animal not common to this
area.
Proper enclosure. A house or a building, or, in the case of a fence or structure/pen, the fence or structure/pen
must be at least four feet in height. The structure/pen must also have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten
feet. The fence or structure/pen must form an enclosure suitable to prevent entry of young children and must be
locked and secured such that an animal cannot climb, dig, jump or otherwise escape of its own volition. The
enclosure shall be securely locked at all times and have secure sides to prevent a dangerous animal or registered
dangerous dog from escaping from the enclosure. The structure/pen shall provide protection from the elements
for the animal. The animal control officer may require a fence higher than four feet or require a secure top and/or
a secure bottom to the structure/pen if the need is demonstrated. Invisible fences or similar technology shall not
constitute “proper enclosure.”
Quarantine. A period of ten days used for observation of a domestic or pet animal to determine the health status
of that animal in relation to the rabies virus.
Quarantine by owner. An animal owner who quarantines with the animal control officer's permission under the
following conditions:
(1) The animal must have a current rabies vaccination;
(2) The animal must be inside an enclosed structure, i.e., house or garage, and must remain there
for ten days;
(3) If maintained outside, the animal must be behind a fence from which it cannot escape and on a
chain from which it cannot break loose or inside a covered pen or kennel from which it cannot
escape. The length of the chain must prevent the animal from making contact with the fence in which
it is kept;
(4) The animal must be kept away from other animals and people except those in the immediate
household;
(5) The animal may not be removed from the corporate city limits while under quarantine;
(6) The owner shall notify the animal control officer immediately if the animal becomes sick or
displays any behavioral changes;
(7) The owner shall not subject the animal to any medical procedure without first notifying the
animal control officer. This includes any vaccination;
(8) The animal must be examined by the local rabies control authority or designee by the first day
of home quarantine and again on the final day of quarantine. Upon final examination, the authority
may declare the animal to be free of the rabies virus or under questionable circumstance defer such
examinations to a licensed veterinarian. In such instances, the owner shall be responsible for all
associated costs and when required produce proof of such veterinarian examinations;
(9) Owners who are deemed habitual offenders, as defined herein, shall not be allowed home
quarantine;
(10) The owner must allow animal control, with reasonable notice, to view and confirm the health
of the animal during the rabies quarantine period.
Rabies vaccination. The vaccination of a dog, cat or other domestic animal with an antirabies vaccine approved
by the department of state health services and administered by a veterinarian licensed by the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/508
Registered dangerous dog. Any dog registered with the city in compliance with chapter 822, Texas Health and
Safety Code, subchapter D, and with the sections of this chapter addressing registered dangerous dogs.
Residence. Any place of human habitation at any time, day or night, including, but not limited to, any single- or
multi-family dwelling, church, school, convalescent center or nursing home.
Restrained. Any animal secured by a leash, rope or chain of some sort or confined through fencing or otherwise
within the property limits of its owner.
Restricted animals. Any individual species and/or subspecies defined herein as “prohibited” animals that have
been registered and permitted in compliance with the procedures set out in section 2.04.006 herein.
Running at large (animals at large).
(1) Off-premises:
(A) Any animal, except a cat wearing a vaccination tag, which is not restrained by means of a
leash, chain, or other physical apparatus of sufficient strength and length to control the actions
of such animal while off-premises;
(B) Any cat which is creating a nuisance off the owner's property.
(2) On-premises:
(A). Any animal, except a cat wearing a vaccination tag, not confined to the premises of the
owner by a substantial fence of sufficient strength and height to prevent the animal from
escaping therefrom, or secured on the premises by a chain or leash sufficient in strength to
prevent the animal from escaping from the premises and so arranged that the animal will remain
upon the premises when the leash is stretched to full length;
(B) An animal intruding upon the property of another person other than the owner's shall be
termed “at large”;
(C) Any animal within a vehicle in a manner that would prevent that animal's escape or
contact with other persons or animals shall not be deemed “at large.”
Serious injury. Bodily injury resulting from severe attack or severe bite from an animal which produces severe
pain, trauma, or loss of blood or tissue, and which requires medical treatment of wounds inflicted by the animal.
Severe attack. An attack in which the animal repeatedly bites or vigorously shakes its victim, and the victim, or a
person intervening, has extreme difficulty terminating the attack.
Severe bite. A puncture or laceration made by an animal's teeth which breaks the skin, resulting in a degree of
trauma which would cause most prudent and reasonable people to seek medical care for treatment to the wound,
without considerations of rabies prevention alone.
Stray animal (including estray). Any animal, of which there is no identifiable owner or harborer, which is found
to be at large within the corporate limits of the city.
Tag. A vaccination tag attached to a collar as required by this chapter or some other permanent identifying
device attached to a collar or to an animal.
Tattoo. A permanent mark which is made on the skin of an animal by puncturing the skin and inserting indelible
color, and which is used to show ownership.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/508
Unprovoked attack. Means that the animal was not hit, kicked, teased, molested or struck by a person with an
object or part of a person's body, nor was any part of the animal's body pulled, pinched or squeezed by a person.
Vaccination. An injection of a rabies vaccine which is approved by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Veterinary Biologics Division, state veterinarian, and administered by a licensed veterinarian or at an approved
antirabies clinic.
Veterinarian. Any person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state board of veterinary
examiners, or who is exempt from such licensing.
Wild animal or wildlife. Any nondomestic creature (mammal, amphibian, reptile or fowl) which is of a species
which is wild by nature, which can normally be found in a wild state, and which is not naturally tame or gentle,
or which, because of its size, vicious nature and other characteristics, constitutes a danger to human life or
property, including all animals identified herein as prohibited.
Workday. A day from Monday through Friday, excluding city holidays, with each respective day's work hours
beginning at 8:00 a.m. and continuously operating until 4:00 p.m., defining the public's routine access to
administrative fee(s) and impound release transactions authorized by this chapter.
Zoological park or zoo. Any facility, other than a pet shop or kennel, displaying or exhibiting one or more
species of animals, operated by a person or under the auspices of a governmental entity.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.101), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.002 Purpose
It is the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide a safe and healthy environment within the city for both
animals and people. While a person may own and keep animals within the city, the conduct of those animals and
the conditions that the animals are kept in should be safe and healthy and should not infringe on the surrounding
homes and their inhabitants. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.102), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.003 Running at large
(a) Prohibited; responsible party. It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, keeps, harbors or otherwise
has control over any animal within the city to allow or permit such animal to run or be at large within the city.
(b) Cats. The prohibition against an animal running at large shall not apply to a domestic cat which has been
vaccinated as required by this chapter and which is wearing the required vaccination tags. The prohibition shall
apply to all other cats. Any cat not wearing a required vaccination tag will be considered a feral
(undomesticated) cat. Citizens with complaints of these cats on their property may obtain a trap from animal
control after posting a deposit sufficient to cover the cost of replacing the trap. It will be the responsibility of the
complaining party to trap the cat and bring it to the animal control officer during regular working hours. When
the trap is returned in good condition the deposit will be refunded in full. Feral cats trapped and delivered to the
animal control officer may be euthanized after 72 hours.
(c) Restraint required. An animal shall be considered to be at large if it is not under the control of its owner by
either a leash, chain, cord or other suitable material attached to a collar or harness, or not restrained on the
property of the owner by a leash, chain, cord or fence. An animal inside a vehicle parked in a public place or in
the open bed of a moving or parked vehicle in a public place shall be considered to be at large unless it is
restrained in such a manner that it cannot exit the vehicle of its own volition.
(d) Snakes. It shall be unlawful for any person to have a snake in any park or other public place unless it is
within some type of cage, pen or enclosure.
(e) Impoundment or issuance of citation. The animal control officer for the city may impound any animal
observed to be at large, whether the animal is on public or private property, subject to the applicable provisions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/508
of the law. If the animal control officer observes an animal on property which is owned by a person other than
the owner of the animal, and observes the animal return to property of its owner, the animal control officer may
impound the animal or issue a citation for the animal running at large. In the event the animal is on private
property or property of the animal's owner, the animal control officer, his/her agent, or peace officer may enter
the property, other than a private dwelling, for the purpose of impoundment or issuance of a citation, or both,
subject to the applicable provisions of this chapter and law.
(f) Prima facie evidence. Proof that an animal was found at large in violation of this section, together with
proof that the defendant was the owner of such animal at the time, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the
defendant allowed or permitted the animal to be at large.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.201), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Restraint, impoundment and disposition of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.033
Sec. 2.01.004 Confinement of female dogs and cats during estrus
(a) Secure enclosure required. Any unspayed female dog or cat in the state of estrus (heat) shall be confined
during such period of time in a house, building or secure enclosure, and the area of enclosure shall be so
constructed that no other dog or cat may gain access to the confined animals except for controlled breeding
permitted by the owner of the female.
(b) Chaining or tethering. Additionally, the female dog or cat shall not be chained or tethered except in a
secured enclosure, and if chained or tethered within a secured enclosure, the female dog or cat may not be
chained or tethered in a manner that prevents her from defending herself or from avoiding a male.
(c) Removal of animal. Owners who do not comply shall be ordered to immediately remove the animal in heat
to a veterinary hospital or the animal shelter. Failure to comply with the removal order of the animal control
officer shall be a violation of this chapter and the dog or cat will then be impounded as prescribed herein. All
expenses incurred as a result of this confinement shall be paid by the owner.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.202), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.005 Animal defecation on public or private property
(a) Prohibition. It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of an animal to intentionally, knowingly,
recklessly or with criminal negligence allow or permit such animal to defecate on any public property or
improved private property other than that of the owner of the animal. That the animal was at large at the time it
defecated on any property shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner or person in control of the animal
allowed or permitted the animal to so act.
(b) Exception. It is an exception to the application of this section that the owner or person in control of the
animal immediately, at the time of defecation, removed and cleaned up such animal's feces from public or
private property.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.203), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.006 Nuisance animals
(a) As used in this chapter, a nuisance animal shall be defined as any animal that commits any of the acts
listed herein:
(1) Molests or chases pedestrians, passersby or passing vehicles, including bicycles, or molests,
attacks or interferes with other animals or persons on public property or private property other than
the owner's;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/508
(2) Makes unprovoked attacks on other animals of any kind or engages in conduct which
establishes such animal as a “dangerous animal”;
(3) Is repeatedly at large, specifically, three or more times per 12-month period (excluding
domestic cats);
(4) Damages, soils or defiles public property or private property, other than property belonging to
or under the control of the owner;
(5) Repeatedly defecates on property not belonging to or under the control of its owner, unless
such waste is immediately, at the time of defecation, removed and properly disposed of by the owner
of the animal (including domestic cats);
(6) Barks, whines, howls, crows, cackles or makes any noise excessively and continuously, and
such noise disturbs a person of ordinary sensibilities;
(7) Produces odors or unclean conditions sufficient to annoy persons living in the vicinity; or
(8) Is unconfined when in heat.
(b) If the animal control officer determines that any animal is a nuisance, the animal control officer may issue
an order requiring that the owner meet certain remedial requirements to correct the conduct of the animal. The
order, the form of which shall be provided for by policy, shall be given to the owner by personal service or by
certified mail, return receipt requested. The owner may file a written appeal to this order clearly stating the
reasons for the appeal, to the chief of police, within 10 days of service. The chief of police or designee shall
conduct a hearing to determine the issues stated in the written appeal. At the hearing, the formal rules of
evidence do not apply. The chief shall make his/her decision on the basis of a preponderance of the evidence
presented. The decision of the chief shall be rendered within 30 days from receipt of the appeal and the decision
of the chief shall be final. Nothing herein precludes the city from seeking other remedies if owners fail to
comply with the remedial requirements stated or the decision(s) rendered in the appeal process.
(c) Persons residing within 600 feet of a person who harbors or keeps an animal that they believe to be a
nuisance may initiate a written, signed complaint, the form of which shall be provided for by policy, with the
animal control division. The animal control division shall investigate the merits of such complaints to determine
if the stated animal is a nuisance as defined in this section. If the animal is determined to be a nuisance animal,
the procedure set forth in subsection (b) of this section shall apply.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.205), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.007 Keeping wild animals or wildlife
(a) No person shall possess, keep or have care, custody or control of a prohibited animal, wild animal, or
wildlife within the city except as provided herein.
(b) All persons shall be prohibited from selling, giving, transferring or importing into the city any wild animal.
(c) This section shall not apply to approved zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. Nor
shall this section apply to primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, zoological parks owned or
operated by a governmental entity or any animal assisting physically handicapped persons.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the animal being kept was an infant or injured
animal which was not capable of surviving on its own and that such animal was kept for three days or less, or for
such reasonable time as was necessary before giving the animal to a licensed wildlife rehabilitator.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.204), adopted 2/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/508
Sec. 2.01.008 Keeping bees
No person shall construct, place or maintain any beehive within 300 feet of any residence other than that of the
owner except with the consent of the occupants of all such residences. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.206),
adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.009 Pens or coops for fowl, rabbits or other non-livestock animals
(a) All fowl and rabbits shall be kept within a pen, coop or hutch. A fenced yard shall not qualify as a pen or
coop.
(b) Any person keeping or harboring any animal, other than livestock, shall locate any pen, coop, hutch or
other housing at least 50 feet from any residence, excluding the residence of the person keeping or harboring the
animals.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.207), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.010 Livestock pens; staking or tying livestock
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having care, custody or control over any livestock to:
(1) Cause or permit any livestock to be pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, lane, alley,
park or other public place;
(2) Tie, stake or pasture or permit the tying, staking or pasturing of any animal upon any private
property within the city without the consent of the owner or occupant of such property, or in such a
way as to permit any livestock to trespass upon any street or other public place or upon any private
property; or
(3) Permit any livestock to be or remain during the nighttime secured by a stake, or secured in any
manner other than by enclosing such animal in a pen, corral or barn sufficient and adequate to
restrain such livestock.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any livestock within the city in a pen or other
enclosure that has less than 1/2 acre of area, exclusive of a residence or accessory structure, for each livestock.
Any person keeping or harboring livestock shall locate any pen or other enclosure at least 50 feet from any
residence, excluding the residence of the person keeping or harboring the animals.
(c) This requirement may be waived by the city council based solely on each individual situation.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.208), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.011 Storage of feed
All feed provided for animals, other than hay, shall be kept in an enclosed building or container except when
being used to feed an animal. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.209), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.012 Keeping swine or pigs prohibited; exception
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any swine or pigs, including such swine commonly known as
potbellied pigs, within the city limits. This section does not apply to hogs kept temporarily (not to exceed five
days) for an organized youth exhibition or show. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.210(a)), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.013 Keeping animals near city water supply wells
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/508
(a) It is unlawful and constitutes an offense for any person, whether for himself or as the agent or servant of
another or others, to keep or to participate in keeping any horse, hog, cattle, sheep, goat, other livestock and/or
fowl in any pen or lot used to confine any such multiple animal operation within 500 feet of any water supply
wells from which the city obtains its principal water supply, as specified in the official Texas Administrative
Code published under authority of the secretary of state, title 31, Natural Resources and Conservation, section
290.41(c)(1)(C), (D), (F).
(b) “Keeping” means the care and control of the livestock or fowl in question for a period of longer than five
days.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.210(b)), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.014 Disposal of dead animals and fowl
It is unlawful for any person in the city to cause to be placed or place, or allow to remain in or near his premises
or the premises of any other person, or in any of the streets or other public roadways, any dead animal, either
wild or domesticated, or any dead fowl, either wild or domesticated. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.210(c)),
adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.015 Creating health hazard
Any person who shall harbor or keep animals on his/her premises, or in or about premises under his/her control,
and who allows such premises to become a hazard to the general health and welfare of the community, or who
shall allow such premises to give off obnoxious or offensive odors due to the activity or presence of such
animals, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.315), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.016 Animals held on complaint
If a complaint has been filed in the municipal court of the city against the owner of an impounded animal for a
violation of this chapter, the animal may be held on the order of the municipal judge, who may also direct the
owner to pay any penalties for violation of this chapter in addition to all impoundment fees. Surrender of an
animal by the owner thereof to the animal control officer does not relieve or render the owner immune from the
decision of the court nor from the fees and fines which may result from a violation of this chapter. (Ordinance
04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.211), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.017 Removing or releasing animal without permission; interference with impoundment
(a) Removal without consent of animal control division. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove or
allow to escape from any place of confinement any dog or cat which has been confined or ordered to be confined
by the city, without the consent of the animal control division.
(b) Releasing animal confined on property of another. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally enter upon the property of another person for which the person is not given specific permission to
enter for the purpose of releasing a confined, chained or tethered animal.
(c) Interference with impoundment. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere or attempt to interfere with
the animal control officer or to interfere or attempt to interfere with any person acting for the city in the taking
up and impounding of animals in the city.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.212), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.01.018 Tampering with traps or equipment of animal control officer
No person shall remove, alter, damage or otherwise tamper with a trap or equipment belonging to or set out by
the animal control officer. No person shall remove an animal inside a trap or equipment belonging to or set out
by the animal control officer. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.316), adopted 2/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/508
ARTICLE 2.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 2.02.001 Enforcement generally
(a) Enforcement officers. The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by animal control officers, police
officers, and such other persons as are designated by the city. Nothing herein is intended to or shall preempt any
statutory duty or authority of any federal, state, or local entity or official charged with animal control, estray
control or impoundment, or other animal-related matters.
(b) Interfering with enforcement. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, obstruct, resist or
oppose any animal control officer or other person authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter while such
person is apprehending an animal or performing any other duties or investigation. It shall be unlawful to take or
attempt to take any animal from any animal control officer or from any vehicle used by the officer to transport
any animal or to take or attempt to take any animal from the animal shelter or other kennel or confinement area
used to impound an animal.
(c) Citations and warnings. In all instances of a violation of any provision of this chapter, whether the animal
is impounded or not, the owner or keeper of such animal may be cited by an officer who has the authority to
enforce this chapter for any violation of this chapter. The animal control division may also by policy establish a
conditional written warning procedure relating to registrations, displaying of tags, and general “at large”
violations. The receipt of such written warnings does not preclude the animal control division from citing the
recipient if the conditions of the written warning are not met in a timely fashion.
(d) Authority to kill, disable, tranquilize or trap animals. In the enforcement of this chapter, animal control
officers and police officers shall have the authority to utilize firearms to kill or otherwise disable any animal to
protect themselves, to protect a third person or to protect another animal from attack or threat of imminent injury
or to prevent such animal from enduring further pain or suffering as a result of disease or injury. They shall also
have the authority to tranquilize or trap any animal, fowl, livestock or wildlife consistent with humane policies
adopted by the animal control division.
(e) Culpability. Unless specifically provided in this chapter, an offense under this chapter shall not require a
culpable mental state. It is the intent of this chapter to impose strict liability for violation of the requirements of
this chapter.
(f) Administrative policies and procedures. To aid in the administration of this chapter, the animal control
division shall, by policy-making authority of the chief of police, adopt administrative policies and operational
procedures consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.103), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.02.002 Powers and duties of citizens regarding animals running at large
Any person who finds an animal which he does not own on property that he owns or exercises control over or on
public property may take control of said animal if it is running at large (as provided in section 2.01.003) and may
deliver the animal to an animal control officer, the animal shelter, or an animal emergency medical facility. If the
animal is not delivered to an animal control officer, the animal shelter, or an animal emergency medical facility,
the person must report that he has taken control of the animal to an animal control officer or the animal shelter
within seventy-two (72) hours. If animal is wearing a tag of any kind or has a tattoo, brand, or other identifying
mark, that information shall be included in the report to the animal control officer or animal shelter. (Ordinance
04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.104), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.02.003 Violations; penalty; false reports
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to comply therewith, or
with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/508
liable for a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day the violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein.
(b) A person commits an offense if, with intent to deceive, he knowingly makes a false report or statement,
either verbal or written, that is material to an investigation of an alleged violation of this chapter to an animal
control officer or other person authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter.
(c) A person commits an offense if he reports to a person authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter an
offense or incident within that person's concern knowing that the offense or incident did not occur.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (11), sec. 2, adopted 5/10/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.02.004 Order to abate violation
Whenever any premises where animals are kept [are] in an unsanitary condition or the facilities are not in
keeping with provisions of this chapter or any other regulations herein, the animal control division, by written
notice on a form provided by police department policy clearly stating the intent of this section, to the person
responsible for the condition of the premises, may order the abatement of the conditions which are not in
accordance with this chapter or other regulations, or conditions which constitute a nuisance. Failure to comply
with such order shall, in addition to any criminal or administrative proceedings, be grounds for and entitle the
city to obtain relief by injunction. Nothing herein precludes the city's use of any public health ordinance or law
in lieu of nuisance abatement or injunctive relief herein provided. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.107),
adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.02.005 Compliance with other ordinances
The keeping of any animal in accordance with provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to authorize the
keeping of the same in violation of the zoning ordinance or any other ordinance of the city. (Ordinance 04-01-12
(12), ex. A (2.108), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.02.006 Recovery of fees, costs and damages
The fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code shall apply to all animals within the city limits. It shall not
be construed that the city be required to bear the costs of any animal that has an owner. The owner shall
reimburse the city for any actual expenses and shall be responsible for all fees set forth in the fee schedule found
in appendix A of this code. The city may recover all fees, costs and damages incurred as a result of the animal as
restitution in a criminal proceeding under the provisions of this chapter or the state statutes in addition to a fine
being charged. In extraordinary circumstances, certain fees related to redemption of impounded animals may be
administratively waived for owners with supervisory approval, or pay agreements reached between owners and
animal control supervisor(s). Such administrative actions shall be guided by animal control's adopted policies
and procedures. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.109), adopted 2/9/04)
ARTICLE 2.03 ANIMAL PROTECTION*
Sec. 2.03.001 Animals in vehicles
(a) Animals left in parked vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any animal in any standing or
parked vehicle in such a way as to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence endanger the
animal's health, safety or welfare. An animal control officer or police officer is authorized to use reasonable
force to remove the animal from the vehicle whenever it appears that the animal's health, safety or welfare is or
will be endangered if the owner of the vehicle cannot be located after reasonable attempts. The animal shall be
taken to the animal shelter or to a veterinarian if the animal is in distress. A written notice bearing the name of
the officer removing the animal, a telephone number where he can be contacted and the location where the
animal may be claimed by the owner shall be attached to the vehicle. Any person violating this section shall bear
the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment cost and disposal of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/508
the animal, including the removal from a vehicle, in addition to any criminal penalty that may be imposed under
this section.
(b) Animals left unattended because of traffic accident or other incident. Instances where occupants of motor
vehicles are involved in a traffic accident or other vehicle-related incidents which result in animals being left
uncontrolled or unattended, animal control or police officers of the city are authorized to take welfare custody of
such unattended animals. In the interest of the health, safety or welfare of such animals, officers are authorized
to transport such animals to the city's kennel facility, a veterinarian, a humane shelter, or an animal emergency
clinic. Information shall be provided to the animal's owner as to the animal's disposition. Animal owners shall
bear the full cost and expense incurred by the city in the care, medical treatment, impoundment costs or other
associated costs.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.301), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.002 Tethered animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to tether, chain or fasten any animal in such a manner as to permit it to be
upon any public sidewalk or street or to leave it unattended while tethered, chained or fastened on public
property. It shall be unlawful to tether, chain or fasten an animal in such a manner as to cause it injury or pain or
not permit it to reach shelter, food and water. A chain or tether must be at least 10 feet in length, including an
animal chained or tethered to an object must have at least 10 feet of free distance at all times. (Ordinance 04-01-
12 (12), ex. A (2.302), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Unlawful restraint of dog, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 821.076 et seq.
Sec. 2.03.003 Giving animal as prize or inducement
(a) No person shall give away any live animal, reptile, fowl, livestock, or wildlife as a prize for or as an
inducement to enter any contest, game, or other competition; or as an inducement to enter a place of amusement;
or as an incentive to enter into an business agreement whereby the offer is for the purpose of attracting trade.
This prohibition shall apply to carnivals, fairs, and circuses.
(b) The prohibition contained in this section shall not apply to fish or to animals given as prizes at a rodeo
contest or livestock show as part of an FFA, 4-H, or similar project.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.303), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.004 Trapping and shooting
(a) Trapping prohibited. It shall be unlawful to set, trigger, activate or otherwise use, or cause to be set,
triggered, activated or used, any steel-jawed leg-hold trap, or for any person, other than animal control officers,
to set or otherwise use other trapping devices, including “live traps” used for the capture of any animal.
Consistent with the provisions herein, the animal control division is authorized to utilize humane “live traps” and
may conduct trapping operations or provide or authorize such devices' use to property owners as may be needed
throughout the city. This subsection is not intended to prohibit the prudent use of traps on one's own property to
control rodents.
(b) Hunting, shooting or injuring animals prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot,
intentionally injure or kill any wild bird, animal, mammal or reptile within the corporate limits of the city. It
shall be unlawful for any person to hunt, shoot or kill, within the city, any domestic bird, animal, mammal,
reptile or pet that is not owned by such person. Except this subsection shall not be construed or interpreted to
prohibit the destruction of poisonous snakes or to prohibit the animal control division from utilizing certain
firearms in emergency field conditions where such actions are provided for by law or policy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/508
(c) Shooting domestic animal. It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot a domestic animal within the
corporate limits of the city. It shall be a defense to prosecution that the domestic animal shot was a vicious
animal and presenting an immediate threat to personal or public safety. Except this subsection shall not be
construed or interpreted to prohibit the animal control division from utilizing certain firearms in emergency field
conditions where such actions are provided for by law or policy.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.304), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.005 Molesting animals
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any manner tease, annoy, disturb, molest or irritate an animal that is
confined to the owner's premises. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.305), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.006 Pens and enclosures
(a) Sanitation requirements. The owners of any animal shall maintain and keep all pens, coops, kennels,
fenced areas and enclosures of any kind in a sanitary condition. This shall include the following:
(1) All animal wastes shall be disposed of promptly and all pens and enclosures shall be cleaned as
needed to prevent odors and not draw insects or other vermin or create a nuisance.
(2) The premises upon which animals are kept shall be clean and free from noxious and unpleasant
odors.
(3) Some standard spray or other chemicals shall be used at reasonable intervals to keep the
premises free of flies, mosquitoes, ticks, fleas and other vectors.
(b) Size. Cages, pens or enclosures used to confine animals shall be of sufficient size to maintain all of the
animals within such pen or enclosure comfortably and in good health.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.306), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.007 Negligent care
(a) It is unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to provide any animal in his charge or custody, as
owner or otherwise, with proper food, water, shade, adequate shelter, veterinary care when needed to prevent
suffering, and grooming when lack thereof would adversely affect the health of the animal, and with humane
care and treatment.
(b) To provide “adequate shelter” for a dog or cat kept outdoors, a person must provide a shelter accessible to
the dog or cat meeting the following standards:
(1) The shelter must provide protection from the weather, i.e., sun, wind, precipitation (in whatever
form), or other inclement weather conditions.
(2) If there are no artificial heat sources, the structure shall be small enough to allow the dog or cat
to warm the interior of the structure and maintain its body heat, but large enough to permit normal
postural adjustments, or standing.
(3) Plastic air shipping containers and/or pet carriers shall not be used as outdoor shelters.
(c) A written warning of violation requiring that the condition be corrected within a specified time period shall
be issued to a person before any notice to appear at the municipal court may be issued or before a complaint may
be filed with the municipal court.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.307), adopted 2/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/508
Sec. 2.03.008 Authority to dispose of animal in state of pain or suffering
(a) If any animal without a license tag or other identifying marker is found in a state of pain and suffering or
becomes so during confinement, the animal control division may dispose of the animal in any humane manner
without complying with the three-day (72-hour) waiting period as set out herein.
(b) If the owner or keeper of an animal found in a state of pain or suffering refuses to assume responsibility to
care for the animal, the animal control officer may dispose of the animal in a humane manner.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.308), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.009 Sale of animals in public place
(a) Not in lieu of or withstanding any permit requirements imposed herein, if an animal is offered for sale in a
public place within the city, the person offering the animal for sale, the owner of the animal, the manager of the
property which is the public place on which the offer is being made, and the owner of the property which is the
public place on which the offer is being made shall be responsible for ensuring that the animal protections of this
article are complied with in regard to the animal offered for sale in a public place during the time the animal is in
the public place.
(b) The term “public place” as used herein shall mean any place to which the public or a substantial group of
the public has access. It shall include, but is not limited to, shops, stores and flea markets.
(c) If an animal offered for sale in a public place is kept within a cage or pen of any type, such cage or pen
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The cage or pen must be large enough for the animal to stand on all of its legs and hold its head
in a natural position and not be in a crouched position. The cage or pen must also have enough room
for the animal to turn around or move without stepping on another animal, animal feces or food or
water provided for the animal.
(2) The cage or pen must either have room for water and food or have water and food situated so
that the animal has access to it through the cage.
(3) The cage or pen must be situated so that air may circulate through it, so that any animal kept
within the cage or pen is not exposed to extreme heat. During cold or inclement weather, cages or
pens should be situated so that animals contained therein may stay warm and stay dry.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.309), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.010 Animal fights
It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence use, or
allow or permit to be used, property that he owns or has control over for the purpose of conducting animal
fights. For purposes of this section, “animal” shall mean a domesticated living creature and wild living creature
previously captured. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.310), adopted 2/9/04)
State law references–Cruelty by causing livestock animals to fight, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.09(a)(6); cruelty by causing
nonlivestock animals to fight, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.092(b)(7); dog fighting, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 42.10.
Sec. 2.03.011 Slaughtering of animals
Animals may be slaughtered for human or animal consumption within the city, provided it is done at a location
that is shielded from sensory perception of the general public, and provided it is done in a manner designed to
cause the animal's death as quickly as possible without needless suffering. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A
(2.311), adopted 2/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/508
Sec. 2.03.012 Use of poisonous substances
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to administer poison to an animal belonging to another without legal
authority or the owner's effective consent. No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether
mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any domestic animal or person.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to recklessly or with criminal negligence injure another's animal by
leaving a poisonous substance of any kind in any place within the city.
(c) The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to an exterminator using poisons as part of a pest
control program, nor shall it apply to persons using commercial insecticides and rodent baits used to control
insects and wild rodents. For purposes of this section, the term “exterminator” shall mean an individual licensed
by the state structural pest control board, unless he or she is exempt from such licensing.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.312), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.013 Cruel treatment
No person shall beat, cruelly ill treat, torment, mentally abuse, overload, overwork or otherwise abuse an animal
or cause, instigate or permit any dogfight, cockfight, bullfight or other combat between animals or between
animals and humans. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.313, adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.03.014 Abandonment
No person shall abandon an animal in his/her custody. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.314), adopted 2/9/04)
ARTICLE 2.04 DANGEROUS ANIMALS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.04.001 Purpose
It is the intention of this article to provide a means of dealing with an animal that is dangerous or, by its conduct,
has indicated that it may represent a danger in the future. In interpreting the definitions contained in this article
and in implementing its provisions, the animal control officer shall recognize the right of a person to use an
animal as a protector or as a guard; however, the animal control officer shall also take into consideration the
right of a neighborhood to be free from fear that an animal may leave the premises of its owner or keeper and
attack and injure a person or other domestic animal. It is also the intention of this article to provide public safety
regarding dangerous wild animals and other potentially dangerous nondomestic animals, as well as providing
avenues for permitting the safe exhibition of certain animals for public entertainment. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12),
ex. A (2.401), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.002 Definition; impoundment; remedial requirements
(a) A dangerous animal shall be defined as an animal which:
(1) Has inflicted injury on a human being without provocation on public or private property;
(2) Has killed or severely injured a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's
property;
(3) Is trained or harbored for fighting, which may be determined based on whether the animal
exhibits behavior and/or bears physical scars or injuries which indicate that the animal has been
trained or used for the purpose of fighting;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/508
(4) Is a warm-blooded mammal which is known to carry or be susceptible to the rabies virus and
which cannot be effectively vaccinated against that virus with any vaccine approved by the
department of state health services;
(5) Is a hybrid animal or any pet wildlife which has attacked a human or which is apprehended or
observed unrestrained; or
(6) Is a venomous or carnivorous fish or reptile or any fish or reptile that grows over three feet in
length.
(b) If an animal acts as stated in subsection (a) of this section, the animal control officer shall impound the
animal immediately if it is at large, or, if it is in the possession of some person, the animal control officer may
issue a notice requiring that the animal be taken to a designated location for impoundment. The form of such
notice shall be provided for by policy. An animal which is impounded shall not be released until a final
determination is made on the disposition of the animal.
(c) Notice shall be given to the owner that the animal control officer has determined that the animal is a
dangerous animal. This notice shall also set out the remedial requirements which the owner must comply with.
This notice shall be given to the owner by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. The
owner shall have five working days from receipt of the notice to file a letter with the chief of police stating that
(s)he shall comply with the remedial requirements as stated in the notice or that (s)he disagrees with the
determination that the animal is dangerous or the remedial requirements and that (s)he requests a hearing before
the chief of police or designee. Such hearing shall be conducted as provided for nuisance animals in this chapter.
(d) If the owner of a dangerous animal cannot be determined after reasonable efforts to do so and after holding
the animal for 72 hours, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner. If the owner of a dangerous animal
which has been impounded cannot be located for the delivery service of the notice required herein either in
person or by mail, the animal may be disposed of in a humane manner after all reasonable effort has been made
to locate such owner.
(e) If the animal's behavior creates a more dangerous situation even though the owner is complying with the
remedial requirements, the chief of police or designee may again review the situation and prescribe additional or
different remedial requirements.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.402), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.003 Potentially dangerous animals
(a) If the animal control officer believes that an animal has exhibited behavior indicating that it represents a
potential danger, the animal control officer may initiate an investigation to determine whether or not the animal
is potentially dangerous.
(b) An animal may be defined as “potentially dangerous” if it has engaged in the following conduct:
(1) When unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or any public or
private property in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack; or
(2) Has a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to
otherwise threaten the safety of human beings or domestic animals.
(c) If upon investigation the animal control officer determines that the animal is indeed a potentially
dangerous animal, remedial requirements may be prescribed subject to the same processes, including appeals,
addressed under this chapter for dangerous animals.
(d) If an animal's behavior creates a more dangerous situation even though the owner is complying with the
remedial requirements, the officer or chief, depending upon previous action, may again review the situation and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/508
prescribe additional or different remedial requirements.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.403), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.004 Exceptions
(a) No animal may be declared dangerous or potentially dangerous:
(1) If the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time:
(A) Was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner
of the animal;
(B) Was tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has in the past been observed or
reported to have tormented, abused or assaulted the animal and the animal was not at large at
the time of the offense; or
(C) Was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(2) If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that person's control from an
unjustified attack or assault; or
(3) If the dog was injured and responding to pain.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to animals under the control of a governmental law
enforcement, correctional, or military agency.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to a dog whose conduct has brought it within the coverage of
the V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code chapter 822, to the extent that said chapter preempts local regulation of the
dog's conduct.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.404), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.005 Exhibition of wild or dangerous animal
No person shall keep, or permit to be kept, on his premises any wild or dangerous animal for display or for
exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee. This section shall not be construed so as to apply to a zoo
or circus, as defined in section 2.01.001. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.422), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.006 Prohibited animals
No person may possess a prohibited animal within the city limits. Such prohibited animals shall include, but are
not limited to, all animals prohibited by state or federal law, and shall include, but are not limited to, the
following animals or any hybrid of these animals or such other class of animals as may be determined to be
dangerous by animal control officer, or any other dangerous animal which may be added in the future to the list
as a high risk animal in the Texas Rabies Control Act, as amended:
(1) Class Mammalia: Family Canidae (such as wolves, coyotes and foxes), except domesticated
dogs and hybrids involving same; family Mustelidae (such as weasels, martins, fishers, skunks,
wolverines, mink and badgers), except ferrets; family Procyonidae (such as raccoons); family
Ursidae (such as bears); and order Chiroptera (such as bats).
(2) Poisonous reptiles, cobras and their allies (Elapidae, Hydrophiidae); vipers and their allies
(Crotiladae, Viperidae); Boonslang and Kirtland's tree snakes; Gila monsters (Helodermatidae); and
crocodiles, alligators and their allies (order Loricata) and nonvenomous reptiles over three feet in
length.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/508
(3) Brown recluse (Loxosceles) and black widow (Lactrodectus) spiders.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.423), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.007 Dangerous wild animals and other nondomestic animals
The animals specified in this section as dangerous wild animals shall be deemed as contraband, and no person
may possess any individual species and/or subspecies of the following dangerous wild animals: Order Carnivora,
family Felidae (such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars, ocelots, lynx, bobcats, cheetahs, and
jaguars), hyenas, bears, lesser pandas, ferrets from natural habitats, order Primata (such as monkeys,
chimpanzees, and apes). No person may possess any individual species of the following animals: antelope,
binturong, miniature pigs, elephants, Vietnamese potbelly pigs, or such other nondomestic species of animal not
common to this area. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.424), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Dangerous wild animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 822.101 et seq.
Sec. 2.04.008 Guard dogs
(a) All dogs which are trained by a certified professional and kept solely for the protection of persons and
property, residential, commercial or personal, shall obtain a permit from the animal control officer. The fee for
this permit shall be according to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code. The area or premises in
which such dog is confined shall be conspicuously posted with warning signs bearing letters not less than two
inches high, stating “Guard Dog On Premises.”
(b) The area or premises shall be subject to inspection by the animal control officer to determine that the
animal in question is maintained and secured at all times in such a manner so as to prevent its coming in contact
with the public.
(c) This section does not apply to dogs used by federal, state, county, or municipal law enforcement agencies
or correctional institutions.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.425), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Licensing and duties of guard dog companies, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 1702.109 et seq.
Secs. 2.04.009–2.04.030 Reserved
Division 2. Nonregisterable Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.04.031 Prohibited; impoundment
No person shall own or harbor a nonregisterable dangerous dog within the city. Such an animal may be
impounded as a public nuisance. If impoundment of such nonregisterable dangerous dog is being attempted
away from the premises of the owner and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the animal may be
destroyed without notice to the owner or harborer. If an attempt is made to impound a nonregisterable dangerous
dog from the premises of the owner or harborer and the impoundment cannot be made with safety, the owner or
harborer will be given 24 hours' notice that, if the animal is not surrendered to the animal control officer for
impoundment within said 24-hour period, then the animal will be destroyed wherever it is found. After this
notice, the nonregisterable dangerous dog may be destroyed during an attempt to impound, if impoundment
cannot be made with safety, wherever the impoundment is attempted. Notice under this section may be verbal or
in writing on a form provided for by policy. A written notice left at the entrance to the premises where the
nonregisterable dangerous dog is harbored will be considered valid notice under this section. (Ordinance 04-01-
12 (12), ex. A (2.405), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.032 Criteria for determination
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/508
A dog is determined to be a nonregisterable dangerous dog if:
(1) A dog is automatically determined to be nonregisterable if it commits acts as set forth under the
definition of “nonregisterable dangerous dog” in section 2.01.001;
(2) The animal control officer may find and determine a dog to be nonregisterable if:
(A) Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals, made under
oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements or made at the animal
shelter before the animal control officer, setting forth an act described in section 2.01.001 and
referenced above in subsection (1), and setting forth:
(i) The nature and the date of the act described in section 2.01.001;
(ii) The location of the event;
(iii) The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and
(iv) The description of the animal in question;
(B) The animal control officer investigates the complaint and may determine that an animal
is nonregisterable under this chapter and/or state law;
(3) The dog has been registered as, or finally determined or declared to be, a dangerous dog, either
in Rockdale or in another city or county in the state, or has made an unprovoked attack on another
person outside the dog's enclosure, or causes injury to such person or a person assisting or
intervening on behalf of such person; or
(4) The owner of a dog determined to be a registerable dangerous dog under this chapter, or any
previous or other ordinance of this city or any other city or state law, cannot or will not comply with
the requirements set out in this chapter for the keeping of a registerable dangerous dog.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.406), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.033 Notice of determination; right of appeal
(a) Within five working days of determining an animal nonregisterable, the animal control officer will notify,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a nonregisterable
animal. In the event that certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control officer
may then give notice by ordinary mail to the last known address of the owner. For the purposes of this section,
written notice may be delivered by the animal control officer in person to the owner/harborer of the dog in
question.
(b) If the animal is determined to be nonregisterable under this chapter, the owner may appeal to the municipal
court within 15 days of notification. Failure to appeal the determination of a nonregisterable dangerous dog shall
result in the animal control officer's determination as becoming final.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.407), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.034 Status of dog pending appeal; taking into custody
Pending any appeal to the municipal court, the animal must be confined at the animal shelter or licensed
veterinary facility, and the cost of such confinement shall be borne by the owner. If the dog in question is not in
the possession of the animal shelter at the time of the declaration, the owner must surrender the dog to the
animal control officer when ordered to do so. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog, the animal
control officer shall take the dog into his possession from the premises of the owner or elsewhere, wherever the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/508
dog may be found within the city limits. If the dog cannot be taken into custody by the animal control officer, it
may be taken, as contraband, into custody under a search warrant pursuant to CCP, article 18.01; the grounds for
issuance shall conform to subsection (8) of article 18.02 of the same code and issued by the municipal judge.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.408), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.035 Defense to determination
The owner of a dog upon receiving a notice of a determination that the dog is a nonregisterable dangerous dog,
dangerous dog, or should be destroyed from the animal control officer may raise as a defense to prosecution the
following defenses: (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (11), sec. 3, adopted 5/10/04)
(1) If the threat, injury or damage was sustained by a person who at the time was committing a
willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal and was older
than eight years of age at the time of the attack;
(2) If the person was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal or has, in the past, been
reported to have teased, tormented, abused or assaulted the animal and is older than eight years of age
at the time of the attack;
(3) If the person was committing or attempting to commit a crime;
(4) If the dog was protecting or defending a person while in that person's control from an
unjustified attack or assault; or
(5) If the dog was injured and responding to pain.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.409), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.036 Disposition
(a) If the municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control officer, the court shall, subject to
any rights of appeal, order the dog to be euthanized in a safe and humane manner.
(b) In the event the municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or
released to its owner provided the owner reimburses the city for any veterinary medical treatment administered
to the dog while in the custody of the animal control officer.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.410), adopted 2/9/04)
Secs. 2.04.037–2.04.060 Reserved
Division 3. Registerable Dangerous Dogs*
Sec. 2.04.061 Generally
This designation shall refer to a dog determined dangerous under this chapter and in compliance with state law
and that meets any of the following criteria:
(1) Any dog which, when unprovoked, chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks
or any public or private property in an apparent attitude of attack such that the person reasonably
believes that the animal will cause physical injury to the person;
(2) Any dog that commits an unprovoked act in a place other than an enclosure in which the dog
was being kept and which enclosure was reasonably certain to prevent the dog from leaving the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/508
enclosure on its own and the act causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog will attack and
cause bodily injury to any person; or
(3) Any animal that has killed or seriously injured a domestic animal without provocation while off
the owner's property.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.411), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.062 Criteria for determination
A dog is determined to be a registerable dangerous dog if it meets the requirements set out in foregoing section,
and:
(1) The owner of the dog in question knows of such an attack as defined in this chapter; or
(2) The owner is notified by the animal control officer that the dog in question is a registerable
dangerous dog. The animal control officer may find and determine a dog to be a registerable
dangerous dog if:
(A) Upon receipt of an affidavit of complaint signed by one or more individuals made under
oath before an individual authorized by law to take sworn statements, setting forth an act
described in foregoing section of this chapter and setting forth as follows:
(i) The nature and the date of the act described in foregoing section;
(ii) The location of the event;
(iii) The name and address of the owner of the animal in question; and
(iv) The description of the animal in question.
(B) The animal control officer has been notified by another agency that the dog has been
determined to be dangerous under state law.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.412), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.063 Notice of determination; securing of animal; right of appeal
(a) Within five working days of determining a dog to be a registered dangerous dog, if written notification
cannot be given personally to the owner of the dog, the animal control officer will notify, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, the person owning the animal of its designation as a registerable dangerous dog. In the
event that certified mail, return receipt requested, cannot be delivered, the animal control officer may then give
notice by ordinary mail.
(b) If the dog is determined to be registerable under this chapter, the notice shall inform the owner of the dog
that he/she may appeal the determination to municipal court no later than 15 days after the date the owner is
notified of the determination. Failure to appeal the determination of registerable dangerous dog within the 15-
day period shall result in the animal control officer's determination becoming final.
(c) Upon determination by the animal control officer that the dog is dangerous, the owners shall be required to
secure the animal immediately within an enclosure that meets the requirements of this chapter. If the owner fails
to do so, the animal control officer shall impound the dog until such enclosure is provided.
(d) The animal control officer shall immediately notify, in writing, adjacent and contiguous property owners
of such determination.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/508
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.413), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.064 Status of dog pending appeal; taking into custody
Pending the outcome of the appeal, the animal must be confined at a licensed veterinary clinic or at the animal
shelter, the cost of which shall be borne by the owner of the dog in question. If the dog in question is not in the
possession of the animal shelter or a veterinary clinic at the time of the determination, the owner must surrender
the dog to the animal control officer when ordered to do so. If the owner fails to immediately surrender the dog,
the animal control officer shall have the right to take the dog into his possession from the premises of the owner
or elsewhere, wherever the dog may be found within the city limits. If the dog cannot be taken into custody by
the animal control officer, it may be taken, as contraband, into custody under a search warrant issued by the
municipal judge. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.414), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.065 Defense to determination
The defenses identified in section 2.04.035 shall serve as a defenses to the determination of a dog as a
registerable dangerous dog and to the prosecution of the owner of that dog. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A
(2.415), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.066 Disposition
(a) If the municipal court upholds the determination by the animal control officer, the owner shall, no later
than ten days after the hearing, comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered
dangerous dog in the city and the dog shall be returned to the owner provided all costs involved in the
impoundment, holding and medical treatment of the dog are paid.
(b) In the event the municipal court reverses that determination, the dog in question shall be returned to or
released to its owner provided the owner has paid all veterinary medical costs administered to such dog while in
the custody of the animal control officer.
(c) The municipal court may make any reasonable orders for the dog consistent with this chapter and chapter
822 of the Health and Safety Code.
(d) If the animal control officer has information or belief or has determined that a court of competent
jurisdiction has ever made or upheld a determination or declaration that a dog is dangerous, or if the animal
control officer has determined that a declaration or determination of dangerous dog became final for failure to
appeal or any other reason, under previous or other ordinances of this city or other cities or state law, the animal
control officer shall notify the person owning or keeping such dog in writing that the owner shall no later than
ten days after the date of the notice comply with the provisions of this chapter for the keeping of a registered
dangerous dog in the city.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.416), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.067 Requirements for owner; registration
(a) The owner must register the dog with the animal control officer and pay the fees as required by state law
not later than 30 days after the owner is notified that the dog is dangerous. The registration shall not be
transferable and shall expire one year from the date of issuance. The animal control officer shall provide to the
owner of the registered dangerous dog a tag, which must be placed on the dog's collar and worn at all times.
(b) The owner must comply with the following to register the dog:
(1) Present proof of liability insurance or financial responsibility in the amount of at least
$100,000.00 to cover damages resulting from an attack by the dangerous dog;
(2) Present proof of current rabies vaccination of the registerable dangerous dog;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/508
(3) Present proof that the dog has been altered so as to prevent reproduction;
(4) Provide a proper enclosure as defined in this chapter, and that proper enclosure must be
inspected and approved by the animal control officer;
(5) Post a sign on his/her premises warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. This sign
shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street or highway. In addition, the owner
shall conspicuously display a sign with a symbol warning, understandable by small children, of the
presence of a dangerous dog; and
(6) Further identification may be required and designated by the order of the city.
(c) When the registered dangerous dog is taken outside the approved proper enclosure, the animal must be
securely muzzled in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog nor interfere with its vision or respiration but
shall prevent it from biting a person or other animal, and the dog must be restrained by a substantial chain or
cable leash having a minimum tensile strength of 1,000 pounds and not to exceed six feet in length.
(d) Prior to selling or moving the registered dangerous dog either inside or outside the city limits, the owner
must notify the animal control officer of his/her intentions. In the event the dog is moved permanently outside
the city limits, the owner must comply with the state law in notifying the animal control division in control of
the area into which the dog has been moved.
(e) Anyone bringing a dog into the city limits that has been declared dangerous by another animal control
authority must notify the animal control officer of the new address where the dog will be kept, and upon
presentation of the dog's prior registration tag that has not expired shall pay a fee set by the city council, and the
animal control officer shall issue a new tag to be placed on the dog's collar. This owner must also comply with
all requirements set out in this chapter.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.417), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.068 Attacks by registered dangerous dog
The owner of a dangerous dog shall notify the animal control officer of any attacks the dog makes on people or
animals. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.418), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.069 Appeal procedure
Any appeal of the decision or order of the municipal court of the city shall be made within ten days in the same
manner as appeal from civil cases originating in the justice of the peace courts of this state. The municipal court
shall order the appellant to post a supersedeas bond payable to the city in an amount not less than $10,000.00.
The form of the bond shall be as prescribed in the laws pertaining to civil appeals originating in the justice of the
peace courts in this state. The appellant shall be responsible for the cost of appeal. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex.
A (2.419), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.070 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution that the person possessing a dangerous dog is:
(1) A veterinarian, a peace officer, or an employee of the city, and the harboring of the dog was in
the performance of his/her duties;
(2) An employee of the institutional division of the state department of criminal justice or a law
enforcement agency and trains or uses dogs for law enforcement or corrections purposes; or
(3) A dog trainer or an employee of a guard dog company, while in the performance of his/her
duties, under the Private Security Act.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/508
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.420), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.04.071 Violations; civil penalty
(a) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and the dog
makes an unprovoked attack on another person outside the dog's proper enclosure and causes bodily injury to the
other person, whether or not the dog was on a leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped
without fault of the owner.
(b) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog
kills or wounds a domestic animal while outside the dog's proper enclosure, whether or not the dog was on a
leash and securely muzzled or whether or not the dog escaped without fault of the owner.
(c) It shall be a violation of this article if the person is the owner of a registered dangerous dog and that dog
attacks a person who gains access to the proper enclosure due to negligence on the part of the owner or the
owner's agent. This negligence shall include a failure to comply with the notification of ownership of dangerous
dog through posting of warning signs in accordance with this article.
(d) In addition to criminal prosecution, a person who commits an offense under this article is liable for a civil
penalty not to exceed $10,000.00. The city attorney may file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect
the penalty. Penalties collected under this subsection shall be retained by the city.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.421), adopted 2/9/04)
ARTICLE 2.05 IMPOUNDMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 2.05.001 Generally
(a) Animals owned or harbored in violation of this chapter or law of the state or those safekeeping or humane
situations provided in this chapter shall be taken into custody by an animal control officer or other designated
official and impounded under this chapter.
(b) Owners of impounded pets are required to pay all fees related to the impoundment as set forth in the fee
schedule found in appendix A of this code. In addition to the impoundment fee, the owner shall pay for any
veterinarian or drug fees incurred for the animal while in the custody of the animal control officer or animal
shelter.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.501), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.002 Tampering with impoundment facilities; unlawful release of animal
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city without proper authority to break into, open, pull down the
enclosure of or make any opening into the animal shelter or any enclosure belonging to or used by the city to
impound or keep animals. It shall also be unlawful for any person to turn out or release, or cause to be turned out
or released, or aid or abet the turning out or release of, any animal from the animal shelter, from an
impoundment vehicle or from any enclosure used by the city for the impoundment of animals. (Ordinance 04-
01-12 (12), ex. A (2.502), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.003 Redemption of impounded animal
(a) Generally; payment of fees. Except as may be provided elsewhere in this chapter, the owner of any animal
impounded in accordance with this chapter may reclaim, on any workday, such animal upon showing
satisfactory proof of ownership and paying all impoundment fees and any other expenses incurred by the city or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/508
its agent in keeping the animal or attempting to locate the owner of the animal. If the owner does not pay such
fees, or some alternate fee satisfaction as provided for in section 2.02.006 of this chapter, the animal may be sold
or otherwise disposed of by the city or its agent.
(b) Spaying or neutering. If a dog or cat has been impounded on two prior occasions, the dog or cat must be
spayed or neutered before being released to the owner if impounded on a third occasion. The owner of the dog or
cat will be responsible for arranging for the spay or neuter surgery. The dog or cat will be transported to the
veterinarian by an animal control officer or an employee or agent of the animal shelter. The cost to spay or
neuter the dog or cat shall be paid by the owner, along with the impoundment fees, either to the animal shelter or
to the veterinarian, in advance of transporting the animal for the surgery. After the surgery is performed, the
veterinarian may release the dog or cat to the owner.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.503), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.004 Disposition of impounded animals
(a) Dogs and cats with no identification. All dogs and cats impounded by the animal control officer, or
brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that animal, shall be held for a
minimum of 72 hours, during which time period the owner may present proof of ownership at the shelter. After
paying all applicable fees, that owner may reclaim the dog/cat. In the event that the dog/cat is not claimed after
72 hours in the shelter, the dog/cat shall become the property of the city.
(b) Dogs and cats with identification. Unless earlier claimed by the owner, all dogs and cats impounded by the
animal control officer, or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than the harborer or owner of that
animal, that are wearing traceable identification, or where an owner is known, shall be held in the shelter for a
minimum of seven complete days from the time the animal enters the facility, during which time the animal
control officer will notify the owner, when known, of the impoundment. Unless the owner has notified the
animal control officer in writing of his/her intention to claim the dog/cat after that date, listing a date by which
time that owner will reclaim the dog/cat and satisfy all applicable fees, and this arrangement has been approved
by the animal control supervisor, the animal shall become the property of the city on the eighth day.
(c) Animals surrendered by owner/harborer. All animals surrendered by the owner/harborer to the animal
control officer shall become the property of the city immediately upon completion of the owner/harborer
surrender form. The owner/harborer of an animal shall pay a fee for surrender of any animal according to the fee
schedule set forth in appendix A of this code.
(d) Other animals. All animals other than dogs, cats, estrays or animals holding current restricted animal
permits that are impounded by the animal control officer or brought to the animal shelter by a person other than
the owner/harborer shall become the property of the city unless such ownership is prohibited by state or federal
law.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.504), adopted 2/9/04)
(e) Disposition of unredeemed animals. Any animal that cannot be adopted or transferred to a proper and
appropriate agency shall be euthanized by an injection of substances approved for euthanasia by the American
Veterinary Medical Association and/or the Texas Veterinary Medical Association to be administered in
compliance with policy and laws of the state. All animals listed as endangered or protected shall be transferred
to the proper authority at the earliest possible date. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.504), adopted 2/9/04;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.05.005 Adoption of animals
(a) All animals which are adopted from the animal shelter shall be surgically altered to prevent reproduction in
that animal. If the animal has not been altered before it leaves the animal shelter, the person adopting the animal
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/508
shall sign an adoption contract stating that he/she will have the animal surgically altered and the date by which
the surgery must be performed (generally dogs and cats should be altered after reaching 6 months of age).
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the person adopting to provide proof of altering to the animal control
officer.
(c) Failure to comply with this section or failure to comply with the terms of the adoption contract shall give
the animal control officer the right to recover the adopted animal in question and revoke the owner's adoption
contract. Such failure shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.
(d) The adoption fee shall be set herein as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code
and may be increased or decreased as needed by the city council. An agreement may be reached with approved
veterinarians for direct payments of surgery and associated costs. The person adopting the animal shall be
responsible for all fees related to the adoption.
(e) This section's requirements of altering and the adoption fee shall not apply where cooperative agreements
between the animal control division and an animal welfare group are made for the placement with such groups
of animals subject to adoption. Likewise, this section's requirements shall not apply to animal transfers made
under cooperative agreements between the animal control division and other governmental entities.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.505), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Sterilization of dog or cat released for adoption, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 828.
Secs. 2.05.006–2.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Livestock and Fowl*
Sec. 2.05.031 Running at large prohibited
(a) It is unlawful for any owner or person in control of any horse, mule, jack, jennet, cattle, hog, goat or sheep
(estray) to permit any such animal to run at large on land not his own or under his control, or on any street, alley
or other public place in the city.
(b) It is unlawful for the owner or person in control of any chicken or other fowl to permit the same to run at
large on any land not his own or under his control, or on any street, alley or other public place in the city.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.506), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.032 Impoundment authorized; records
The animal control authority, upon receipt of a report or upon discovery of an estray within the city, shall, as
soon as possible, notify the sheriff of the county and report the presence of the animal and the location where the
animal can be found. If circumstance permits, the animal control officer shall refer the matter in its entirety to
the sheriff. If circumstance does not permit or the sheriff seeks the assistance of the animal control authority, the
animal control officer may cause the impoundment of any and all estray and other livestock that may be found in
and upon any street or alley or upon any unenclosed lot in the city, or otherwise to be found at large, and confine
such estray or other livestock for safekeeping. Upon impounding, the animal control officer shall prepare a file
to be located in the animal control division offices. Each entry shall include the following:
(1) The name and address of the person who notified the animal control officer of the estray or
other livestock;
(2) The date, time and location of the estray or other livestock when found;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/508
(3) The location of the estray or other livestock until disposition; and
(4) A description of the animal, including its breed, color, sex, age, size, all markings of any kind
and other identifying characteristics.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.507), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.033 Advertisement of impounded animal
When an estray or other livestock has been impounded by the animal control authority, the animal control officer
shall make a diligent search of the register of recorded brands in the county for the owner of the estray or other
livestock. If the search does not reveal the owner, the animal control officer shall advertise the impoundment of
the estray in a newspaper of general circulation in the county at least twice during the next 15 days following
impoundment and post a notice of the impoundment of the estray or other livestock on the public notice board of
city hall. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.508), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.034 Recovery of animal by owner
The owner of an estray or other livestock may recover possession of the animal at any time before the animal is
sold under the terms of this chapter if:
(1) The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership of the estray
or other livestock containing at least the following information:
(A) The name and address of the owner;
(B) The date the owner discovered that the animal was missing;
(C) The property from which the animal strayed;
(D) A description of the animal, including its breed, color, sex, size, all markings of any kind
and any other identifying characteristics;
(2) The animal control officer has approved the affidavit; and
(3) The owner has paid all handling fees to those entitled to receive them.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.509), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.035 Sale of impounded animal
(a) If the ownership of an estray or other livestock is not determined within 14 days following the final
advertisement required by this chapter, ownership of the estray or other livestock rests with the city and the
animal control officer shall then cause the estray or other livestock to be sold at a public auction. If there are not
any bidders, ownership is forfeited to the city.
(b) Title shall be deemed vested in the animal control officer for purposes of passing a good title, free and
clear of all claims, to the purchaser at the sale.
(c) The disposition of the proceeds derived from the sale at public auction will be as follows:
(1) Pay all handling fees to those entitled to receive them;
(2) Execute a report of sale of impounded stock;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/508
(3) The net proceeds remaining from the sale of the estray or other livestock after the handling fees
have been paid shall be delivered by the animal control officer to the city secretary. Such net
proceeds shall be subject to claim by the original owner of the estray or other livestock as provided
herein;
(4) If the bids are too low, the animal control officer shall have the right to refuse all bids and
arrange for another public auction or sealed bidding procedure.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.510), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.036 Recovery of sale proceeds by owner
(a) Within 12 months after the sale of an estray or other livestock under the provisions of this chapter, the
original owner of the estray may recover the net proceeds of the sale that were delivered to the city treasurer if:
(1) The owner has provided the animal control officer with an affidavit of ownership; and
(2) The animal control officer has accepted the affidavit of ownership.
(b) After the expiration of 12 months from the sale of an estray or other livestock as provided by this chapter,
the sale proceeds shall escheat to the city. If an animal was forfeited to the city due to no bidders at auction, then
the city is not to be liable to owner for any proceeds of sale, since no proceeds were received.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.511), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.037 Use of impounded animal
During the period of time an estray or other livestock is held by one who impounded the estray or other
livestock, it may not be used by any person for any purpose. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.512), adopted
2/9/04)
Sec. 2.05.038 Death or escape of impounded animal
If the estray or other livestock dies or escapes while held by the person who impounded it, the person shall
report the death or escape to the animal control officer. The report shall be filed in the record regarding the
impoundment. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.513), adopted 2/9/04)
ARTICLE 2.06 RABIES CONTROL*
Sec. 2.06.001 Vaccination of dogs and cats required
(a) All dogs or cats four months of age or older within the city shall be vaccinated against rabies. Such
vaccinations shall be repeated annually (within 12 months from the previous rabies vaccination). (Ordinance
2004-04-12 (11), sec. 4, adopted 5/10/04)
(b) A veterinarian who vaccinates a dog or cat against rabies shall issue to the owner of such dog or cat a
vaccination certificate on a form approved by the department of state health services. The veterinarian shall also
issue a metal tag with the veterinarian's address and the year of the vaccination stamped thereon. Upon
vaccination, the veterinarian shall execute and furnish to the owner of the dog or cat, as evidence thereof, a
certificate of vaccination. The veterinarian shall retain a duplicate copy of the certificate and one copy shall be
filed with the owner. Such certificate shall contain the following information.
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the vaccinated dog or cat;
(2) The date of vaccination;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/508
(3) The type of rabies vaccine used;
(4) The year and number of the rabies tag; and
(5) The breed, age, color and sex of the vaccinated dog or cat.
(c) Concurrent with the issuance and delivery of the certificate of vaccination, the owner of the dog or cat
shall cause to be attached to the collar or harness of the vaccinated animal a metal tag, serially numbered to
correspond with the vaccination certificate number and bearing the year of issuance.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to own, keep, possess, harbor or allow to remain upon
premises under his control any dog or cat which has not been vaccinated as required herein. Any person
establishing residence within the city shall comply with this chapter within ten days of establishing such
residency.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.601), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Rabies vaccinations, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.021 et seq.
Sec. 2.06.002 Vaccination of impounded animals
(a) After impoundment, all animals which are required to be vaccinated by this article which are redeemed by
an owner from the animal shelter must be vaccinated against rabies in accordance with the requirements of this
article, or the owner thereof must present a veterinarian's certificate showing a current vaccination.
(b) In order for an animal not vaccinated in accordance with the requirements of this article to be released,
such owner must sign a statement giving the name of the owner and the address where the animal is to be
immediately taken and confined and stating that the owner will have the animal vaccinated in accordance with
the requirements of this article. Within seven days of the release of the animal, a certificate of vaccination shall
be presented to the animal shelter. Failure to present the vaccination certificate to the animal shelter within the
stated time shall be grounds for the immediate return of the animal to the animal shelter, and such animal may be
destroyed immediately or otherwise disposed of. Such failure shall also constitute a misdemeanor punishable as
set out in section 2.02.003, except that the minimum fine shall be $200.00.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.602), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.06.003 Proof of vaccination; dismissal of offense
The failure of a dog or cat to wear a vaccination tag on a collar shall be prima facie evidence of the failure to
vaccinate the animal as required by this article. To prove that a dog or cat was vaccinated at the time of the
offense, the owner of the dog or cat must present a copy of the vaccination certificate issued by the veterinarian
that shows the date the vaccination was administered. The offense shall be dismissed upon verification that the
animal alleged in the offense was vaccinated on the date of the offense with the payment of an administrative fee
in the amount provided in appendix A to this code. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.603), adopted 2/9/04;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 2.06.004 Reporting of rabid animals or rabies exposure required
(a) It shall be the duty of all animal owners, veterinarians, physicians or any other person to report to the
animal control officer all cases of rabies with which he comes in contact or to which his attention has been
directed. This report shall be made immediately upon diagnosis or suspicion of a case of rabies.
(b) Any person having knowledge of an animal bite or scratch to an individual or to another animal by an
animal which the person suspects is rabid shall report that incident to the animal control officer within 24 hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/508
(c) Every physician or other medical practitioner who treats a person or persons for any animal bite/scratch
that occurred within the city shall within 12 hours report such treatment to the animal control officer, giving the
name, age, sex and precise location of the bitten/scratched person or persons and such other information as the
officer or agency may require.
(d) Any veterinarian who clinically diagnoses rabies or any person who suspects rabies in a dog, cat or other
domestic or wild animal shall immediately report the incident to the animal control officer, stating precisely
where such animal may be found.
(e) If a known suspected rabid animal bites or scratches a domestic animal, such incident shall also be
reported immediately to the animal control officer.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.604), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Reports of rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.041.
Sec. 2.06.005 Animal biting or scratching person
(a) Report by victim. Any person who is bitten or scratched by an animal shall report that fact to the animal
control officer within 24 hours. If the person bitten or scratched is a minor under the age of 17, the parent or
guardian of such minor, if he has knowledge of the incident, shall report that fact to the animal control officer
within 24 hours.
(b) Report by owner. A person who owns, keeps, harbors or allows an animal to remain on premises under his
control and who has knowledge of a bite shall report to the animal control officer within 24 hours any incident
where such animal bit or scratched any person.
(c) Submission of animal for quarantine. The animal committing the act shall be submitted to the animal
control officer for quarantine. When the local rabies control authority goes to the premises where the animal that
bit or scratched any person is being kept, the animal control officer may take immediate custody of the animal.
Where suitable arrangements are made, the local rabies control authority may permit the animal to be transferred
to another location for the remainder of the quarantine period. This duty to submit the animal to quarantine shall
apply to any person who owns, keeps, harbors, has possession of or allows an animal to remain on premises
under his control. If convicted of violating this section, a minimum fine of $100.00 shall be imposed by the
municipal court.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.605), adopted 2/9/04)
(d) Observation of animal. Any owned dog, cat or ferret having bitten or scratched a person shall be observed
for a period of ten days from the date of the bite. The procedure and place of observation shall be designated by
the investigating officer or responsible agency in compliance with state law. If the dog or cat is not confined on
the owner's premises for owner's quarantine, confinement shall be by impoundment in the animal shelter, or at a
veterinary hospital of the owner's choice. Such confinement shall be at the owner's expense. (Ordinance 04-01-
12 (12), ex. A (2.605), adopted 2/9/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
(e) Stray dogs and cats. Stray dogs and cats, or those animals whose owners cannot be located, shall be
confined in the animal shelter for a period of 96 hours, and if unclaimed may be destroyed and the brain of such
animal immediately submitted to a qualified laboratory for rabies examination at the victim's expense.
(f) Surrender of animal. The owner of any dog or cat that has been reported to have inflicted a bite on any
person shall on demand produce the dog or cat for impoundment, as prescribed in this chapter.
(g) Home quarantine. Home quarantine may be allowed only in those incidents where permitted by state law
and agreed to by the animal control officer. Refusal to produce such dog or cat constitutes a violation of this
section, and each day of such refusal shall constitute a separate and individual violation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/508
(h) Wild, exotic or dangerous animals. Any wild, exotic or dangerous animal that is considered high risk by
state law or regulation and which has bitten or scratched a person shall be caught and humanely killed and the
brain submitted for rabies examination. Those wild animals which are classified as low risk animals shall be
handled as dictated by state law.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.605), adopted 2/9/04)
State law reference–Quarantine of animals, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.042.
Sec. 2.06.006 Contents of reports
When an individual is placed under a duty to report an incident in which an animal has bitten or scratched some
person or some animal or to report an animal known or suspected to be rabid, that report to the animal control
officer shall include, if the person making the report knows, the following information:
(1) The location where the bite or scratch occurred.
(2) The location where the animal which committed the act or which is known or suspected to have
rabies or have been exposed to rabies can be located.
(3) The name and address of any person who was bitten or scratched.
(4) The name and address of the person who owns, keeps, harbors or has control over the premises
where the animal committing the act normally can be found.
(5) The names and addresses of the persons who own, keep or harbor [or have control over the
premises where] any other animal exposed to rabies can be found.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.606), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.06.007 Quarantine; release from quarantine
(a) When an animal is required to be placed in quarantine, the animal shall be submitted for quarantine at the
animal shelter. Only with the prior approval of the local rabies control authority may the animal be held in
quarantine at any other location. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.607), adopted 2/9/04)
(b) Any domestic dog, cat or ferret quarantined shall be held for a period of ten days from the date of the bite.
Other animals shall be quarantined for a period of 30 days. The animal shall not be released from quarantine
until such release has been approved by the local rabies control authority. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A
(2.607), adopted 2/9/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
(c) Upon release of an animal from quarantine, if the ownership of the animal is known, such owner has 48
hours to claim the animal. If the ownership of the animal is unknown, the animal may be disposed of as provided
in this article without waiting for an additional 72 hours. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.607), adopted
2/9/04)
State law references–Release or disposition of quarantined animal, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 826.043.
Sec. 2.06.008 Submission of head for rabies diagnosis
(a) If the animal biting or scratching a person is a wild animal, the animal shall be humanely destroyed in such
a manner that the brain is not mutilated. The head shall then be submitted to a laboratory certified by the
department of state health services for rabies diagnosis.
(b) If an animal being quarantined becomes ill, it may be humanely destroyed in such a manner that the head
is not mutilated. The head shall then be submitted to a laboratory certified by the department of state health
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/508
services for rabies diagnosis. The head of each animal dying while in quarantine shall also be submitted for
rabies diagnosis.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.608), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.06.009 Payment of cost of quarantine or rabies diagnosis
(a) If, at the end of the required quarantine period, a quarantined animal is found to be free of rabies, the local
rabies control authority shall order the release of the animal to the owner if the rabies vaccination provisions of
this article have been complied with and any and all impoundment and quarantine fees have been paid by such
owner.
(b) The impoundment fees and quarantine fees shall be according to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A
of this code.
(c) If a head is submitted to the department of state health services for rabies diagnosis, the cost of removing
the head and shipping it shall be paid by the owner of the animal.
(d) (1) The local rabies control authority may order that all impoundment fees and all quarantine
fees be paid by the person bitten or scratched if:
(A) The animal has a rabies vaccination certificate;
(B) The animal was on property under the control of the animal's owner when the bite or
scratch occurred; and
(C) The bite or scratch occurred when the animal was acting to defend its owner or the
property, or after provocation.
(2) If the animal is a wild animal, the local rabies control authority may order that all fees be paid
by the person who was bitten or scratched.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (11), sec. 5, adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 2.06.010 Enforcement
For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this article and to enforce its provisions, any peace officer
or animal control officer is empowered to enter upon any premises upon which an animal is kept or harbored and
to demand the exhibition by the owner of such animal of the license for such animal in accordance with the
provisions of this article, to include random city-wide canvassing and checks for compliance with this article.
The owner of any animal is required to produce the license or vaccination information for each animal in his
ownership upon demand by an animal control officer or peace officer. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.610),
adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.06.011 Counterfeiting or destruction of tag, certificate or license
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly counterfeit a rabies vaccination tag or
certificate or a license.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally or knowingly destroy a rabies vaccination tag or
certificate.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (11), sec. 6, adopted 5/10/04)
ARTICLE 2.07 COMMERCIAL ANIMAL ENTERPRISES AND MULTIPLE ANIMAL OWNERSHIP
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/508
Sec. 2.07.001 Permit required
(a) Permits shall be required for all commercial animal enterprises and multi-animal owners. Commercial
animal enterprises shall include but not be limited to enterprises such as kennels, pet shops, riding stables,
animal auctions, zoological parks, circuses, performing animal exhibitions, animal training services, grooming
shops, petting zoos, aviaries or any similar entrepreneurial relationships regarding animals. Five or more animals
maintained at any one residence shall be considered a multi-animal owner. No person shall maintain, harbor or
care for more than four but limited to six dogs or cats or animals of any species or any combination thereof,
excluding fish and fowl, without having obtained a multi-animal owner permit for any one residence, excluding
fish and fowl.
(b) All such permits shall be considered commercial except multi-animal owner. Multi-animal owner permits
shall be considered as relative only to private multiple animal ownership, with no relationship to any commercial
animal enterprise. Multiple animal ownership permits shall not be required for residences with common
household pets having “litters” which remain at such residences for a period of time not exceeding four months.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.701), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.07.002 Term of permit; fee; revocation
(a) Permits shall be valid for one year from date of issuance. The permit fee and renewal fee shall be
according to the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(b) The animal control officer, upon an inspection finding inconsistent with the permit requirements of this
article, may file an application with the municipal judge to revoke any permit issued under this article. In
addition to conducting a full revocation hearing, the municipal judge may temporarily suspend any permit
pending a full hearing if such immediate action is determined reasonably necessary to protect the public health
or the safety of any animal.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.702), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.07.003 Facility requirements
(a) Upon inspection of the premises by the animal control officer, the permit shall be issued if the following
conditions are met:
(1) The facility must be adequate for the number and type of animals to be kept.
(A) The facility must be of sufficient size as to allow animals to move about freely. This shall
apply to each animal kept. Size of the facility shall be in proportion to the size of the individual
animal's height and weight.
(B) Adequate food and water must be provided so that each and all animals kept shall be
maintained in good health and free of malnutrition and/or dehydration.
(C) The premises shall be kept in a sanitary condition and reasonably free of animal waste,
parasites, insects and flies that could be harmful to the animal's health and/or to the health of
the general public.
(2) The animals and the facility must be kept free of odor or stench which is offensive to a person
of ordinary sensibilities.
(3) The animals must be maintained in a manner which does not pose a danger to the health of the
animals themselves or to adjacent animals.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/508
(4) The animals must not cause noise which is offensive or disturbing to a person of ordinary
sensibilities on adjoining, adjacent or neighboring premises.
(5) The applicant or holder of the permit shall not have been issued citations for violation of this
chapter on two separate occasions, or animals covered by or to be covered by the permit have not
been impounded on two separate occasions.
(b) The chief of police shall adopt standard operational procedures for the animal control division consistent
with this article in providing guidelines and standards for the inspection of such facilities for permitting and for
the periodic monitoring of such facilities. Such permitted facilities may be randomly inspected for compliance
with the basic requirements stated herein at any reasonable time for a multiple animal owner permitted residence
or during regular business hours for a commercial animal enterprise permitted facility. Refusal to allow such
inspections shall be grounds for permit revocation.
(Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.703), adopted 2/9/04)
Sec. 2.07.004 Violations
Any commercial animal enterprise or multi-pet owner permit may be revoked if the owner's facility is found to
be in violation of this chapter, any zoning law or health law or any other applicable ordinance of the city or of
the state, or if the facility is maintained in such a manner as to be detrimental to the health, safety or peace of
mind of persons residing in the immediate vicinity. (Ordinance 04-01-12 (12), ex. A (2.7044), adopted 2/9/04)
CHAPTER 3
BUILDING REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 3.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 3.01.001 Purpose and scope
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public
welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location and
maintenance of all buildings and structures within the city and other such equipment regulated herein. The
provisions of this chapter shall apply to all construction, site clearance, alteration, moving and repair of any
building or structure within the city. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.101), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.01.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Accessory building. A subordinate building located on the same lot as a principal building, the activity of which
is clearly integral with or incidental to the permitted use of the principal building.
Alterations. Any change, addition or modification in construction, including any change in structural members
of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the consummated act of which may be
referred to herein as “altered” or “reconstructed.”
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/508
Approved. Having paid all permit fees and receiving the written approval of the code enforcement officer, or
appropriate inspector, as the result of an investigation and, if necessary, tests conducted by the code enforcement
officer or appropriate enforcement official of the city.
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof or other covering, and designed or used
for the shelter or enclosure of any person, animal or property of any kind, including tents, awnings or vehicles
situated on private property.
Certificate of occupancy or completion. A written certificate issued by the CEO authorizing use and occupancy
of a structure upon the satisfactory completion of any work or operations authorized by the city's building permit
or other permit or change in occupancy. No occupancy of any new [structure], or change requiring a permit,
shall take place until a written certificate titled “certificate of occupancy” or “certificate of completion” therefor
shall have been issued by the CEO.
City or municipality. The City of Rockdale, Texas.
City attorney or corporate counsel. The attorney appointed to represent the city.
City official. The legally designated head of a city department or his authorized representative when acting in an
official capacity.
Code enforcement officer or CEO (herein inspector, CEO or code enforcement officer). The person, his staff or
employees, or entity designated by the city or appointed to perform the duties and responsibilities set forth
herein, or, if none has been appointed, the chief executive officer. Where the inspection is for plumbing,
electrical or other such inspection or permitting, the inspector designated to perform such specific duties is the
code enforcement officer for such project.
Dwelling. A building used for residential purposes.
Dwelling unit. A residential unit designed to accommodate one (1) household.
Fire chief or fire marshal. The legally designated chief of the fire department of the city, or his authorized
representative.
Health officer or health inspector. The legally designated head of the city health department or his authorized
representative, or, where none, the head of the county health department or his authorized representative.
Occupant. Any person who rents, leases or appears to reside in, rent or lease a building, structure or property
through custody of the premises or who has the legal right to possession of such premises.
Owner. Any person who holds any interest in the legal title of a building, structure or property or who has the
legal right of possession thereof.
Permit. A written document or certification issued by the CEO permitting the specific construction, alteration, or
extension requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter and regulations stated herein.
Person. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
Plot plan or site plan. A graphic representation, drawn to scale, in a horizontal plane, delineating the outlines of
the land included in the plan and all proposed use locations, accurately dimensioned, the dimensions also
including the relation of each use to that adjoining and to the boundary of the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/508
Police chief. The legally designated chief of the police department of the city, or his authorized representative.
Repair. The reconstruction, renovation or renewal of any part of an existing building or structure for the purpose
of its maintenance or improvement.
Responsible parties or responsible party. The owner or occupant, including the person in custody of the
building, property or structure, and any mortgagee or lienholder.
Utility service. Shall have its common meaning and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, electric,
water, wastewater, gas and telephone service.
Variance. A modification of the literal provisions of this chapter granted when strict enforcement of this chapter
would cause undue hardship caused by circumstances unique to the individual property on which the variance is
granted.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.103), adopted 12/28/01)
ARTICLE 3.02 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.02.001 Permit, bond and insurance requirements
(a) Permits generally.
(1) No building or structure or part thereof shall be hereafter constructed, erected, altered, moved,
or placed within the city unless all appropriate permits to comply with this chapter shall have first
been issued for such work. No permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city for
building or for connection to the city's water and wastewater services or a private sewage facility
upon any lot in a subdivision or confirming plat for which a final plat has not been approved by the
city and filed for record, or upon any lot in a subdivision in which the standards contained in the
city's subdivision ordinance, as amended, or referred to therein, have not been complied with in full.
No site clearance, excavation, grading, or land fill on public or private land shall commence unless
all applicable permits shall have first been issued for such work.
(2) Any owner or occupant may personally make minor improvements and ordinary repairs on any
structure without a permit provided that such improvements and repairs conform to all applicable
building laws and codes. The CEO shall have the right to inspect all such improvements or repairs
and determine whether a permit is necessary.
(b) Moving permit. No building or structure or part thereof shall be moved onto or over the city streets unless
a permit shall have first been issued for such move.
(c) Bond or deposit.
(1) Before any permit pursuant to this chapter is issued, the applicant shall file with the city a
corporate surety bond, approved by the city attorney, or a cash deposit with the city, which deposit
shall be placed in an escrow account in accordance with the following table:
Estimated Cost of Construction Surety Bond Cash Deposit
$0.00 - $500.00 None None
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/508
$500.01 - $1,000.00 $250.00 $25.00
$1,000.01 - $2,000.00 $500.00 $50.00
$2,000.01 - $5,000.00 $1,000.00 $100.00
$5,000.01 - $10,000.00 $2,500.00 $250.00
$10,000.01 - $30,000.00 $10,000.00 $1,000.00
$30,000.01 and above Thirty-three percent of costs Ten percent of costs
(2) When applications are submitted where the costs of the total project are estimated to be more
than $30,000.00, the CEO may require that a bond or deposit in an amount based on a percentage of
the cost of the project in question shall be tendered prior to issuance of a permit. The CEO may
require a larger or smaller bond or deposit when, in his or her opinion, the nature of the permit
indicates such a need. Such bond shall be conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with this
chapter and other ordinances of the city, and shall secure and may be used for the payment of any and
all damages to persons or property (including the city) which damages arise from, or are caused by,
any act or conduct of or authorized by the applicant.
(d) Insurance. Before a construction project is started for which a bond or deposit is required under this
chapter, each person applying shall furnish to the city evidence that he or she has procured public liability and
property damage insurance in the following amounts:
(1) For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of one person in any one accident:
$100,000.00.
(2) For damages arising out of bodily injury or death of two or more persons in any accident:
$300,000.00.
(3) For injury or destruction of property in any one accident: $100,000.00.
Such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period of time for which a bond or deposit shall
be issued or the premises occupied. The city may waive this insurance requirement for minor construction
projects.
(e) Exemptions. State, county and federal agencies are exempt from the bond and deposit requirements.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.104), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.002 Application for permit; site plan; construction plans
(a) Application for permit. To obtain a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall first file an application
therefor in writing. Each such application shall be accompanied by the required fee and shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/508
(1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made;
(2) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done, by lot, block, tract and house or
structure and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the
proposed work;
(3) Indicate the use and occupancy for which the proposed work is intended;
(4) Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required in subsections (b) and (c) of this
section;
(5) State the valuation of the proposed work;
(6) Be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to
indicate authority;
(7) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the CEO.
(b) Site plan. All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a site plan drawn to scale,
together with such additional copies as the CEO may determine to be necessary for review by other city
officials. The site plan shall contain the following:
(1) A legal description of the land included on the site plan and of the lot; the addresses and
telephone numbers of the owner, the builder and the designer or architect;
(2) Lot and block number; and street number as approved by the U.S. Postal Service;
(3) The actual shape, location, and dimensions of the lot, an arrow pointing north and the lot area
of the land included in the site plan;
(4) Erosion and sedimentation controls in use during construction;
(5) Location and dimensions of easements and setback requirements;
(6) Floodplain elevations, showing the floodway and that portion of the lot which is subject to
inundation by the 100-year flood;
(7) Location of existing and proposed walks, driveways, off-street parking design and access
roads;
(8) The existing and intended use of the lot and of all such structures upon it, including, in
residential areas, the number of dwelling units the building is intended to accommodate;
(9) Existing and proposed grades and drainage systems and structures, with topographic contours
at intervals not exceeding two (2) feet;
(10) The architectural design, shape, size and location of all buildings or other structures to be
erected, altered, or moved and of any buildings or other structures already on the lot;
(11) Site clearance and excavation plans;
(12) Exterior lighting plans;
(13) Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for
determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/508
(c) Construction plans. Construction plans and specifications for all contemplated construction on the site
shall be provided to the CEO, and such plans shall include at least the following information:
(1) Scaled floor plan of each floor and of the basement, if any, for each building.
(2) Plan of all attached terraces, porches, or covered walkways, and/or attached or detached garage
or carport and accessory buildings, parking lots and driveways, and all other structures as herein
defined. All setback dimensions shall be indicated on the plans.
(3) Location and size of all permanently installed construction and equipment, such as closets,
storage, plumbing fixtures, appliances, etc.
(4) Location and symbols of all electrical equipment, including switches, outlets, fixtures, etc.
(5) Exterior elevations:
(A) All exterior elevations.
(B) Wall and roof finish materials.
(C) Dimensions of overhang.
(D) Height from finished ground grade.
(E) Undisturbed and finished ground grade line.
(6) Structural section:
(A) Cross-section of typical wall construction details.
(B) Scale plan of foundation and pertinent section of typical beams, footings, girders, etc.
(7) Architect/engineer seal, when applicable (only if required by state law):
(A) Architects or engineers shall affix their seal, actual signature, and date of affixation to all
original construction drawings, including index sheets identifying all drawings covered,
addenda, and change orders which are developed and issued under the direct supervision or
authorship of the architect as contract documents.
(B) Those sheets or pages prepared by consultants (structural, mechanical, electrical, etc.)
retained by the architect or engineer shall also bear the seal and registration number of the
consultant responsible therefor. The architect's seal on the work of his/her consultants shall be
applied only after the seal of the consultant has been applied and shall attest only to the
architect's coordination of the consultant's work with that of the architect's and does not imply
the architect's practice of engineering or other consultant's specialty. The engineer's seal on the
work of his/her consultants shall be applied only after the seal of the consultant has been
applied and shall attest only to the engineer's coordination of the consultant's work with that of
the engineer's and does not imply the engineer's practice of architecture or other consultant's
specialty.
(C) An architect's seal is required on plans relating to new commercial permits. An engineer's
seal is required when mandated by state law, city ordinance or the technical codes.
(8) Erosion and sedimentation control plan to be used during construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/508
(9) Such other information as deemed reasonably necessary by the CEO. If a geotechnical report or
engineered foundation plans are required, the applicant may provide a report covering the soil
conditions typical to the area and may provide a typical foundation plan for such conditions. The
applicant would not have to submit a separate report or a separate plan for each individual site.
(d) Licensing. Any work required to be performed by a licensed operator must have such license submitted at
the time of application for a permit. The permit may only be issued in the name of the licensed operator. No
other person may perform services or work requiring a license unless such person is permitted by the terms of
this chapter, has a valid permit for the work or service and has a current valid license from the state to perform
the services or work.
(e) Verification of compliance with Architectural Barriers Act. For all public and private commercial projects
in excess of $50,000.00, the owner shall be required to verify compliance with the Texas Architectural Barriers
Act or claim exemption.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.105), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.003 Issuance of permit; conditions
(a) Review of application. The application, plans, specifications and other data filed in support of a permit or
license shall be reviewed by the CEO or other inspector. The city engineer may be asked by the CEO to review
the permit application and plans to insure compliance with this chapter and other applicable city ordinances,
codes, standards and specifications, and good engineering practices. If the CEO determines that the work
described in an application and the required plans, specifications, and other data comply with this chapter and
other applicable ordinances, and that all fees have been paid, (s)he shall issue the permit or license, as
applicable, to the applicant.
(b) Fees. Applicable fees pursuant to city ordinances and as set forth in appendix A of this code shall be paid,
including, but not limited to, all professional fees, engineer, and attorney fees incurred by the city for or with
respect to the review, processing and approval of the application for the approval of the permit.
(c) Approval or denial. When the CEO issues a permit where plans are required, the approved plans and
specifications shall be endorsed or stamped “APPROVED.” The approved plans and specifications shall not be
changed, modified, or altered without authorization from the CEO. All work shall be done in accordance with
the approved plans. Approval of an application for permit is not guaranteed and approval does not authorize
deviation from any ordinance or statute. The applicant must tender all relevant information requested by the
CEO in the format required in a timely fashion to the CEO. All applications denied shall be endorsed or stamped
“DENIED.” The CEO shall indicate the reason for denial in writing to the applicant. The applicant may appeal
the decision of the CEO as provided in section 3.02.012 herein by filing a notice of appeal with the city secretary
specifying the grounds for appeal therein. The duration of time required for review of permit applications and
plans shall depend on the availability of the CEO.
(d) Permit for part of work. The CEO may issue a permit for construction of part of a building, structure, or
building service equipment before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building, structure, or
building service equipment have been submitted or approved, when information and detailed statements have
been filed with the city which the CEO determines adequately comply with the requirements of this chapter. The
holder of a permit issued under this subsection may proceed with construction at his or her own risk, without
assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be approved. No vested right shall arise under a
permit issued under this subsection.
(e) Validity of permit. The issuance of a permit and the approval of plans and specifications is not a permit for,
or an approval of, any violation of any provision of this chapter or any other city ordinance. Issuance of a permit
based on plans, specifications, and other data shall not prevent the CEO from thereafter requiring the correction
of errors in the plans, specifications, and other data, or from preventing building operations being carried on
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/508
thereunder when in violation of this chapter or other applicable city ordinances. No permit presuming to give
authority to violate or cancel any requirement or provision of this chapter [shall be valid].
(f) Expiration and extension of permit.
(1) A building permit expires if work authorized by the permit is not commenced within 180 days.
An extension may be granted by the CEO for good cause. This extension must be requested in
writing before the permit expires and must be granted in writing to be effective.
(2) A building permit expires if work authorized by the permit, once begun, is suspended or
abandoned for more than 180 days. A single extension of up to 180 days may be granted by the CEO
for good cause. The extension must be requested before the permit expires and must be granted in
writing to be effective.
(3) After a building permit has expired, no work shall be commenced until a new permit has been
applied for, fees paid and the permit has been issued by the CEO.
(g) Suspension, withholding or revocation of permit or license.
(1) For good cause, the CEO may suspend, withhold or revoke a permit or license issued by the
city. Good cause may include, but is not limited to, the following:
(A) Failure or refusal to permit inspection of a site, location or building where work is being
performed under a current permit.
(B) Failure or refusal to stop work and correct deficiencies when duly notified as described in
section 3.02.005.
(C) Fraud or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit or license.
(D) Violation on more than one occasion, either willfully or maliciously, or by reason of
incompetence, of any provisions of the technical codes.
(E) Refusal to comply with the lawful requirements of the CEO, or bad faith or unreasonable
delay in the performance of any installation, alteration or changes required by the CEO or the
correction of any defect pointed out by the CEO.
(F) Consumption of alcoholic beverages, intoxication or use of narcotics during construction
which may create a dangerous work environment, or workers being impaired by the use of
narcotics on a permitted work site.
(G) Existing adjudication of insanity of the permittee or licensee.
(H) Conviction of the permittee or licensee who are to be contractors on a site of defrauding
any person to whom (s)he has rendered or contracted to render services.
(I) Securing a permit or license for work that is not actually performed or supervised when
permitted by the permittee or licensee.
(J) Securing a permit under any pretext for construction or installation concerning which the
applicant has no valid contract.
(2) Each permittee shall have a fiduciary duty to supervise any person performing work at a site for
which the permittee holds a permit. The permittee shall be responsible for any violations of this
chapter by any person performing work at a site for which the permittee holds a permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/508
(3) The CEO may withhold the issuing or renewal of a license or permit to an applicant for the
same reason and by the same process used for revocation or suspension described in this subsection.
(h) Transfer of license or permit.
(1) No license or permit issued in accordance with this chapter shall be assignable or transferable.
(2) No work shall be performed by any person not the holder of a license required by this chapter.
(3) No person shall employ another person for doing work for which a license is required unless
such person proposed to be employed is the holder of the proper license.
(4) No licensee shall assign or in any other manner convey his or her license, the use thereof or any
rights thereunder to anyone by power of attorney or any other process. Should any licensee violate
this subsection, the license theretofore issued to him or her under this chapter shall by that act alone
become null and void. However, any such prior assignment or other conveyance made by a licensee
shall not be an effective or valid assignment of such license after its expiration date.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.106), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.004 Inspections
(a) Generally; inspection before issuing permit. Before issuing a permit, the CEO may examine or cause to be
examined any building or electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems for which an application has been
received for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or change the occupancy or use. The CEO
shall inspect all buildings, structures, and electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, from time to time,
during and upon completion of the work for which a permit was issued. Prior to issuing a certificate of
occupancy to any premises, the CEO may conduct a through inspection of the premises for which a certificate of
occupation is requested. The CEO shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of all
apparent violations.
(b) Manufacturers and fabricators. When deemed necessary by the CEO, the CEO shall make, or cause to be
made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication. A record shall be made
of every such examination and inspection and of all violations of the building regulations.
(c) Use of inspection service. The CEO may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required by this
chapter. The CEO may accept reports of inspectors of recognized inspection services, provided that after
investigation the CEO is satisfied as to their qualifications and reliability. A certificate called for by any
provision of the technical codes shall not be based on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified by
a responsible officer of such service.
(d) Inspections during work; final inspection. The CEO shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various
intervals all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every
building, structure, and electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of
the certificate of occupancy or completion.
(e) Posting of permit card. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his or her
agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place on the premises. The permit shall be protected from the
weather and located in such position as to permit the CEO or representative to conveniently make the required
entries thereon. This permit card shall be maintained in such position by the permit holder until the certificate of
occupancy or completion is issued by the CEO.
(f) Required inspections. The CEO upon notification from the permit holder or his or her agent shall make the
following inspections and such other inspections as necessary, and shall either release that portion of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/508
construction or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent of any violations which must be corrected in
order to comply with the technical codes.
(g) Building.
(1) Foundation inspection: To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected.
(2) Frame inspection: To be made after the roof, all framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place,
all concealed wiring, and all pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete.
(3) Final inspection: To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy.
(h) Electrical work.
(1) Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, and conduit or
cable installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
(2) Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place
and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes.
(3) Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are
in place and properly connected or protected and the structure is ready for occupancy.
(i) Plumbing.
(1) Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and piping
installed and before any backfill is put in place.
(2) Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing is in place
and all soil, waste and vent piping is complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling
membranes.
(3) Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place
and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
(j) Mechanical work.
(1) Underground inspection: To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated and underground
duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place.
(2) Rough-in inspection: To be made after the roof, framing, fireblocking and bracing are in place
and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or
ceiling membranes.
(3) Final inspection: To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place
and properly connected, and the structure is ready for occupancy.
(k) Other inspections. In addition to the required inspections specified above, the CEO shall make or require
to be made any other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this
chapter and other laws which are enforced by the city.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.107), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.005 Stop work orders
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/508
(a) Generally. Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or another
controlling ordinance or statute governing the building, the CEO may order the work stopped by notice verbally
or in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and the city shall post a
stop work order on the property adjacent to the posted building permit, and any such persons shall forthwith stop
such work until authorized by the CEO to proceed with the work. If no permit has been issued, all work shall
stop until a permit has been properly issued and all errors corrected to the satisfaction of the CEO. The CEO
may also issue a work correction order, which shall be served upon any persons who are working on a certain
aspect of the construction project. The work on other aspects of the construction not in violation of the city's
ordinances may proceed, but work shall cease as to that aspect in violation of the city's ordinances.
(b) Occupancy and use violations. Whenever any structure is being used contrary to the provisions of this
chapter, the city zoning ordinance provisions applicable to such structure, lot, parcel or tract of property upon
which the structure is located, or the city subdivision ordinance provisions applicable to such structure, lot,
parcel or tract upon which the structure is located, the CEO may order such use discontinued and the structure,
or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall
discontinue the use within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice or make the structure, or portion thereof,
comply with the requirements of this chapter. If the CEO determines that any building, structure or premises has
not been brought into compliance within the requisite time period, the CEO may by written notice, as provided
in section 3.02.010, immediately revoke the certificate of occupancy.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.108), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.006 Certificate of occupancy
(a) Required. No building or structure shall be occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy or
classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made, until the CEO has issued a certificate of
occupancy therefor, as provided herein, and such permit is current and not revoked. Prior to any connection of
utilities or transfer of utilities from one name to another or from one location to another, the primary occupant
must have been issued a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(b) Change in use. Changes in the character or use of a building or structure shall not be made except as
specified by this chapter and the technical codes adopted in this chapter.
(c) Issuance. After final inspection, when it is found that the building or structure complies with the provisions
of this chapter, the city zoning ordinance provisions applicable to such structure, lot, parcel or tract of property
upon which the structure is located, and the city subdivision ordinance provisions applicable to such structure,
lot, parcel or tract upon which the structure is located, the CEO shall issue a certificate of occupancy or
completion, which shall contain the following:
(1) The use and occupancy for which the certificate is issued;
(2) A certification that the building or structure complies with the provisions of this chapter;
(3) The permit number of the building or structure;
(4) The address of the building or structure;
(5) The name and address of the owner and occupant;
(6) A description of that portion of the building or structure for which the certificate is issued;
(7) A statement that the described portion of the building or structure complies with the
requirements of this chapter for the group and division of occupancy and the use for which the
proposed occupancy is classified;
(8) The name of the CEO.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/508
(d) Temporary certificate. A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued by the CEO for the use of a
portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. The
temporary certificate shall state thereon the duration for which the certificate is issued and, where no duration is
indicated, the certificate shall be for no more than 180 days from the date of issuance.
(e) Nonconforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of
land or buildings created by any ordinance of the city identifying the lawful nonconforming use. Application for
such certificate of occupancy for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the CEO by the owner or primary
occupant of the building or land occupied by such nonconforming use within one (1) year of the effective date of
this article. It shall be the duty of the CEO to issue a certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, or
refusal of the CEO to issue a certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use shall be evidence that said
nonconforming use was either illegal or did not lawfully exist.
(f) Connection of utilities. No person shall make connections from a utility source which is regulated by the
technical codes for which a permit is required to any building or system until released by the CEO and a
certificate of occupancy or completion is issued.
(g) Temporary connection of utilities. The CEO may authorize the temporary connection of the building or
system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use
under a temporary certificate of occupancy.
(h) Authority to disconnect utilities in case of emergency. The CEO shall have the authority to authorize
disconnection of utility service to the building, structure or system regulated by the technical codes, in case of
emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The CEO shall notify the
serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system, of the
decision to disconnect, if possible, prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or
occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing as soon as practical thereafter.
(i) Authority to disconnect utilities for failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy. The CEO shall have
authority to authorize disconnection of utility services to any building, structure or system regulated by the
technical codes for which a certificate of occupation has been revoked or is required and has never been issued
to the current occupant after written notice and an opportunity to correct as provided in section 3.02.009
[3.02.008]. Before utilities may be disconnected, the CEO shall send a notice specifying that the owner or
occupant must bring the property into compliance or the utilities will be disconnected and indicating that the
owner or occupant may appeal to the board of adjustments within ten (10) days of the date of the letter.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.109), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.007 Variances
(a) Any person may apply for a variance of any provision of this chapter by submitting a written application to
the CEO citing the specific provision of this chapter for which a variance is sought and setting forth with
particularity the reasons for such request. The CEO shall review such an application and forward the application
to the board of adjustments for consideration and approval or denial. If a person wants to protest the decision of
the board of adjustments, an appeal must be made to the district court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10)
days of the denial as provided in section 3.02.012.
(b) A person may not proceed with any operation for which a permit or variance is required by this chapter
unless and until the appropriate permit or variance has been granted.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.110), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.008 Notice of violation; citations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/508
(a) Enforcement officers. The CEO, his or her representatives, and any officer charged with enforcement of
the ordinances of the city, including any peace officer of the city, may enforce the provisions of this section.
(b) Citations. If an officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter shall determine that a situation exists
which immediately affects or threatens the health, safety and well-being of the general public, and that
immediate action is necessary, such officer may take such action as shall be necessary, including issuing
citations for violations of the terms and provisions hereof to the owner, occupant and/or responsible party for the
property upon which such condition exists, as may be deemed appropriate and necessary.
(c) Imminent threat. If an officer charged with enforcement of this chapter determines a situation constitutes
an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and the owner, occupant or responsible party for the
property is absent or fails to immediately remedy the violation, the city council may, at a regular session or at an
emergency session called for the purpose of considering the issue, upon evidence heard, determine that an
emergency exists and order such action as may be required to protect the public health, safety and welfare. In
such event, the city may prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover its costs.
(d) Failure to correct violation. If any owner, occupant or responsible party shall fail or refuse to remedy any
of the conditions prohibited by this chapter within ten (10) days after written notice to do so, the city may do
such work or cause the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses in doing or having such work
done or improvements made to the property, and such charge shall be a personal liability of such owner(s),
occupant(s) and/or responsible parties to the city.
(e) Service of notices. Notices required pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing. Such notices may be
served upon such owner(s), occupant(s) and/or responsible party as follows: in person by an officer or employee
of the city; by certified letter addressed to such owner, occupant and/or responsible party at his/her post office
address; or, if personal service may not be had, or the owner, occupant, or responsible party's address be not
known, then notice may be given by publishing a brief summary of such order at least once in the official
newspaper of the city or by posting a notice on or near the front door of each building on the property upon
which the violation relates, or, if no building exists, by posting notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into
the ground on the property to which the violation relates. The notice shall state “Building and Construction
Regulations,” “To Whom It May Concern” and a brief statement of the violation(s). Service of the notice by any
one of the above methods, or by a combination thereof, shall be deemed sufficient notice.
(f) Refusal of notice. If an owner is mailed a notice in accordance with subsection (e) and the United States
Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not affected, and the
notice is considered as delivered.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.111), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.009 Abatement of dangerous conditions without notice
Whenever an immediate danger to the health, life or safety of any person exists as a result of any building or
premises violations or conditions on any lot, parcel or premises within the city, the city may abate the nuisance
without notice to the owner. If the utility connections to the property need to be disconnected to the property to
prevent further risk or damage, the CEO may direct that the necessary utilities be disconnected. In the event the
city abates the nuisance under this section, the city shall forward notice to the owner within ten (10) days in the
manner set forth herein. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.112), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.010 Abatement procedures
(a) Notice. In addition to any other remedy provided in this chapter and cumulative thereto, the CEO, after
giving to the owner, occupant and/or responsible party of the property ten (10) days' notice in writing, as
provided herein, may cause any of the work or improvements mentioned in this chapter to be done at the
expense of the city, and charge the utility bill of the property on which such work or improvements are done as
well as cause all of the actual cost to the city to be assessed on the real estate or lot on which such expenses
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/508
occurred; provided that the owner, occupant and/or responsible party of any such real estate may appeal to the
board of adjustments from the order of the CEO by filing an appeal, as provided in section 3.02.012, within ten
(10) days after receipt of the notice provided for above, stating that such real estate complied with the provisions
of this chapter before the expiration of a ten (10) day period and requesting a hearing.
(b) Appeals. The board of adjustments shall set a date, within thirty (30) days from the date of the appeal, for
hearing the appeal to determine whether the real estate complied with the provisions of this chapter before the
expiration of such ten (10) day period.
(c) Suspension. The authority of the CEO to proceed to cause such work to be done shall not be suspended
while an appeal from the order is pending.
(d) Compliance prior to abatement. If it shall be determined by the board of adjustments that the premises
complied with the provisions of this chapter before the expiration of the ten (10) day period, then no personal
liability of the owner or occupant shall arise nor shall any lien be created against the premises upon which such
work was done.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.113), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.011 Collection of costs of abatement; lien
(a) Authority. Cumulative of the city's remedy by fine, as set forth herein, the city may do such work or cause
the same to be done to remedy such condition to remove such matter from such owner's premises at the city's
expense and charge the same to the utility bill of such property and assess the same against the real estate or lot
or lots upon which such expense is incurred.
(b) Addition of costs to utility bill. Expenditures plus ten (10) percent per annum interest on the expenditures
from the date of such payment by the city shall be added to the next billing cycle for utility bills for the real
estate or lot or lots, if not already paid. Payment shall be due and payable in full by the owner or occupant at the
time of payment of such utility bill. If the property is unoccupied, no utilities shall be furnished to the property
where the work occurred until such obligation, as herein set out, payable to the city for abatement of any
nuisance described herein is paid in full.
(c) Lien. Upon filing with the county clerk of a statement by the city secretary or designee of such expenses,
the city shall have a privileged lien upon said real estate or lot or lots, second only to tax liens and liens for street
improvements, to secure the expenditure so made and ten (10) percent per annum interest on the amount from
the date of such payment so made by the city.
(d) Suit to recover costs. The city may, additionally, institute suit and recover such expenses and foreclose
such lien in any court of competent jurisdiction, and the statement so filed with the county clerk or a certified
copy thereof shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work or improvements to remedy
such condition or remove any such matter.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.114), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.012 Appeals
(a) Filing. Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, any person aggrieved by a decision of an officer or CEO
acting under this chapter or any officer, department, board or bureau of the city affecting a property under this
chapter may appeal such decision to the board of adjustments. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the
office of the board of adjustments within ten (10) days of the action or incident being appealed. A notice of
appeal specifying each and every ground for appeal shall accompany the appeal and state thereon “Notice of
Appeal.” The officer, department, board or bureau from which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
board all of the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from is taken.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/508
(b) Notice of hearing. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal or other matter
referred to it, and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties in interest.
(c) Findings of fact. The board of adjustments shall file findings of fact within a reasonable time after the final
decision of the board of adjustments is announced. The findings shall be in writing filed in the office of the city
secretary. Filing of the minutes of the meeting of the board of adjustments meeting at which the appeal hearing
was held shall constitute a filing of the findings of fact absent a more specific filing prior to filing the minutes.
(d) Appeal of action of board. Any party aggrieved by the decision of the board of adjustments shall have ten
(10) days from the date of the filing of the findings of fact to file an appeal with the district court of competent
jurisdiction.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.115), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.013 Offenses; penalty
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the technical codes adopted herein, or
shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor offense and shall be liable for a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars
($2000.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to
all the other remedies provided herein.
(b) Any person who shall remove a notice of violation or a placard posted pursuant to this chapter from a
property prior to correction of the deficiencies indicated thereon shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor
offense.
(c) Any person who shall knowingly or intentionally provide false information on any application required
pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor offense.
(d) Any person who shall occupy a building, or any part thereof, without having received a certificate of
occupancy in compliance herewith, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable
for a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2000.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute
a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein.
(e) On motion of the city or the judge of municipal court, any person convicted under this chapter or placed on
deferred adjudication or other form of deferral who is assessed a penalty and who does not pay the penalty in
full as ordered by the court may be assessed the penalty against the defendant's property in the same manner as a
judgment in a civil suit by order of the municipal judge pursuant to Texas Code of Criminal Procedure section
45.047, as amended from time to time.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.116), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.014 Enforcement generally
(a) No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, or utility tap shall be
issued by the city for or with respect to any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits, after the effective
date of this article, except in compliance with all then-applicable requirements of this chapter, the city zoning
ordinance provisions applicable to the property and the city subdivision ordinance provisions applicable to the
property.
(b) This chapter and any code or provision adopted by this chapter may be further enforced by civil injunction
and other civil and criminal judicial proceedings, either at law or in equity, and in lieu of or in addition to any
other authorized enforcement or action taken. Any person who violates any term or provision of this chapter
with respect to any land, property, building or development within the city may also be fined as well as charged
all other penalties, civil and criminal, as provided herein and by state law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/508
(c) Upon the request of the city council, the city attorney or other authorized attorney shall file an action in the
district courts to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this chapter, or to obtain declaratory judgment,
and to seek and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or to recover damages in an amount sufficient for the
city to undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring about compliance with a requirement
regarding the property and established pursuant to this chapter.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.117), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.015 Duties of utility service providers
No utility service provider using the rights-of-way of the city to access any customer within the city limits shall
connect or reconnect utility services to such customer after the effective date of this article unless and until the
customer has provided proof that the structure to be serviced has a current and valid certificate of occupancy or
temporary certificate of occupancy. Each utility service provider utilizing city rights-of-way to provide services
to any customer within the city limits shall cooperate with the CEO to terminate services as provided herein and
shall provide information concerning the services provided to any customer within the city limits to the CEO to
carry out the duties of the CEO under the provisions of this chapter. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.118),
adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.016 Prima facie evidence of responsibility for violation
In any prosecution charging a violation of this chapter governing the failure to comply with any notice or order
or failure to apply for a building permit or other permit or license required herein, proof that the particular
property described in the complaint was in violation of any section of this chapter, together with proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such notice or order or at the time when work was
performed without a permit, the registered owner of such property, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie
presumption that the registered owner of such property was the person who failed to comply with the notice or
order or failed to apply for a permit for the time during which such violation occurred. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1),
ex. A (3.119), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.02.017–3.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Code Enforcement Officer*
Sec. 3.02.041 Office established; appointment and removal
(a) Office established. The office of CEO is hereby created, and the executive official in charge shall be
known as the CEO.
(b) Appointment and removal. The CEO shall be the employee designated from time to time to perform the
duties of the position.
(c) Acting CEO. During temporary absence or disability of the CEO, the appointing authority shall designate
an acting CEO.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.121), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.042 Qualifications
The CEO shall be in good health and physically capable of making the necessary examinations and inspections.
(S)He shall not have any interest whatever, directly or indirectly, in the sale or manufacture of any material,
process or device entering into or used in or in connection with building construction, alterations, removal and
demolition. The CEO shall have no financial interest in any business or person, either directly or indirectly, that
is engaged in any construction requiring a permit under this chapter, including but not limited to new
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/508
construction, remodeling, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.122),
adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.043 Duties
(a) Permits, notices and orders. The CEO shall receive applications required by the technical codes, issue
permits and furnish the prescribed certificates. (S)He shall examine the premises for which permits have been
issued and shall make necessary inspections to see that the provisions of law are complied with and that
construction is conducted safely. (S)He shall enforce all provisions of the building code and, when requested by
proper authority, or when the public interest so requires, make investigations in connection with matters referred
to in the codes and render written reports on the same. To enforce compliance with the law, to remove illegal or
unsafe conditions, to secure the necessary safeguards during construction, or to require adequate exit facilities in
buildings and structures, he shall issue such notices or orders as may be necessary.
(b) Inspections. Inspections required under the provisions of the technical codes shall be made by the CEO or
his duly appointed assistant. The CEO may accept reports of inspectors or recognized inspection services, after
investigation of their qualifications and reliability. No certificate called for by any provision of the technical
codes shall be issued on such reports unless the same are in writing and certified to by a responsible officer of
such service.
(c) Records of work required. The CEO shall keep permanent comprehensive records of applications, all
permits issued, any and all fees collected, certificates issued, inspections made, and reports rendered and of
notices or orders issued for each property accurately reflecting the names, physical location of the property and
dates on each document.
(d) Records to be open to public inspection. All such records shall be open to public inspection for good and
sufficient reasons at the stated office hours, but shall not be removed from the office of the CEO without his/her
written consent.
(e) Monthly reports. The CEO shall make written reports to his immediate superior once each month, or more
often if requested, including statements of permits and certificates issued and orders promulgated.
(f) Records of fees. The CEO shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other monies collected
and received under this chapter, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, and the date
and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.123), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.044 Right of entry
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the
CEO or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon
any premises any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe or constitutes a violation of this
chapter, the CEO or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to
inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the CEO by this chapter; provided that, if such building
or premises be occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry, and if such building or
premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having
charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the CEO or his
authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ordinance 28-
1201-(1), ex. A (3.124), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.045 Deputies and assistants
In accordance with the procedure and with the approval of the city council, the CEO may appoint such number
of officers, inspectors and assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. With the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/508
approval of the city council, he may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of
the CEO. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.125), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.046 Liability
The CEO, members of the board of adjustments, or any employee charged with the enforcement of this chapter,
acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render
himself liable personally and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or
her duties. Any suit brought against the CEO or such employee because of any act or omission by him in the
discharge of his duties under any provision of this chapter shall be defended by the city attorney or an attorney
appointed by the city's insurance carrier until final termination of the proceedings. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex.
A (3.126), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.02.047 Cooperation of other officials
The CEO may request, and shall receive so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his duties, the assistance
and cooperation of other officials of the city. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.127), adopted 12/28/01)
ARTICLE 3.03 BUILDING AND DEVELOPMENT FEES
Sec. 3.03.001 Building permit and inspection fees
The following fees and charges are established and shall be in addition to any fees otherwise required pursuant
to this article:
(1) Fee components; exemption.
(A) Fee components. The permit fee for single-family residential, multifamily and
commercial structures shall consist of a base permit fee, the applicable plan review fee, and the
inspection fees as set forth in appendix A of this code.
(B) Exemption for valuation under $500.00. Where the valuation of the addition does not
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), no fee shall be charged, unless such work by its nature
requires an inspection (such as structural alterations, or addition to plumbing, electrical or
mechanical systems). If the total valuation of the work is $500.00 or less, but one or more
inspections are required because the work includes structural alterations or plumbing, electrical
or mechanical system work, a base fee plus a required inspection fee shall be charged.
(2) Base permit fees.
(A) Single-family residential structures. The base building permit fee for a single-family
residential structure, inclusive of general building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical work,
shall be a fee based on the square footage of the structure according to the schedule in appendix
A of this code.
(B) Commercial and multifamily structures. The building permit fee for commercial and
multifamily structures, inclusive of general building, electrical, plumbing and mechanical work,
shall be based on the square footage of the structure according to the schedule in appendix A of
this code.
(3) Plan review fee increment. A nonrefundable plan review fee shall be charged, in addition to the
base permit fee, for and with respect to each single-family, multifamily or commercial structure for
which a base permit fee is payable pursuant to subsection (2) above. Such plan review fees shall be
charged and payable according to the schedule in appendix A of this code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/508
(A) Single-family structures. A plan review fee shall be charged for and with respect to each
single-family building permit application. Such fee shall be payable upon the initial application
for such building permit.
(B) Multifamily and commercial structures. A plan review fee shall be charged for and with
respect to each multifamily and commercial building permit application. The full amount of
such fee shall be payable upon the initial application for such building permit.
(4) Inspection fee increments. The work and improvements for which a base building permit fee is
required to be paid pursuant to subsection (2) of this section shall be subject to the inspections
provided for in the National Electrical Code, the International Building, Mechanical, and Plumbing
Codes and all related codes and ordinances of the city (the “codes”). A nonrefundable inspection fee
shall be charged, in addition to the base permit fee and plan review fee, for and with respect to each
single-family, multifamily or commercial structure for which a base permit fee is payable pursuant to
subsection (2) above. Such inspection fees shall be charged and payable according to the schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(A) Single-family structures. A base inspection fee increment shall be paid for each building
permit for a single-family dwelling for building, electrical, and mechanical and plumbing
multiplied by the minimum number of inspections required pursuant to the codes, prior to the
issuance of any building permit for which a base building permit fee is required to be paid
pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. Such fee shall be payable upon the issuance of the
building permit.
(B) Multifamily and commercial structures. A base inspection fee increment shall be paid for
each building permit for a multifamily or commercial structure for building, electrical and
mechanical plumbing multiplied by the minimum number of inspections required pursuant to
the codes, prior to the issuance of any building permit for which a base building permit fee is
required to be paid pursuant to subsection (2) of this section. Such fee shall be payable upon the
issuance of the building permit
(C) Additional inspection fees. In addition to the base inspection fee payable pursuant to
subsections (A) and (B) above, additional inspection fees shall be payable, as applicable,
according to the schedule in appendix A of this code.
(i) Additional inspections. An additional fee shall be charged for each additional
inspection, if any, that is required above the minimum required by the codes. Such fees
shall charged for each additional inspection of a single-family dwelling and for each
additional inspection of a multifamily or commercial structure. The fees for such
additional inspections as are required by the codes or any state or federal agency having
jurisdiction shall be paid prior to being made and, in any event, prior to the issuance of
any certificate of occupancy.
(ii) Reinspections. If the inspector needs to make a return trip to assure compliance with
required corrections, an additional inspection fee per reinspection for single-family
dwellings, commercial, and multifamily construction must be paid to the city before a
reinspection will be made and, in any event, prior to the issuance of any certificate of
occupancy.
(iii) Out-of-sequence inspections. An added, additional fee shall be charged for each
inspection requested that is not requested in the sequence provided for in the codes. Such
additional fee shall be paid to the city before the inspection is made and, in any event,
prior to the issuance of any certificate of occupancy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/508
(5) Other building permit fees. Save and except as provided in subsection (1)(B) above, it is the
intent of this article to establish an appropriate fee for each permit and inspection required to be made
pursuant to the codes. With that purpose, the permit fees and charges in appendix A of this code shall
be charged for and with respect to the respective listed permits.
(A) Moving of structures.
(i) Except as provided in the following subsection (ii), a permit fee plus an escort fee if
applicable shall be charged for moving buildings or structures, including mobile or
manufactured homes moved by other than a registered retailer or installer, in the city. No
permit or inspection fee shall be charged or required for the moving of a mobile or
manufactured home out the city.
(ii) If, based upon location moved from or to, the streets to be used in the move, size of
the structure, and related facts, an escort is deemed necessary for the protection of the
public health and safety, except as provided in subsection (i) above, an additional fee shall
be collected in advance for such escort to be provided by the police department. Such
escort fee shall be an amount equal to 1.5 times the hourly cost for both the officer
(including wages and benefits) and the patrol car, times the estimated number of hours or
fractions thereof required for the escort within the city limits.
(iii) No fee shall be charged for the moving of a portable building or structure that is
eight feet (8') or less in height and that is not larger than sixty-four (64) square feet.
(B) Swimming pools and spas. A permit fee for construction or installation of a swimming
pool, spa or hot tub shall be charged according to the schedule in appendix A of this code.
(C) Certain structures with roof. A permit fee for the construction of porches, patios, decks,
carports, storage sheds and similar structures under roof, and not permitted under another
subsection of this section, shall be charged according to the schedule in appendix A of this
code.
(D) Remodeling and alterations. Structural alterations, repairs, and remodeling on all
structures, buildings and residences, including shell buildings and mobile or manufactured
homes, but excluding projects costing $500.00 or less and for which a permit is not otherwise
required, shall require a minimum permit fee plus the applicable inspection fees for building,
electrical and mechanical and plumbing for single-family residential and building, electrical,
and mechanical and plumbing for multifamily and commercial, per required inspection. In the
event that the total square footage to be altered, repaired or remodeled exceeds 200 square feet,
the base permit fee shall be determined pursuant to subsection (2) or (3) above, as applicable.
(6) Double permit fees for commencing work without permit. If work for which a permit is
required pursuant to this section is initiated, started or proceeded without the permit first being
obtained, the fees and charges specified in this section shall be doubled according to the schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance adopted 9/8/03, sec. 1)
Sec. 3.03.002 Subdivision fees
The following guidelines for fees and charges are established and fees shall be collected for the subdivision of
land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction according to the schedule in appendix A of this code:
(1) Concept or master plan. A fee plus a per-lot fee shall be charged for the filing and review of
any concept or master plan. Such fee shall be in addition to the engineer review fee provided
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/508
hereinafter in subsection (5) and shall be paid, together with the estimated amount of the engineer
review fee, when the concept plan or master plan is filed. A deposit shall be paid to apply against the
engineer review fee.
(2) Short form subdivision plat. A fee plus a per-lot fee shall be paid for each short form
subdivision plat filed for review by the city. Such fee shall be in addition to the engineer review fee
provided hereinafter in subsection (5) and shall be paid, together with the estimated amount of the
engineer review fee, when the plat-plan is filed. A deposit shall be paid to apply against the engineer
review fee.
(3) Preliminary subdivision plat-plan. A fee plus a per-lot fee shall be paid for each preliminary
subdivision plat filed for review by the city. Such fee shall be in addition to the engineer review fee
provided hereinafter in subsection (5) and shall be paid, together with the then-estimated amount of
the engineer review fee, when the plat-plan is filed. A deposit shall be paid to apply against the
engineer review fee.
(4) Final subdivision plat-plan. A fee plus a per-lot fee shall be paid for each final subdivision plat
filed for review by the city. Such fee shall be in addition to the engineer review fee provided
hereinafter in subsection (5) and shall be paid, together with the then-estimated amount of the
engineer review fee, prior to the plat-plan being finally approved by the city and filed of record. A
deposit shall be paid to apply against the engineer review fee.
(5) Engineer review fee. In addition to the fees set forth and required pursuant to this section, every
person or entity filing a concept plan, master plan, or preliminary subdivision plat-plan, and every
person filing a final subdivision plat-plan, or any other application specified herein, shall pay to the
city an amount equal to all engineering fees billed to the city for and with respect to such plat-plan,
plus an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the total of such engineering fees billed to the city. The
deposit made and applicable to such plan shall be credited against the final amount of such fee.
(6) Plat vacation. A fee plus all estimated county recording fees shall be charged for each plat-plan
vacation request. Such fee shall be in addition to any engineer review fee, if any, that may be
applicable and charged pursuant to subsection (5). A deposit shall be paid to apply against the
engineer review fee.
(7) Subdivision replat-amending plat. A fee plus a per-lot fee shall be paid for each replat or
resubdivision of a plat, or part thereof, filed for review by the city. Such fee shall be in addition to the
engineer review fee provided hereinabove in subsection (5) and shall be paid, together with the thenestimated
amount of the engineer review fee, when such request is filed. A deposit shall be paid to
apply against the engineer review fee.
(8) Subdivision variance request. In addition to all other applicable fees and charges, a fee shall be
paid in advance for each variance requested from the subdivision ordinance or any applicable design
and/or construction standards. A deposit may be required to apply against the engineer review fee
should an engineer review be required.
(9) Construction inspection. A fee to be calculated on a percentage of the total estimated cost for
construction of all streets, water, wastewater, drainage and other infrastructure required to be
constructed for the approval and final acceptance of any subdivision or section thereof shall be paid,
together with all other applicable fees and charges, prior to any approved plat-plan being finally
approved by the city and filed of record. The total estimated amount of such fee shall be paid as a
deposit prior to the start of construction.
(10) Professional fees. In addition to the fees and charges, and engineer review fee, above set forth
in this section, the proposer, developer or subdivider of land, a subdivision, plat, or municipal utility
district shall reimburse and pay to the city the actual cost and expense for professional services,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/508
including but not limited to consulting engineers, attorneys and land planners, incurred by the city
with respect to such subdivision, plat, development or municipal utility district.
(Ordinance adopted 9/8/03, sec. 2)
Sec. 3.03.003 Zoning fees
A fee shall be charged for each zoning change or rezoning request, and for each variance requested under the
zoning or the building codes ordinance, according to the schedule in appendix A of this code. A fee shall be
charged for each applicant requesting postponement of a zoning request. (Ordinance adopted 9/8/03, sec. 3)
ARTICLE 3.04 TECHNICAL AND CONSTRUCTION CODES AND STANDARDS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.04.001 Schedule of adopted codes
The International Codes listed in the following codes schedule are adopted and not less than one copy has been
and is now filed in the office of the city secretary. In the event a conflict is determined to exist between said code
as adopted and the other provisions of this chapter, the latter provisions shall be construed as controlling and
taking precedence over the former. Any codes referenced therein are not adopted hereby unless specifically
adopted. The following codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in this chapter,
and the provisions of such code shall be controlling on all premises, including but not limited to all buildings
thereon, within the corporate limits of the city:
(1) International Building Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(2) International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, International
Code Council.
(3) International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(4) International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(5) International Fire Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(6) International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(7) International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(8) International Property Maintenance Code, 2012 edition, International Code Council.
(9) National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, National Fire Protection Association.
(Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.002 Minimum standards
In addition to the standards provided in the International Building Code and International Residential Code for
One- and Two-Family Dwellings, every building, structure, or part thereof erected or altered, moved or
relocated, including all development of property in the city, shall conform to the following minimum standards,
which are deemed to be minimum standards necessary for the health and general welfare of the residents of the
city:
(1) Solid waste container storage. Each dwelling shall have a solid waste structure which must be
inaccessible to dogs and other animals. Nonresidential buildings shall have a solid waste structure
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/508
which is inaccessible to dogs and other animals and which is of a design and location approved by
the CEO in compliance with the applicable zoning ordinance.
(2) Sewage facility. Each plumbing fixture shall be connected by adequate water and drainage
lines to an organized disposal system operated by the city.
(3) Utility connections. It shall be unlawful to serve or connect any public utilities to any structure
for service until the CEO has authorized such connection.
(4) Roofing materials. No roofing material or painted exterior roof shall produce reflective glare
where reflective glare interferes with traffic upon city streets or where the reflective glare is evident
beyond the property line. All new metallic roof surfaces which produce reflective glare beyond
property lines shall be painted so as not to affect adjoining property and other property. Samples of
roofing material shall be provided to the CEO and no building permit shall be issued until the CEO
approves the roofing material. Wood shingles and wood shakes are prohibited on all structures.
Ordinary roof coverings shall be prohibited additionally on nonresidential buildings. Fire-retarding
roof coverings, wood shingles and wood shakes having a class B rating in accordance with the
building code standards are allowed on all structures.
(5) Water fixtures. All new installations or remodeling of water fixtures shall meet the following
minimum standards:
(A) Water closet tanks shall have a flushing capacity sufficient to properly flush the water
closet bowl but shall not exceed one and six-tenths (1.6) gallons per flush.
(B) Showers shall flow at a rate of no greater than two point seventy-five (2.75) gallons per
minute.
(C) Faucets shall flow at a rate of not greater than two point two (2.2) gallons per minute.
(6) Shielding of exterior compressors and other equipment. All exterior compressors and other
mechanical equipment or like devices shall be shielded and insulated so as to insure that sound
emanating therefrom does not interfere with the use and enjoyment of surrounding property.
(7) Grease traps. Waste pipes from kitchen sinks and dishwashers in any commercial property
serving food, such as a hotel, restaurant, clubhouse, boardinghouse, public institution, hospital or
other similar place, shall be run into an approved type grease trap, adequate in size and constructed in
such a manner as to remove all grease before it reaches the sanitary sewer or private sewage facility,
and shall be properly vented on the sewer side. Grease traps may be a manufacturer's item especially
made for the purpose or may be constructed of concrete. Plans of a typical concrete grease trap may
be obtained from the CEO. No food grinder shall discharge into a grease trap. If the grease trap is set
more than thirty inches from the sink that it serves, the sink shall be locally vented and run
independently through the roof.
(A) The sizing of grease traps shall be based on the flow rate, which shall be determined in
accordance with the state commission on environmental quality construction standards for onsite
sewage facilities, plus a 25% safety factor.
(B) Manufactured grease traps shall be selected to fit the flow rate requirements of the
connected fixtures from the published manufacturer's rating chart.
(C) Where one grease trap serves more than one fixture, the simultaneous usage flow rate
(not the sum of the connected fixtures) shall be used to determine the size of the grease trap.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.203), adopted 12/28/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/508
Sec. 3.04.003 Fire warning system
(a) Generally. Each dwelling and nonresidential building shall be provided with a smoke detector conforming
to the International Building Code specifications. All detectors shall be located within twelve inches (12") of the
ceiling and shall be tested for proper operation by the CEO as a condition for a certificate of occupancy. Care
shall be exercised to insure that the installation will not interfere with the operating characteristics of the
detector.
(b) Dwellings. The detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor
or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. Where sleeping rooms are on an upper level, the
detectors shall be placed at the center of the ceiling directly above the stairway. Detectors, of a sufficient number
and decibel level of sound, shall provide adequate sound to alert all portions of the dwelling and dwelling units.
(c) Nonresidential buildings. The detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located
with respect to electric or gas appliances or cooking equipment. Detectors, of a sufficient number and decibel
level of sound, shall be installed to provide adequate sound to alert all portions of the building.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.204), adopted 12/28/01)
State law reference–Smoke detectors in rental homes, apartments, dwellings, etc., V.T.C.A., Property Code, sec. 92.251 et seq.
Sec. 3.04.004 Swimming pool enclosures
No outdoor swimming pool shall be erected, constructed or structurally altered without an enclosure device of at
least four (4) feet in height which completely surrounds such swimming pool. Such enclosure device shall not
contain any opening which would permit the passage of a sphere six (6) inches or more in diameter. Each gate or
door-opening through such enclosure device shall be equipped with a self-closing latch that keeps the gate or
door securely closed at all times when not actually used; provided, however, that the door of any building which
forms a part of the enclosure device need not be so equipped. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.205), adopted
12/28/01)
State law references–Swimming pool enclosures, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.101 et seq.; pool yard enclosure for
multiunit rental complex, property owners' association, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, ch. 757.
Sec. 3.04.005 Culverts and driveways
(a) Culverts and ditches required. Whenever a street or roadway is not furnished with a curb and gutter
connected to a storm sewer or to a ditch or waterway for drainage, draining ditches shall be installed along the
roadway at the expense of the owner of the adjoining property. No person shall construct or maintain any
driveway over a ditch without furnishing a culvert to provide drainage, in accordance with specifications
approved by the city. The owner and occupant of abutting property shall keep such culverts and ditches free of
obstruction.
(b) Driveway and culvert maintenance. Prior to installing or altering a driveway or culvert, a permit
application for such work shall be submitted to the CEO and work shall not commence before a permit is issued
for such work or a written statement from the CEO declaring that a permit is not required. A permit shall not be
required for minor repairs and alterations that do not affect the size or location of the impervious cover. The
CEO shall require plans and specifications on the location, drainage and other relevant information. Once a
complete application is submitted, the CEO may forward the plans to the city engineer for review.
(1) It shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner and the occupant of property within the city
to construct, reconstruct, install, repair and maintain, from time to time as required, any driveway
and/or culvert necessary to connect such property with a public street. The driveway and any culvert,
whether existing or to be installed, to serve any property shall be constructed, reconstructed,
installed, repaired and maintained by the owner and the occupant of such property in a manner to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/508
prevent such driveway and/or culvert from interfering with, diverting or obstructing the flow of
stormwater and drainage.
(2) It shall be the responsibility and duty of the owner and the occupant of any property for which
a culvert exists or is maintained for the purpose of connecting, or providing access for, such property
with a public street to keep such culvert open and free of obstruction or debris, and to repair,
reconstruct, raise or lower the grade, and maintain such culvert from time to time to assure the culvert
does not interfere with or obstruct the flow or drainage of stormwater, or divert stormwater from the
bar ditch or drainage channel.
(c) Driveway inspection; failure to comply. Completed projects will be inspected by the CEO to insure
compliance. Those whose projects are not in compliance will be allowed thirty (30) days in order to comply. If
they have not complied in thirty (30) days, then their permit is void. Any existing driveway which in the opinion
of the city council constitutes a threat to the safety and welfare of the citizens of the city shall be corrected at the
property owner's expense within sixty (60) days after receiving notice.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.206), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.006 Erosion control
(a) Site and construction plans. No construction plans or building permits shall be approved unless it shows all
improvements reasonably required to prevent erosion during and after completion of development. No certificate
of occupancy shall be issued unless the improvements shown on the site plan have been installed, constructed or
created and erosion is effectively controlled. This section does not apply to projects for which a building permit
is not required and does not require a site plan for those projects which are otherwise exempt from the site plan
requirement.
(b) Requirements. The CEO may require, where appropriate and reasonable under the circumstances, the
construction of silt traps, the mulching and temporary or permanent planting of areas exposed by grading, and
the construction of diversions, channel linings, grade stabilization structures, and bank protection structures;
shall place limits on the area of land which may be exposed at any one time and the length of time that any area
may be exposed; and shall require all other acts and impose all other limits and restraints which are necessary
and reasonable to prevent erosion. The CEO has the duty to impose any additional limits or restraints to prevent
erosion after approval of any permit herein, whenever conditions arise during development or construction
which require the taking of any additional measures or precautions. Where, during development or construction,
it appears that measures or precautions previously required are unnecessary, the CEO shall waive them in
writing. The CEO shall require certification of plans and specifications and supervision of work by a licensed
professional engineer unless he determines it is not necessary under the circumstances.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.207), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.007 Conformity with zoning and subdivision regulations
No building or structure shall be erected or installed and no existing building or structure shall be moved,
structurally altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used or designated for use
for any purpose or in any manner other than as provided for in the zoning district in which the building, land or
premises is located and in compliance with the subdivision regulations; provided, however, that necessary
structural repairs may be made where health and safety are endangered. Furthermore, no open space surrounding
any building shall be encroached upon by a structure or reduced in any manner unless the same shall conform to
the zoning regulations and subdivision regulations designated for the district or lot within which such building or
open space is located. The CEO may, with notice as provided in this chapter, revoke the certificate of occupancy
for properties not in compliance herewith. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.208), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.008–3.04.040 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/508
Division 2. Building Code and Residential Code*
Sec. 3.04.041 Building code adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Building Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, G, I, and
J, published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the building code of the city establishing
the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures, by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use, and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures, and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Building Code, 2012 edition, published by the
International Code Council, on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted and made a
part of this section as if fully set out in this article. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.042 Amendments to building code
The International Building Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 1612.3.1. “The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Rockdale,” as amended or revised, with the
accompanying flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM) and related
supporting data, along with any revisions thereto.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.201(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.043 Residential code adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, including
appendix chapters A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, J, and K, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the residential building code of the city regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses in the city, and providing for the issuance of
permits and collection of fees, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings, 2012 edition, published by the International
Code Council, on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this
section as if fully set out in this division. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.044 Amendments to residential code
The International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Table R301.2(1). Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria.
Roof snow load 5 psf
Wind speed 90 mph
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/508
Seismic design criteria Category “C”
Weathering Moderate
Frostline depth 12"
Termite Moderate to heavy
Decay Slight to moderate
Winter design temp 28° F
Flood hazards FEMA ordinance as adopted by the
city
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.201(d)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.045 Repairs and remodeling
A permit is required for repairs and remodeling that require structural alterations such as, but not limited to,
supports or supporting walls being removed or modified, floor space being added, or when a plumbing or
electrical permit is required. A project costing $500.00 or less and for which a permit is not otherwise required is
excluded from the permit requirement. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.201(e)), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance
adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.046 Exceptions
Any codes noted or mentioned in the International Building Code and International Residential Code for Oneand
Two-Family Dwellings which are not formally adopted by this article shall be a guide only and are not
subject to permit and enforcement. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.201(f)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.047 Interpretation by enforcing officer
Wherever, in the building code hereby adopted, it is provided that anything must be done to the approval of or
subject to the direction of the enforcing officer, this shall be construed to give such officer only the power to
determine whether the rules and regulations established by this article have been complied with, and shall not be
construed as giving such officer discretionary powers. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.202), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.048–3.04.100 Reserved
Division 3. Plumbing*
Part I. In General
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/508
Sec. 3.04.101 Plumbing inspector
(a) Position created. There is hereby created the position of plumbing inspector, who shall be employed by the
city.
(b) Qualifications. The plumbing inspector shall have experience in plumbing to the extent that enables him to
know when plumbing is installed correctly.
(c) Conflict of interest. The plumbing inspector shall not be directly connected in any way with any person
directly or indirectly engaged in the business of plumbing or with plumbing suppliers.
(d) Duties. The plumbing inspector shall:
(1) Enforce all provisions of this division, and such inspector is hereby granted the authority to
enter all buildings within or without the corporate limits of the city when such buildings are
connected, or are to be connected, to the municipal water and/or sewage system.
(2) Prepare or cause to be prepared suitable forms for applications, permits, inspection reports and
other such materials.
(3) Inspect and test all plumbing work for compliance with this division and its adopted plumbing
code, and enforce changing of such installations that do not meet the requirements. It further shall be
his duty to see that all persons installing or altering plumbing shall be qualified by state law.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.503), adopted 12/28/01)
State law reference–Authority to appoint plumbing inspector, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 214.011.
Sec. 3.04.102 Plumbing License Law adopted
For the protection and preservation of the health, safety, property and the general welfare of the people of the
city, the city hereby adopts V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1301, as amended from time to time, cited as
the “Plumbing License Law,” in its entirety as its own. All plumbing work and plumbing inspections done in the
city and on properties located outside the city being serviced by city water and/or sewer must be done in
accordance with the Plumbing License Law. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.501), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.103 Permits
All applications for permits shall be made on suitable forms provided and in accordance with the fee schedule
set forth in appendix A of this code and the administrative fee ordinance of the city. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex.
A (3.504), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.104 Connection to water and wastewater system
(a) Water and wastewater services shall only be connected by city personnel or under the supervision of the
city by a company authorized to service the property, and only after the plumbing of the location has been
inspected and approved by the CEO. Upon making an application for water and/or wastewater services, the
applicant covenants that the location is in compliance with the policies and requirements of the city, the
plumbing code, and all applicable government regulations.
(b) The responsible parties for any premises, and the contractor for any work performed thereon, shall be
responsible for the compliance of such premises and work with the requirements of this division. The
responsible party and the contractor shall, by making the application for service, agree that if required changes
and corrections are not made within thirty (30) days after such inspection and failure to approve, the city may
discontinue service to the property until such changes have been made. The responsible party and the contractor
shall, by making the application for service, release the city from any liability of every kind and nature for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/508
damage which may occur from plumbing connections of said premises or from failure to inspect said plumbing,
and such permit application shall further be an agreement to hold the city harmless from any and all liability.
(c) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued or stay in effect for any premises not in compliance with this
division. The CEO may revoke any certificate of occupancy as provided in article 3.02.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.505), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.105–3.04.140 Reserved
Part II. Plumbing Code
Sec. 3.04.141 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters B, C, D, E, F, and G,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the code of the city for regulating the design,
construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement,
addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of
the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this
division. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.142 Amendments
The International Plumbing Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 106.6.2. The fee schedule is located in the city fee ordinance.
Section 106.6.3. The CEO shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. Not more than 70 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been performed under a
permit issued in accordance with this code.
2. Not more than 30 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which
a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been
expended.
Section 108.4. Violations penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical [plumbing] work in
violation of the approved construction documents or directives of the code official, or of a permit or certificate
issued under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000.00 per day. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Section 108.5. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/508
Section 305.6.1. Sewer depth. Building sewers that connect to private sewage disposal systems shall be a
minimum of 12 inches below finished grade at the point of septic tank connection. Building sewers shall be a
minimum of 12 inches below grades.
Section 904.1. Roof extension. All open vent pipes that extend through a roof shall be terminated at least 6
inches above the roof, except that where a roof is to be used for any purpose other than weather protection, the
vent extensions shall be run at least 7 feet above the roof.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.502(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.143 Cross-connection control program
(a) General. No water service connections shall be made to any establishment where a potential or actual
contamination hazard exists unless the water supply is protected in accordance with the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems (290 Rules) and this section.
The water purveyor shall discontinue water service if a required backflow prevention assembly is not installed,
maintained and tested in accordance with the 290 rules and this section.
(b) Backflow prevention assembly installation, testing and maintenance.
(1) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested upon installation by a licensed backflow
prevention assembly tester and certified to be operating within specifications. Backflow prevention
assemblies which are installed to provide protection against health hazards must also be tested and
certified to be operating within specifications at least annually by a recognized backflow prevention
assembly tester.
(2) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed and tested in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions, the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14) or the University of Southern
California Manual of Cross-Connection Control.
(3) Assemblies shall be repaired, overhauled, or replaced at the expense of the customer whenever
said assemblies are found to be defective. Original forms of such test, repairs, and overhaul shall be
kept and submitted to the city within five (5) working days of the test, repair or overhaul of each
backflow prevention assembly.
(4) No backflow prevention assembly or device shall be removed from use, relocated, or other
assembly or device substituted without the approval of the city. Whenever the existing assembly or
device is moved from the present location or cannot be repaired, the backflow assembly or device
shall be replaced with a backflow prevention assembly or device that complies with this section, the
American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-
Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, University of Southern California Manual of
Cross-Connection Control, current edition, or the current plumbing code of the city, whichever is
more stringent.
(5) Test gauges used for backflow prevention assembly testing shall be tested for accuracy at least
annually in accordance with the American Water Works Association's Recommended Practice for
Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control (Manual M14), current edition, or the University
of Southern California's Manual of Cross-Connection Control, current edition. The original gauge
accuracy test form must be submitted to the city within five (5) working days after the gauge has
been tested for accuracy.
(6) A recognized backflow prevention assembly tester must hold a current license from the Texas
Commission on Environmental Quality (commission).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/508
(c) Customer service inspections.
(1) The customer shall allow his property to be inspected for possible cross-connections and other
potential contamination hazards. These inspections shall be conducted by the water system or its
designated agent prior to initiating new water service; when there is reason to believe that crossconnection
or other potential contamination hazards exist; or after any major changes to the private
water distribution facilities. The inspections shall be conducted during the water system's normal
business hours.
(2) A customer service inspection shall be completed prior to providing continuous water service
to all new construction, on any existing service when the water purveyor has reason to believe that
cross-connections or other contaminant hazards exist, or after any material improvement, correction,
or addition to the private water distribution facilities.
(3) Only individuals with the following credentials shall be recognized as capable of conducting a
customer service inspection:
(A) Plumbing inspectors and water supply protection specialists that have been licensed by
the Texas State Board of Plumbing Examiners.
(B) Customer service inspectors that have been licensed by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ).
(4) The customer service inspection must certify that:
(A) No direct connection between the public drinking water supply and a potential source of
contamination is permitted. Potential sources of contamination shall be isolated from the public
water system by a properly installed air gap or an appropriate backflow prevention assembly.
(B) No cross-connection between the public water supply and a private water source exists.
Where an actual properly installed air gap is not maintained between the public water supply
and a private water supply, an approved reduced pressure-zone backflow prevention assembly
is properly installed and a service agreement exists for annual inspection and testing by a
recognized backflow prevention assembly tester.
(C) No connection exists which allows water to be returned to the public drinking water
supply is permitted.
(D) No pipe or pipe fitting which contains more than 8% lead may be used for the installation
or repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use.
(E) No solder or flux which contains more than 0.2% lead can be used for the installation or
repair of plumbing at any connection that provides water for human use. A minimum of one
lead test shall be performed for each inspection.
(d) Thermal expansion. With the installation of backflow prevention assemblies at the service connection a
“closed-system” is created. This closed system could result in injury to the water system customer or damage to
the customer's property if adequate safety measures, such as the installation of thermal expansion tanks, are not
implemented.
(1) Thermal expansion may cause damage ranging from leaking faucets to a ruptured water heater
if the condition is not addressed.
(2) The city shall provide customers with information regarding thermal expansion when the city
requires a backflow prevention assembly to be installed at the customer's service connection. The city
shall not accept any liability resulting from thermal expansion at a customer's property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/508
(e) Fire hydrant protection. An approved double check valve backflow prevention assembly (DCVA) or
reduced-pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RPBA) shall be the minimum protection for fire
hydrant water meters which are being used for a temporary water supply during any construction or other uses
which would pose a potential hazard to the public water supply.
(1) An RPBA must be installed if any solution other than potable water can be introduced into the
system.
(2) It is the responsibility of all persons engaging in the use and rental of a fire hydrant water meter
to abide by the conditions of this article. All fire hydrant water rentals shall meet the current
requirements as provided for by the city.
(Ordinance 2017-03-13(9A) adopted 3/13/17)
Secs. 3.04.144–3.04.200 Reserved
Division 4. Electrical Work*
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.04.201 Scope
(a) The object of this division is to reduce the personal hazard and the fire hazard from electrical causes. To
accomplish this, the requirements set forth in this division are intended to provide a minimum standard for
electrical work and maintenance in the city.
(b) The provisions of this division shall not be construed to apply to the installation, operation, alteration, or
repairs of electrical installations or equipment owned and used by an electric light and power company,
telephone and/or telegraph company, or railroad company for generation, transmission, distribution, or metering
of electricity, or for the operation of signals or the transmission of intelligence.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.701), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.202 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Apprentice electrician. Except as otherwise provided, a person undertaking the learning of the electrical trade
and doing electrical work under the direct, constant personal supervision and control of either a licensed master
electrician or a journeyman electrician and who has been properly registered with the CEO as provided in this
division.
Circuit. A final two or more wire branch circuit rated at 15 amperes, 120 volt, or as required for load.
Electrical inspector. The chief electrical inspector and his duly authorized assistants.
Electrical wiring and apparatus. All materials, devices, machinery, appliances, appurtenances or conductors
used in connection with the production of electrical lights, heat or power or the transmission of electrical signals.
Electrical work. All materials, devices, appliances, machinery, and equipment used in connection with the
production, transmission or consumption of electrical energy, together with installing, maintaining or repairing
of same.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/508
Journeyman electrician. Except as otherwise provided, a person undertaking electrical work under the
supervision, direction and control of a licensed master electrician and who has been properly registered. The
term “journeyman electrician,” however, shall not include an apprentice electrician, and nothing in this division
shall be construed as prohibiting an apprentice electrician from doing electrical work under the direct, constant,
personal supervision and control of either a licensed master or journeyman electrician.
Maintenance. The keeping in safe repair and operation of any and all existing installations, apparatus and
equipment.
Master electrician. A person skilled in the planning, supervision, installation, alteration or changing of electric
wiring and apparatus and familiar with the rules, laws and regulations governing such and who has been licensed
in the manner provided by this division.
Meter loop. The service entrance conductors, meter base, service breakers or fuses, service disconnect, and the
system and equipment grounding.
Outlet. A point on the wiring system at which current is or may be taken or consumed: lights, receptacles, etc.
Permit electrician. Any person who has met all requirements for approval and has been granted a license or
registration, which includes the privilege of taking out permits to install one or more types of electrical work, as
covered by this division.
Spot. The location at which the power company will install the conductors supplying a customer.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.702), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.203 Electrical inspectors
(a) Records and reports. The chief electrical inspector, and his assistants, shall keep a complete record of the
activities of the electrical inspection division and shall render monthly and yearly reports to the chief executive
officer, or to any person duly designated by the chief executive officer.
(b) Qualifications. The chief electrical inspector, and his assistants, shall be well versed in electrical safety
requirements generally, and especially those set out in this division, the National Electrical Code, and the safety
regulations of the state applying to electrical work.
(c) Enforcement authority; right of entry. The chief electrical inspector, and his assistants, are hereby
authorized, empowered and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this division, and the electrical inspector,
and his assistants, are hereby vested with full authority to enter any building or premises and any manhole,
subway or plant at any time during business hours and at any and all times in case of emergency in the discharge
of their duties. They are authorized to pass upon and decide any questions under the provisions of this division.
(d) Answering questions. The electrical inspector shall answer any relevant questions concerning or give any
desired information in respect to the meaning, intent or application of the regulations and rules of this division.
(e) Approval of plans and specifications. The electrical inspector shall, when he deems it necessary to
accomplish the objectives of this division, require plans and specifications as prepared by the architect. When
such plans and specifications are demanded, it shall be a violation of this division for any person to install any
part of the electrical work concerned until the electrical inspector approves the installation.
(f) Inspection of electrical work. The city may, but shall not be required to, inspect all electrical work. The
city may rely on a representation by an owner or electrician that electrical work has been completed in
compliance with this division; provided that the electrical inspector shall make a thorough inspection of all
electrical work within the city from time to time, and where the electrical work is in a dangerous or unsafe
condition, or is deemed to be an interference with the work of the fire department of the city, the inspector shall
notify the person owning, using or operating such electrical work to place same in a safe, secure and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/508
noninterfering condition. Any person failing, neglecting or refusing within a reasonable time to make the
necessary repair or changes, and have the necessary work completed within a reasonable time after the receipt of
such notice, shall be deemed guilty of violation of this division. Every day which shall elapse after the expiration
of such reasonable time until the wires and apparatus are repaired, removed or changed, as required by the
electrical inspector, shall be considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this division.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.704), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.204 Master and journeyman electrician's license
(a) Master electrician's license required. No person shall engage in the business of contracting or installing,
altering or repairing any electrical work within the city which is regulated by this division unless such person
has been issued a master electrician's license, as specified in this section, except as otherwise set out.
(b) Work by journeyman electrician. A journeyman electrician is a person holding a journeyman's license. No
journeyman electrician shall perform any work except under the direct order and supervision of duly licensed
master electrician by whom he is employed.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.705), adopted 12/28/01)
(c) Application for master electrician. To qualify for a master electrician's license, the applicant must prove to
the satisfaction of the CEO any of the following:
(1) Current registration as a master electrician from the state department of licensing and
regulation;
(2) A picture identification stating name and address;
(3) Payment of a fee as stated in the city fee schedule.
(d) Expiration of license. All licenses are to expire on December 31 of each year unless the license has been
revoked by the CEO.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.04.205 Electrical signs
(a) Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all electrical signs, outline wiring and to all
classes of lighting used for advertising purposes or to attract attention.
(b) General standards. No electrical sign shall be erected, installed or connected to a source of energy within
the city unless such sign bears an approval label of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or unless it has met the
requirements set forth in this section for signs and has an approval card attached by the electrical inspector. All
signs erected before an inspection is called for must be open, and means of access shall be supplied by the
person erecting the sign.
(c) Permit required; approval tag. No signs or neon tubing shall be installed until a permit has been applied for
and issued by the electrical inspector. No sign or neon tubing shall be connected to a source of energy until an
approval tag is attached to the same by the electrical inspector.
(d) Compliance with National Electrical Code. No neon or similar tubing and no electrical work regulated by
this division shall be fastened to any sign structure which does not comply with section no. 600-21 of the
National Electrical Code.
(e) Payment of fees. Fees shall be paid for each sign constructed and for each installation of neon or similar
tubing which is installed within the city. Fees are to be paid in full prior to operation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/508
(f) Fee schedule. Appendix A of this code shall govern all permits and inspection fees.
(g) Installation of high tension conductors. All high tension conductors installed within a building shall be
enclosed in approved raceways and shall be equipped with insulation approved for the voltage of the circuit,
except:
(1) Short connections between the tube terminals, which are enclosed in glass in an approved
manner, may be bared conductors; and
(2) As set forth in section no. 600-31(f) of the National Electrical Code. Outside the main building
walls, the conductor for high tension current shall be equipped with insulation approved for the
voltage of the circuit and shall be enclosed in rigid conduit, except that, when conductors are not
readily accessible from a standing surface, they may be installed exposed, if supported or [by]
approved insulators at intervals not exceeding two feet and so arranged that all required clearance
will be maintained permanently. Straight connections between tube terminals may be enclosed in
glass and supported in an approved manner.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.706), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.206 Special licenses
(a) Work requiring special license. No person shall assemble or manufacture any appliances, equipment or
apparatus to be used in the city, and which is partly or wholly operated by electricity at a potential of 50 volts or
more, unless the same bears an approval label of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., until such person has been
granted a license by the board.
(b) Conditions. Such license shall be limited to the electrical work within or attached to appliances, equipment
and apparatus specified on the license and permits. Inspection and inspection fees, as called for in this division,
shall be required. A special license shall not include any privilege to do any other electrical work, or to connect
to or to disconnect from a source of energy.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.707), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.207 Permits
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, alter, change or repair any electrical work in the
city, as covered by this division, without first having applied for and obtained a permit to make such installation,
alteration, change or repair. No alteration or change shall be made in the electric wiring or apparatus located
within a building nor shall any such electric wiring or apparatus be installed in any building without first
securing a permit therefor, except as provided in this section, nor shall any change be made in any wiring or
apparatus after inspection without notifying the electrical inspector and securing a new permit therefor.
(1) If the duly licensed master electrician on the job is not the owner or a co-owner of the firm,
corporation or association engaged in the installation or alteration of electrical wiring or apparatus
within the city, the licensed master electrician must be a duly appointed officer of the firm or
corporation.
(2) No firm, corporation or association shall enter into any contract to do electrical wiring or
apparatus installation or permit any employee to make such installations unless the owner, co-owner
or duly appointed officer holds a valid master electrician's license issued by the CEO.
(3) No person shall be granted a permit until he has fully complied with all requirements of this
division as a permit electrician.
(4) Applications for permits shall be on forms furnished by the electrical inspector. All applications
for permits and requests for inspection shall be made to the office of the electrical inspector.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/508
(b) Exceptions to permit requirement.
(1) No wiring, poles, duct lines, guy anchors, apparatus, devices, appliances, fixtures or equipment
[shall be installed, maintained or altered], without first securing a permit therefor from the CEO,
except as follows:
(A) No permit shall be required for replacing fuses or lamps or the connection of portable
equipment to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed or for repairs to
portable appliances.
(B) No permit shall be required for the installation, maintenance or alteration of electric
wiring, apparatus, devices, appliances or equipment to be installed by an electric public service
company for the use of such company in the generation, transmission, distribution, sale or
utilization of electrical energy. However, an electric public service company shall not do any
wiring on a customer's premises other than wiring or repairs to apparatus which is part of the
company's distribution system, including metering equipment, meter cabinets, and meter-related
connections wherever located and transformer vaults in which the company's transformers are
located, nor shall any of its employees do any work other than that done for the company as
provided in this subsection by virtue of this exception.
(C) No permit shall be required for the installation of temporary wiring apparatus, devices,
appliances or equipment used by a recognized electrical training school or college.
(D) No permit shall be required for the installation and maintenance of railway crossing
signal devices, when such is performed by due authority of the railroad and in accordance with
the standards of the American Railroad Association and in collaboration with and approval of
the city street department.
(E) No permit shall be required for installation of electrical bells or other low energy wiring,
provided such installation is made by a licensed electrician. Intercom and public address
systems shall also be considered low energy wiring.
(F) No permit shall be required where specially exempt in this division. No permit shall be
required for repairing portable appliances.
(G) No permit or license shall be required for minor repairs performed by a homeowner on
his or her “homestead,” including such repairs as replacement of sockets, fuses, drop cords,
snap switches, and the like.
(H) No permit shall be required for replacing flush or snap switches, receptacles, lamp
sockets, the installation of lamps or minor repairs on permanently connected electrical
appliances and lighting fixtures.
(2) Where no permit is required for the installation or repair of wiring, apparatus, devices or
equipment for the transmission, distribution or utilization of electric energy for any purpose, the
wiring, apparatus, devices and equipment shall be installed or repaired in conformity with this
division.
(c) Building permit number required. In all cases requiring building permits, the electrical inspector shall not
issue an electrical permit until he has been furnished the building permit number issued by the CEO to the owner
or his authorized agent.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.708), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.208 Inspections
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/508
(a) Approval required prior to concealment of work or connection to source of energy. No electrical work for
which a permit is required under this division shall be concealed in any manner from access or sight until such
work has been inspected or approved by the electrical inspector. No electrical work shall be connected to a
source of energy until the electrical work is completed or has the approval of the electrical inspector.
(b) Failure to obtain approval. Any person having charge of the construction, alteration or repair of any
buildings, or any other person who covers or conceals, or causes to be covered or concealed, or any such person
who connects, or causes to be connected, any electrical work, for which a permit has been issued or is required,
before such electrical work has been inspected and approved, without having notified the electrical inspector at
least 24 hours previously, shall be subject to the penalty provided for in this division.
(c) Final inspection. When any electrical work for which a permit is required has been installed, the permit
electrician in charge shall deliver to the office of the electrical inspector a request for the final inspection. The
electrical inspector may inspect the electrical work.
(d) Approval of work. If the electrical work meets all requirements of this division, the electrical inspector
shall immediately make the necessary service records, and allow the city or other utilities to connect the work to
a source of supply. Should the electrical work fail to meet the requirements of this division, the electrical
inspector shall notify the permit electrician in writing of all the defects. The permit electrician shall, within a
reasonable time, correct such defects and notify the electrical inspector. If inspection and reinspection is made,
the person taking out the permit shall pay a reinspection fee as provided in appendix A of this code. When any
permit electrician fails or refuses to provide a statement of compliance or request a final inspection, the owner of
the premises on which the electrical work has been performed may request an inspection, and, upon payment of
a reinspection fee by such owner or person, the electrical inspector shall inspect the electrical work as soon
thereafter as practicable.
(e) Completion of partial work. When a master electrician does not have the contract for the finishing of the
electrical work covered by his permit, he shall make his inspection request to the electrical inspector when his
part of the work is completed.
(f) Certificate of approval. A written certificate of approval shall be used [issued], upon request, to a permit
electrician to cover any electrical work approved by the electrical inspector.
(g) Defects to be promptly corrected. When a permit electrician is given notice that defects exist in his
electrical work, he shall make corrections promptly. If these corrections are not made within thirty (30) days, he
shall not be issued any other permits until the defects are corrected and approved by the electrical inspector;
provided, however, that a time extension may be granted in writing by the electrical inspector.
(h) Responsibility for compliance. No permit or certificate of inspection shall be conclusive as against the city
that the electrical work therein referred to has been installed in conformity with the requirements of the law, but
the owner of the premises, the permit electrician, and all other persons concerned shall be obligated to see that
all matters, things and acts to which this division and such permit or certificate relates shall conform to the
regulations of the city.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.709), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.209 Fees; reinspection
(a) Fees generally. The fees listed in appendix A of this code and the administrative fee ordinance of the city
shall be paid to the city for any electrical work done in the city for which a permit is issued or is required by this
division.
(b) Requirements for final inspection and provision of utility services. The CEO will not make the final
inspection until all required fees have been paid. No utility services, other than temporary services for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/508
construction, or certificate of occupancy will be provided by the city until the statement of compliance has been
given or the final inspection has been made and the work approved by the electrical inspector.
(c) Authority to set other fees. When fees are not set up in this section, the electrical inspector shall set fees
that are consistent with fees established in this division. Inspection fees are subject to change by the city council
at any time.
(d) Reinspections. When any electrical work, as covered by this division, is reported to the electrical inspector
as ready for inspection, and upon such inspection the electrical work does not meet the requirements of this
division, the permit electrician shall be notified of the defects. After correcting the defects, he shall call for a
reinspection and be charged a reinspection fee of up to the initial inspection fee.
(e) Payment of fees; accounting. Unless otherwise stated in this division, all fees shall be delivered to the city
and all fees shall be payable during regular business hours at the office of the CEO at the city municipal
building. All accounting and records concerning finances covered by this division shall be under the supervision
and control of the finance director.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.710), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.210 General standards
(a) No electrical work in the city shall be approved unless the electrical work has been represented as in
conformity with this division and the laws of the state, and unless such electrical work has been represented as in
conformity with the approved methods of construction for the safety of life and property. When not specifically
covered by this division, the regulations as prescribed by the National Electrical Code shall be prima facie
evidence of such approved methods, provided that the provisions of this division shall prevail over the National
Electrical Code in case of conflicting provisions.
(b) All electrical work as covered by this division shall be installed in a safe and secure manner with materials
of such kind, quality and capacity as will maintain satisfactory and economical service to both the service and
consuming parties. No electrical materials, devices or appliances shall be used or installed in the city unless such
materials, devices and appliances are in conformity with the provisions of this division and the laws of the state,
and unless same are in conformity with the approved methods of construction for safety to life and property.
Unless otherwise covered by this division, conformity of electrical materials, devices and appliances with the
standards of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., as approved by the American Standards Association, and other
standards approved by the American Standards Association shall be prima facie evidence that such electrical
materials, devices and appliances comply with the requirements of this division.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.711), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.211 Wiring and conduits
(a) Wiring in residential districts. All structures located within residential districts may be wired in any wiring
method approved by the National Electrical Code.
(b) Wiring in other districts. All structures located in any other use or districts, including business,
commercial and industrial, shall be wired in one or more of the following approved methods:
(1) Standard rigid conduit;
(2) Thin wall conduit; and
(3) Surface metal raceways.
(c) Use of flexible metallic conduits. Flexible metallic conduits may be used to connect up vibrating
equipment, provided it does not exceed six feet in length without prior approval of the electrical inspector, as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/508
provided for under subsection (d) of this section. Flexible metallic conduits shall not be enclosed in plaster.
Flexible metallic conduits, as the expression is used in this section, means Greenfield, not BX cable. BX cable
shall not be used without prior approval in writing from the electrical inspector.
(d) Exceptions. The following exceptions to the wiring methods outlined in subsection (c) of this section shall
be recognized:
(1) Equipment wired with other methods and which bears the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.,
label of approval.
(2) Wiring methods especially approved in this division.
(3) The electrical inspector may approve other methods of wiring, such as special raceways or
busways or methods to meet conditions, where the methods named in subsections (b) and (c) of this
section are not suitable for the use intended, or where the National Electrical Code requires a certain
method.
(e) Rigid metal or nonmetallic conduit required for certain installations. Only rigid metal (not thin wall) and
nonmetallic conduit shall be used underground within concrete construction, where exposed to excessive
moisture, and where required under the National Electrical Code, except that thin wall conduits may be run
through a concrete beam or wall without coupling or connection. Thin wall conduit will be considered as not
exposed to weather if run on the ceiling 24 inches or more from the outside edge of an awning or on side walls
more than 45 degrees inside from a vertical line at the outside edge of a roof.
(f) Metal enclosed systems. No metal enclosed system shall be installed which does not allow the easy pulling
and replacing of the conductors which it encloses.
(g) Moved-in buildings. Moved-in houses and other types of buildings shall be treated as new construction
under this division. Old buildings moved within the city limits shall meet the requirements of this division for
repair work. New buildings moved within the city limits shall be treated as new construction under this division.
(h) Rewiring or additions. Any rewiring or additions to existing wiring representing over 60 percent of the
original outlets' installation value shall require the total installation to meet the requirements of this division.
(i) Wiring material. All internal electrical wiring will be copper. Aluminum wiring is prohibited.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.712), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.212 Connection of electric service
(a) Electric service shall only be connected by city personnel or under the supervision of the city by the
electrical company authorized to service the property, and only after the wiring of the location has been
inspected and approved by the CEO. Upon making an application for services, the applicant covenants that the
location will be wired in accordance with the policies and requirements of the city, the National Electrical Code,
the National Electrical Safety Code, and all applicable government regulations.
(b) The responsible party for any premises, and the contractor for any work performed, shall be responsible
for the compliance of such premises and work with the requirements of this division. The responsible party and
the contractor shall, by making the application for service, agree that if required changes and corrections are not
made within thirty (30) days after such inspection and failure to approve, the city may discontinue service to the
property until such changes have been made. The responsible party and the contractor shall, by making the
application for service, release the city from any liability of every kind and nature for damage which may occur
from defective wiring of said premises or from failure to inspect said wiring, and such permit application shall
further be an agreement to hold the city harmless from any and all liability.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/508
(c) No certificate of occupancy shall be issued or stay in effect for any premises not in compliance with this
division. The CEO may revoke any certificate of occupancy as provided in article 3.02 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.713), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.213 Correction of dangerous or unsafe conditions
Where wires or apparatus are found in dangerous or unsafe condition or are deemed to be an interference with
the work of the fire department, the electrical inspector or CEO shall notify the person owning, using or
operating such to place them in safe, secure and noninterfering condition. Any person failing, neglecting or
refusing within a reasonable time after the receipt of the notice, as provided in section 3.02.010, shall be deemed
guilty of violation of this chapter, and every day which shall elapse after ten (10) days until the wires and
apparatus are repaired, removed or changed as required by the electrical inspector, CEO or fire marshal shall be
considered a separate offense within the intent and meaning of this chapter. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A
(3.714), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.04.214 Authority to turn off current
The chief of the fire department, an electrical inspector, the CEO or a competent person delegated by them or
either of them shall have the power to at once cause the removal of all wires or the turning off of all electric
current where the circuits interfere with the work of the fire department during the progress of a fire. The
electrical inspector is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the turning off of electric current from all
conductors or apparatus which are deemed by him to be in an unsafe condition or which have not been installed
in conformity with this division. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.715), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.215–3.04.250 Reserved
Part II. Electrical Code
Sec. 3.04.251 Adopted
There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, removal and maintenance of electric wiring and apparatus, including permits and penalties, that
certain electrical code known as the National Electrical Code of the National Fire Protection Association, being
particularly the 2011 edition of the National Electrical Code, and the whole thereof, save and except such
portions as are hereafter deleted, modified or amended, of which no less than one copy has been and now is filed
in the office of the city secretary. Such code is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length in
this section, and the provisions of such code shall be controlling in the construction, alteration, maintenance or
removal of all electric wiring and apparatus within the corporate limits of the city. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B)
adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.252 Amendments
The National Electrical Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 404.2. See the fee schedule adopted by ordinance of the city.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.703(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.253–3.04.300 Reserved
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/508
Division 5. Mechanical Code*
Sec. 3.04.301 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is
hereby adopted as the mechanical code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of materials,
erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of
heating, ventilating, cooling, or refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing
appliances in the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and each and all
of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition,
published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to,
adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this division. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted
7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.302 Amendments
The International Mechanical Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 106.5.2. The fee schedule is located in the city fee ordinance.
Section 106.5.3. The CEO shall authorize the refunding of fees as follows:
1. Not more than 70 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been performed under a
permit issued in accordance with this code.
2. Not more than 30 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which
a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any plan review effort has been
expended.
Section 108.4. Violations penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of
the approved construction documents or directives of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under
the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $2,000.00
per day. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
Section 108.5. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.209(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.303–3.04.350 Reserved
Division 6. Fuel Gas Code*
Sec. 3.04.351 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, including appendix chapters A, B, C, and D,
published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the fuel gas code of the city for the control of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/508
building and structures as provided, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and terms of such
International Fuel Gas Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, on file in the office of
the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section as if fully set out in this
division. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.352 Amendments
The International Fuel Gas Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 103.6. The fee schedule is located in the city fee ordinance.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.211(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.04.353–3.04.400 Reserved
Division 7. Energy Conservation Code*
Sec. 3.04.401 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the energy code of the city for regulating the design, construction, quality of
materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or
maintenance of the building envelope, mechanical lighting and power systems of the city and providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor, and each and all of the regulations, provisions, conditions and
terms of such International Energy Conservation Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code
Council, on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this section
as if fully set out in this division. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 3.04.402 Amendments
The International Energy Conservation Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.212(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
ARTICLE 3.05 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.05.001 State law adopted
Chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, is hereby adopted by the city and made a part of this article. In the
event of any conflict or inconsistency between the terms and provisions of this article and chapter 214, the terms
and provisions of chapter 214 shall govern and control. (Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.03, adopted 6/14/12)
Secs. 3.05.002–3.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Property Maintenance Code
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/508
Sec. 3.05.031 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the “International Property Maintenance Code,” 2012 edition, including all appendix ordinances,
published by the International Code Council, Inc., is hereby adopted as the building code of the city establishing
the minimum regulations governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to
ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures in connection with the city's
dangerous building regulations and chapter 214, Tex. Local Gov't Code; and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such “International Property Maintenance Code,” 2012 edition, published by
the International Code Council, Inc., on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted and
made a part of this section as if fully set out in this division.
Sec. 3.05.032 Amendments
The 2012 International Property Maintenance Code is further amended as follows:
(1) Section 111.1 is amended to delete any reference or requirement that requires a written
application for appeal to be filed within 20 days after the decision of a code official.
(2) Section 111.3 is deleted.
(3) The following numbered section is deleted and replaced in full with the text indicated:
Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who violates a provision of this code, or fails to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and
subject to a fine of between $1.00 and $2,000.00. Each day a violation occurs constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.02, adopted 6/14/12)
Secs. 3.05.033–3.05.060 Reserved
Division 3. Substandard Buildings
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.05.061 Definitions
As used in this article the following terms shall have the meanings given below:
Building. Any building or structure built for the support, shelter, use or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or
property of any kind.
Code enforcement authority. The person designated by the city for purposes of making inspections, sending
notices, and otherwise enforcing the provisions of this article.
County. The County of Milam, Texas.
Dangerous building, unsafe building, and substandard building. Any building located within the incorporated
limits of the city that is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/508
(1) In such a state or condition of repair or disrepair that all or any of the following conditions
exist:
(A) Walls or other vertical structural members list, lean, or buckle;
(B) Damage or deterioration exists to the extent the building cannot be used or occupied
without risk of injury, or to the extent the building poses a danger to persons on the property or
adjacent property;
(C) Loads on floors or roofs are improperly distributed or the floors or roofs are of
insufficient strength to be reasonably safe for the purposes used;
(D) Damage by fire, wind, or other cause has rendered the building or structure dangerous to
life, safety, morals or the general health and welfare of the occupants or the people of the city;
(E) The building or structure is so dilapidated, substandard, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary or
otherwise lacking in the amenities essential to decent living or use that the same is unfit for
human habitation or occupancy, or is likely to cause sickness, disease or injury or otherwise to
constitute a detriment to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of those persons
assembled, working, or living therein or is a hazard to the public health, safety and welfare;
(F) Light, air, and sanitation facilities are inadequate to protect the health, morals, safety, or
general welfare of persons who assemble, work, or live therein;
(G) Stairways, fire escapes, and other facilities of egress in case of fire or panic are
inadequate;
(H) Parts or appendages of the building or structure are so attached that they are likely to fall
and injure persons or property;
(I) The floors, exterior walls, or roof fail to protect occupants of the building or structure
from weather, injury, and the danger of collapse due to the presence of holes, cracks, and loose,
rotten, warped, or protruding boards or other similar damage in floors, exterior walls or the
roof;
(J) Conditions of the structure or building constitute a material violation of provisions of the
city's building codes, plumbing code, fire prevention code, or electrical code (the “codes”). For
the purposes of this section, a “material” violation is a violation of any provision or provisions
of the codes that creates a significant risk of personal injury, death, or property damage;
(2) Dilapidated, substandard, or unfit for human habitation and a hazard to the public health,
safety, and welfare of the city's residents;
(3) The structure, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety
or general welfare of the city's citizens including all conditions conductive to the harboring of rats or
mice or other disease-carrying animals or insects reasonably calculated to spread disease;
(4) The structure has been found to contain molds which are known to be harmful to humans, and
that remediation of such mold contamination would exceed fifty (50) percent of the value of the
structure;
(5) The building or structure is hazardous to the welfare of the community because it contains
other premises defects that may be hazardous, is or may become an attractive nuisance as that term is
defined by law, or is an aesthetic eyesore that may denigrate surrounding property values;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/508
(6) Regardless of its structural condition, unoccupied by its owners, lessees, or other invitees and is
unsecured from unauthorized entry to the extent that it could be entered or used by vagrants or other
uninvited persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children; or
(7) Boarded up, fenced or otherwise secured in any manner if:
(A) The building constitutes a danger to the public even though secured from entry; or
(B) The means used to secure the building are inadequate to prevent unauthorized entry or
use of the building to the extent it could be entered or used by vagrants or other uninvited
persons as a place of harborage or could be entered or used by children;
(8) Defined as a dangerous or unsafe building by the 2012 International Property Maintenance
Code, published by the International Code Council, Inc.
Responsible parties. The owner, and any mortgagee or lienholder identified by the owner or by search of the
public tax records and real property records of the county, and any occupant or person residing within, or in
custody of the building or structure.
Structure. That which is constructed.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (2.01), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.062 Declaration of nuisance
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous building in the
city; and it shall be unlawful for any person to permit same to remain in such condition.
(b) All dangerous buildings, unsafe buildings, and substandard buildings are hereby declared to be public
nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with the procedures
provided in this article.
(c) The code enforcement authority shall enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (3.01), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.063 Inspections and duties of the code enforcement authority
The code enforcement authority shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, every building, or portion thereof
reported to be dangerous. If such building, or any portion thereof is determined to be dangerous, the code
enforcement authority shall give the responsible parties notice in accordance with the requirements set forth in
sections 3.05.064 and 3.05.066 of this article. The code enforcement authority shall also:
(1) Inspect or cause to be inspected, when necessary, any building or structure within the
incorporated limits of the city, including public buildings, schools, halls, churches, theaters, hotels,
tenements, or apartments, multifamily residences, single-family residences, garages, warehouses, and
other commercial and industrial structures of any nature whatsoever for the purpose of determining
whether any conditions exist which render such places a “dangerous building” as defined herein.
(2) Inspect any building, wall or structure about which complaints have been filed by any person to
the effect that a building, wall or structure is or may be existing in violation of this article.
(3) Report to the building standards commission any noncompliance with the minimum standards
set forth in this article. The city code enforcement authority shall obtain from the secretary of the
building standards commission a hearing date for a public hearing by the building standards
commission on any building believed to be a dangerous building and shall provide the secretary of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/508
the building standards commission with copies of the written notice to persons with interests in the
property as required under this article.
(4) Appear at all hearings conducted by the building standards commission and testify as to the
conditions of dangerous buildings within the city.
(5) Place a notice on all dangerous buildings reading as follows: “This building has been found to
be a dangerous building by the City of Rockdale Code Enforcement Authority. This notice is to
remain on this building until it is repaired, vacated, or demolished in accordance with the notice
which has been given to the owner(s), occupant(s) and person(s) with interests in the property as
shown by the records of the City Secretary and the Tax Appraisal District. It is unlawful to remove
this notice until such notice is complied with.”
(6) Request the city manager, as applicable, to have the building inspector, or an appropriate
engineer or building inspector, provide additional inspections, reports and act as an expert witness at
hearings for buildings that appear marginally dangerous.
(7) Make a diligent effort to determine the identity and address of each owner, lienholder, or
mortgagee. The code enforcement authority satisfies the requirements of this subsection to make a
diligent effort, to use best efforts, or to make a reasonable effort to determine the identity and address
of an owner, a lienholder, or a mortgagee if the code enforcement authority searches the following
records:
(A) County real property records of the county in which the building is located;
(B) Appraisal district records of the appraisal district in which the building is located;
(C) Records of the secretary of state;
(D) Assumed name records of the county in which the building is located;
(E) Tax records of the city; and
(F) Utility records of the city.
(8) Perform the other requirements with respect to notification of public hearings as are set forth
more specifically in this article.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (3.02), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.064 Contents and service of notice to abate
(a) Should the code enforcement authority determine that a building within the city is a dangerous building,
he/she shall, in the manner provided for in this article, attempt to identify all the responsible parties that have an
interest in the building, and give written notification of the dangerous building or condition by certified mail
return receipt requested and regular U.S. mail to each of the identified responsible parties that are identified by
the search made pursuant to subsection (4) below. Such notice shall include:
(1) The address or legal description of the property where the building or structure deemed unsafe
is located;
(2) A statement of the specific conditions, violations, or defects which make the building or
structure a dangerous building;
(3) Notice of the date and time of a public hearing before the building standards commission to
determine whether the building complies with the standards set out in this article; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/508
(4) A statement that the owner, lienholder, mortgagee, or persons with a legal interest in the
building will be required to submit at the hearing proof of the scope of any work that may be required
to comply with this article and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(b) The notice required under this section must be either personally delivered or mailed on or before the 10th
day before the date of the hearing unless the code enforcement authority determines that the property, building,
or structure is in immediate need to be secured, repaired, or abated and the property, building, or structure
presents an immediate threat to the health, safety, and welfare of the public. For purposes of providing the
minimum notice under this subsection, the notice of dangerous building or dangerous condition of property shall
be deemed served upon the responsible parties on the date the notice is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service.
(c) Such notice shall be served upon the responsible parties both by certified mail and regular U.S. mail as
required in this section.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (3.03), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.065 Securing dangerous building
(a) Should the code enforcement authority determine that any building or structure within the incorporated
limits of the city is a dangerous building, or is unoccupied and unsecured, or is occupied only by persons who do
not have a right of possession of the building, he/she shall cause the building to be secured.
(b) Before the 11th day after the date the building is secured, the municipality shall give notice to the owner
by:
(1) Personally serving the owner with written notice;
(2) Depositing the notice in the United States mail addressed to the owner at the owner's post
office address;
(3) Publishing the notice at least twice within a 10-day period in a newspaper of general circulation
in the county in which the building is located if personal service cannot be obtained and the owner's
post office address is unknown; or
(4) Posting the notice on or near the front door of the building if personal service cannot be
obtained and the owner's post office address is unknown.
(c) The notice must contain:
(1) Identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the building and the property
on which it is located;
(2) A description of the violation of the city standards that is present at the building;
(3) A statement that the city will secure or has secured, as the case may be, the building; and
(4) An explanation of the owner's entitlement to request a hearing about any matter relating to the
municipality's securing of the building.
(d) The building standards commission shall conduct a hearing at which any of the responsible parties may
testify and present witnesses and written information about any matter relating to the city's securing of the
building, if, within 30 days after the date the code enforcement authority secures or causes to be secured the
building, a responsible party files a written request for the hearing. The building standards commission shall
conduct the hearing within 20 days after the date the request is filed with the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/508
(e) The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands, unless it is a homestead, to
secure the payment of the cost of securing the building. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city shall
file for record, in recordable form in the official public records of the county, a written notice of the imposition
of the lien. The notice shall contain a legal description of the land.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (3.04), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.066 Sufficiency of notice
(a) A notice of dangerous building or dangerous condition of property as required under this article shall
include notice of the date and time of a public hearing and shall be deemed properly served upon the responsible
parties if a copy thereof is:
(1) Served upon him/her personally;
(2) Sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular U.S. mail to the last
known address of such person as shown on the records of the city; or
(3) Posted in a conspicuous place in or about the building affected by the notice.
(b) When the city mails a notice in accordance with this section to a property owner, lienholder, or mortgagee,
and the United States Postal Service returns the notice “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the notice is not
affected, and the notice is considered delivered.
(c) The city shall file notice of the hearing in the public records of real property of the county.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (3.05), adopted 6/14/12)
Secs. 3.05.067–3.05.090 Reserved
Part II. Building Standards Commission
Sec. 3.05.091 Establishment; organization
There is hereby created a building standards commission. The code enforcement authority or any city employee
in applicable departments of the city, who shall be designated by the city manager, shall be authorized to inspect
all buildings or structures reported to be or believed to be substandard. The code enforcement authority or
designee shall prepare a report of such inspection for the building standards commission. The building standards
commission shall, except in cases of emergency as hereinafter set forth, notify the responsible parties of its
intention to hold a hearing to determine cases concerning alleged violations of this article and follow the
procedure hereinafter provided.
(1) The building standards commission shall consist of one (1) panel composed of five (5)
members. The members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed by the city council to
terms of two (2) years. The city council shall appoint regular members on the panel to designated
places 1 through 5. Terms of places 1, 3 and 5 shall expire in November of odd-numbered years and
the terms of places 2 and 4 shall expire in November of even-numbered years.
(2) A panel member may be removed for cause on a written charge in accordance with section
54.033, Texas Local Government Code. Before a decision on removal is made, the city council must
hold a public hearing on the matter, if requested by the commission member subject to the removal
action.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/508
(3) Any vacancy shall be filled for the unexpired term.
(4) The city council may provide for the appointment of eight or more alternate members who shall
serve in the absence of one or more regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city
manager. By the adoption of this section, the city council requests alternate members to serve in place
of a regular member due to absence, conflict of interest, etc. or as part of a rotation of regular and
alternate members. Alternate members shall serve for the same period and are subject to removal in
the same manner as regular members. Vacancies for alternates shall be filled in the same manner as
vacancies for regular members. The city council may appoint alternates to designated places 1
through 5. The terms of alternates for places 1, 3 and 5 shall expire in November of odd-numbered
years and the terms of alternates for places 2 and 4 shall expire in even-numbered years.
Sec. 3.05.092 Duties
The building standards commission (the “commission”) shall:
(1) Schedule and conduct a hearing and hear testimony from the code enforcement authority, the
owner and other persons having an interest in the dangerous building, and any person desiring to
present factual evidence relevant to the dangerous building. The code enforcement authority, the city
attorney or any other person so designated by the city manager shall present cases before the building
standards commission. Such testimony shall relate to the determination of the question of whether the
building or structure in question is a dangerous building and the scope of any work that may be
required to comply with this article and the amount of time it will take to reasonably perform the
work. The owner or a person having an interest in the dangerous building shall have the burden of
proof to demonstrate the scope of any work that may be required to comply with this article and the
time it will take to reasonably perform the work.
(Ordinance 2012-12-19(6B) adopted 12/19/12)
(2) Upon conclusion of the hearing, the building standards commission shall determine by majority
vote whether the building or structure in question is a dangerous building. Upon a determination that
the building or structure in question constitutes a dangerous building, the building standards
commission shall issue a written order:
(A) Containing an identification of the building and the property on which it is located;
(B) Making written findings of the minimum standards violations that are present at the
building;
(C) Requiring the owner and persons having an interest in the building to secure, repair,
vacate, and/or demolish the building within thirty (30) days from the issuance of such order,
unless the owner or a person with an interest in the building establishes at the hearing that the
work cannot reasonably be performed within thirty (30) days, in which instance the building
standards commission shall specify a reasonable time for the completion of the work; and
further provided that the building standards commission may require the owner and occupants
to vacate the building within a shorter period of time if the building has fallen, is at risk of
immediate collapse, or is in such a condition that life is endangered by further occupation of the
building; and
(D) Containing a statement that the city will vacate, secure, remove or demolish the
dangerous building and relocate the occupants of the building if the ordered action is not taken
within the time specified by the building standards commission and it is found and determined
by the building standards commission in its order that there is an immediate clear and present
danger to other property or the public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/508
(3) If repair or demolition is ordered, the building standards commission shall send a copy of the
order by certified mail to the owner and all persons having an interest in the property, including all
identifiable mortgagees and lienholders within a reasonable period of time after the hearing. Within
10 days after the date that the order is issued, the city shall:
(A) File a copy of the order in the office of the municipal secretary or clerk; and
(B) Publish in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality in which the building is
located a notice containing:
(i) The street address or legal description of the property;
(ii) The date of the hearing;
(iii) A brief statement indicating the results of the order (may be a copy of the order);
and
(iv) If not provided in the notice, instructions stating where a complete copy of the
order may be obtained.
(4) If repair or demolition is ordered and notice of public hearing was not filed in the official
public records of real property of the county, the city may file and record a copy of the order in such
records of the county.
(5) If the building standards commission allows the owner or a person with an interest in the
dangerous building more than thirty (30) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building, the
building standards commission in its written order shall establish specific time schedules for the
commencement and performance of the work and shall require the owner or person to secure the
property in a reasonable manner from unauthorized entry while the work is being performed. The
securing of the property shall be in a manner found to be acceptable by the city code enforcement
authority. Any required permits or approvals shall be obtained prior to commencing the repair,
removal, or demolition of the building.
(6) The building standards commission may not allow the owner or person with an interest in the
dangerous building more than ninety (90) days to repair, remove, or demolish the building or fully
perform all work required to comply with the written order unless the owner or person:
(A) Submits a detailed plan and time schedule for the work at the hearing; and
(B) Establishes at the hearing that the work cannot reasonably be completed within ninety
(90) days because of the scope and complexity of the work.
(7) If the building standards commission allows the owner or person with an interest in the
dangerous building more than ninety (90) days to complete any part of the work required to repair,
remove, or demolish the building, the building standards commission shall require the owner or
person to regularly submit progress reports to the building standards commission to demonstrate that
the owner or person has complied with the time schedules established for commencement and
performance of the work. The written order may require that the owner or person with an interest in
the building appear before the city code enforcement authority to demonstrate compliance with the
time schedules.
(8) In the event the owner or a person with an interest in a dangerous building fails to comply with
the order within the time specified therein, the city may cause any occupants of the dangerous
building to be relocated, and may cause the dangerous building to be secured, removed, or
demolished at the city's expense. The city may assess the expenses on, and the city has a lien against,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/508
unless it is a homestead as protected by the Texas Constitution, the property on which the dangerous
building was located. The lien is extinguished if the property owner or a person having an interest in
the building reimburses the city for the expenses. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the
time the notice of the lien is recorded and indexed in the office of the county clerk in the county in
with the property is located. The notice of lien must contain:
(A) The name and address of the owner of the dangerous building if that information can be
determined by a diligent effort;
(B) A legal description of the real property on which the building was located;
(C) The amount of expenses incurred by the city; and
(D) The balance due.
(9) Such lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and all previously recorded bona fide
mortgage liens attached to the real property.
(10) In addition to the authority set forth in subsection (8) above, after the expiration of the time
allotted in the order for the repair, removal, or demolition of a dangerous building, the city may repair
the building at its expense and assess the expenses on the land on which the building stands or to
which it is attached. The repairs contemplated by this section may only be accomplished to the extent
necessary to bring the building into compliance with the minimum standards established by city
ordinance, and to the extent such repairs do not exceed minimum housing standards. This section
shall be applicable only to residential buildings with ten (10) or fewer dwelling units. The city shall
follow the procedures set forth in subsection (8) above for filing a lien on the property on which the
building is located.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (art. IV, sec. 2), adopted 6/14/12)
Secs. 3.05.093–3.05.120 Reserved
Part III. Appeals
Sec. 3.05.121 Building standards commission order
(a) Any responsible party affected by a building standards commission order who desires to appeal the
decision of the building standards commission or the findings set forth in the building standards commission
order, must appeal the order of the building standards commission to city council in accordance with the
following procedures:
(1) The responsible party shall file a written notice of appeal with the city council and the code
enforcement authority within 30 calendar days of receiving the building standards commission order.
(2) The notice of appeal must set forth and describe the factual and legal grounds why the building
standards commission decision is in error, wrong, or incorrect.
(3) The responsible party must request a public hearing before the city council.
(4) The responsible party has the burden of proof of demonstrating at a public hearing before city
council that the building standards commission is in error, wrong, or incorrect.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/508
(5) City council shall only consider evidence that was available to the building standards
commission at the time of the hearing before the building standards commission.
(6) The building standards commission order shall be deemed final and nonappealable if a
responsible party fails to timely submit an appeal in accordance with this section.
(b) In conducting its review of a building standards commission order, the city council shall by ordinance
either affirm the order or modify or reverse the order.
(c) If the city council affirms the building standards commission order, the findings and decision set forth in
the building standards commission order shall be deemed final and the city council's ordinance shall include the
following:
(1) Findings of fact as to the specific conditions which make the building or structure a dangerous
building;
(2) If city council orders the demolition of the dangerous building, the ordinance ordering the
demolition of the dangerous building must include:
(A) A finding that there is an immediate clear and present danger to other property or the
public; and
(B) The ordinance must specify that the demolition of the dangerous building cannot occur
earlier than 35 calendar days from the date of the city council's order affirming the building
standards commission.
(d) If the city council reverses the building standards commission, the city council shall set forth in factual
findings in the ordinance the grounds and reasons for the reversal.
(e) The building standards commission order shall be deemed final:
(1) In the absence of a timely filed appeal in accordance with the appeal procedures established in
this section; or
(2) Due to a failure of an appealing party to comply with the appeal procedures set forth in this
section.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (5.01), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.122 City council action
If the responsible parties that have an interest in a building or structure that is ordered to be repaired,
rehabilitated, demolished, or removed, fail to timely comply with such order, the city council may:
(1) Authorize the code enforcement authority to obtain the repair and/or securing of the building or
structure, and to file a lien against such property for the cost and expense of such work;
(2) By ordinance, assess a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day against the owners and persons
having an interest in the property; and
(3) Authorize and take such other action as contemplated by this article, or chapter 214 [of the
Texas Local Government Code], as is necessary or advisable in the judgment of the city council to
protect the public health, safety or welfare.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (5.02), adopted 6/14/12)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/508
Sec. 3.05.123 Judicial review
(a) Any owner, lienholder, or mortgagee of record of property jointly or severally aggrieved by an order of the
city council issued under this article and section 214.001 [of the Texas Local Government Code] may file in
district court a verified petition setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the
grounds of the illegality. The petition must be filed by an owner, lienholder, or mortgagee within 30 calendar
days after the respective dates a copy of the final decision of the municipality is personally delivered to them,
mailed to them by first class mail with certified return receipt requested, or delivered to them by the United
States Postal Service using signature confirmation service, or such decision shall become final as to each of
them upon the expiration of each such 30 calendar day period.
(b) On the filing of the petition, the court may issue a writ of certiorari directed to the municipality to review
the order of the municipality and shall prescribe in the writ the time within which a return on the writ must be
made, which must be longer than 10 days, and served on the realtor or the realtor's attorney.
(c) The city may not be required to return the original papers acted on by it, but it is sufficient for the
municipality to return certified or sworn copies of the papers or of parts of the papers as may be called for by the
writ.
(d) The return must concisely set forth other facts as may be pertinent and material to show the grounds of the
decision appealed from and shall be verified.
(e) The issuance of the writ does not stay proceedings on the decision appealed from.
(f) Appeal in the district court shall be limited to a hearing under the substantial evidence rule. The court may
reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the decision brought up for review.
(g) Costs may not be allowed against the city.
(h) If the decision of the municipality is affirmed or not substantially reversed but only modified, the district
court shall allow to the city all attorney's fees and other costs and expenses incurred by it and shall enter a
judgment for those items, which may be entered against the property owners, lienholders, or mortgagees as well
as all persons subject to the proceedings before the city.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (5.03), adopted 6/14/12)
Secs. 3.05.124–3.05.150 Reserved
Part IV. Penalties and Enforcement
Sec. 3.05.151 Assessment of expenses and penalties
(a) If the time allotted for the repair, removal or demolition of a building under this article has expired, then
the city council may, in addition to the authority granted under chapter 214, Texas Local Government Code, and
the foregoing sections of this article:
(1) Order the repair of the building at the city's expense and assess the expenses on the land on
which the building stands or to which it is attached, or
(2) Assess a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per day against the responsible party for failure to
repair, remove, or demolish the building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/508
(3) Authorize the city code enforcement authority to invite at least two (2) or more building
contractors to make estimates pertaining to the needed repair, removal or demolition of a building.
The code enforcement authority shall cause to be made an assessment of expenses, and may also
recommend civil penalties, based on such estimates. The code enforcement authority shall endeavor
to minimize the expenses of any building repairs, removal or demolitions order pursuant to this
article.
(b) The city shall impose a lien against the land on which the building stands or stood, unless it is a homestead
as protected by the Texas Constitution, to secure the payment of the repair, removal, or demolition expenses or
the civil penalty. Promptly after the imposition of the lien, the city shall file for record, in recordable form in the
office of the county clerk, a written notice of the imposition of the lien. The notice shall contain a legal
description of the land.
(c) The city's lien to secure the payment of a civil penalty or the costs of repairs, removal, or demolition is
inferior to any previously recorded bona fide mortgage lien attached to the real property to which the city's lien
attaches if the mortgage lien was filed for record in the office of the county clerk before the date the civil penalty
is assessed or the repair, removal, or demolition is begun by the city. The city's lien is superior to all other
previously recorded judgment liens.
(d) Any civil penalty or other assessment imposed under this section accrues interest at the rate of 10 percent a
year from the date of the assessment until paid in full. The city may further file with the district clerk a copy of
an ordinance assessing a civil penalty pursuant to this article.
(e) In any judicial proceeding regarding enforcement of the city's rights under this section, the prevailing party
is entitled to recover reasonable attorney's fees as otherwise provided by statute.
(f) A lien acquired under this section by the city for repair expenses may not be foreclosed if the property on
which the repairs were made is occupied as a residential homestead by a person 65 years of age or older.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (6.01), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.152 Violations
(a) The owner of any dangerous building who shall fail to comply with any notice or order to repair, secure,
vacate or demolish said building or structure, such notice or order given by the authority of the building
standards commission, or the city council, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(b) An occupant or lessee in possession of any dangerous building who fails to comply with any notice or
order to vacate such building and fails to repair such building in accordance with an order given by the building
standards commission shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) Any person removing the notice of a secured building as provided for in section 3.05.065(b)(4), and or a
notice of dangerous building as provided in section 3.05.066(a)(3) of this article, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(d) The violation of any provision of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense punishable by a
fine of between $1.00 and $2,000.00 dollars. Each day a violation of this article continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (6.02), adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.153 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable for a
fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/508
separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein. To the extent of any
conflict between this section and a penalty provision in the codes adopted by division 2 of this article, such
penalty provision shall be amended and this section shall control. (Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (6.03),
adopted 6/14/12)
Sec. 3.05.154 Enforcement of regulations
(a) No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, or utility tap shall be
issued by the city for or with respect to any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits, after the effective
date of this article, except in compliance with all then applicable requirements of this article and the above
codes.
(b) Whenever any building work is being done contrary to the provisions of this article, another controlling
ordinance or statute governing the building, the building official or code enforcement officer designated by the
city manager may order the work stopped by notice verbally or in writing served on any persons engaged in the
doing or causing such work to be done and the city shall post a stop work order on the property adjacent to the
posted building permit, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the building
official or code enforcement officer to proceed with the work. If no permit has been issued, all work shall stop
until a permit has been properly issued and all errors corrected to the satisfaction of the building official or code
enforcement officer. The building official or code enforcement officer may also issue a work correction order,
which shall be served upon any persons who are working on a certain aspect of the construction project. The
work on other aspects of the construction not in violation of the city's ordinances may proceed, but work shall
cease as to that aspect in violation of the city's ordinances.
(c) This article and any code or provision adopted by this article may be further enforced by injunction and
other judicial proceedings, either at law or in equity; and, in lieu of or in addition to any other authorized
enforcement or action taken, any person who violates any term or provision of this article, with respect to any
land, building or development within the city, by fine and penalties as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2012-06-14(4A), sec. 1.04 (6.04), adopted 6/14/12)
ARTICLE 3.06 MOVING BUILDINGS*
Sec. 3.06.001 Application for permit
To obtain a moving permit to move a building into, out of or through the city, the applicant must first file an
application therefor in writing. Each such application shall be accompanied by the required fee and shall contain:
(1) The name of the person, firm, partnership or corporation who will move the building;
(2) The name of the owner of the building;
(3) The present location of the building;
(4) The proposed new location of the building;
(5) The route of moving, as approved by the chief of police;
(6) The exact date and time during which the building will occupy the street;
(7) The time that the building is allowed to remain in the street;
(8) The size and type of construction of the building;
(9) Evidence that arrangements have been made with utility companies and/or the city, where
necessary to prevent damage thereto;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/508
(10) The receipt of the permit fee;
(11) The business address and home address of the applicant;
(12) Proof of corporate surety bond and of liability insurance with an insurance company
authorized to do an insurance business in the state, as provided herein, to protect the public and the
city from any damage caused by the applicant in moving the building for which the permit is
requested;
(13) Such other information as may be required by the CEO.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.1001), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.06.002 Bond and indemnification
Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall agree to indemnify the city for any damage that may thereafter
occur to public or private property within the city of reason of the applicant's intended move, and shall file with
the city a bond and certificate of insurance as may be required by the CEO. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A
(3.1004), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.06.003 Route and time of move; leaving building on street
(a) The CEO shall immediately notify the chief of police stating the proposed route, when moving will begin
and end, and the number of days the move is expected to take.
(b) The chief of police shall have authority to establish and direct, as a condition to the issuance of the permit,
the time when the house moving shall start and the time when it shall be completed, the routes over which
buildings of specified dimensions may be moved, and such other regulations and conditions which he may deem
necessary. Deviation therefrom shall constitute an offense.
(c) The maximum time during which a house may remain in a street, under a permit, shall be forty-eight (48)
hours.
(d) During the entire time that the building is occupying the street, or any portion thereof, the mover shall
keep it continuously in motion toward its destination and shall not allow the work of moving to stop during such
time.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.1000), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.06.004 Prohibited acts
(a) It shall be unlawful for the holder of the permit to disconnect any electrical light and power connection,
gas connection, water connection or telephone connection from any building within the city which he or she
proposes to move without the consent of the public utility owning such connection.
(b) It shall be unlawful for the holder of the permit to remove, tear down or destroy any pole or wire or other
property belonging to the city or to any utility company furnishing gas or electrical light and power or belonging
to any telephone or telegraph company without the consent of such utility or other person owning the same.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the holder of the permit to remove any vegetation on private or public property
without the consent of the person owning same.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.1002), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.06.005 Inspection upon completion of move; repair of damage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/508
(a) Inspection. Whenever the holder of a permit has completed the work of moving a building under a permit,
(s)he shall promptly notify the CEO of such fact. The CEO shall cause an inspection to be made of the route of
moving and the installation of the building.
(b) Repair of damage. If the holder of the permit has caused damage to the streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or
other public or private property, the holder of the permit shall be notified of such fact, specifying the damage, by
mailing to him a written notification by certified mail at either the business or home address listed in the
application for the permit. The holder of the permit shall proceed within two (2) days from the date of such
notification to begin the work of repairing the damage and completing the same to the satisfaction of the city.
(c) Return of deposit or bond. When the building moving operation is completed and the CEO has written
assurance that no damage to life or property has occurred or that the damage has been repaired and that all
claims arising out of any damage are settled, any required deposit or bond shall be reimbursed, released or
returned to the applicant.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.1003), adopted 12/28/01)
ARTICLE 3.07 MANUFACTURED HOUSING*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.07.001 Definitions
For the purpose of this article, certain terms, words and phrases shall have the meaning hereinafter ascribed
thereto:
Agent. Any person authorized by the licensee of a trailer and motor home park to operate or maintain such park
under the provisions of this article.
Common access route or internal street. A private way which affords the principal means of access to individual
lots or auxiliary buildings.
HUD-code manufactured home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, as defined in V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 1201, as amended.
License. A written license issued by the city council or its authorized representative, permitting a person to
operate and maintain a trailer and motor home park under the provisions of this article and regulations issued
hereunder.
Licensee. Any person licensed to operate and maintain a trailer and motor home park under the provisions of this
article.
Manufactured home. A manufactured home as defined in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter 1201, as
amended.
Manufactured home subdivision. A unified development of mobile home or manufactured home lots arranged on
a tract of land for permanent or semi-permanent location of manufactured homes which has been subdivided and
is under ownership of two or more persons meeting all requirements of city subdivision regulations.
Mobile home. Any structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections,
which in the traveling mode is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when
erected on-site is 320 or more square feet, as more particularly described in V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, chapter
1201. No mobile home may be placed on any lot within the city limits. The minimum housing standards
established for existing buildings and manufactured homes shall apply to all existing mobile homes within the
city limits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/508
Replacement. The act of moving one trailer or motor home from an existing stand and replacing it with another
trailer or motor home.
Service building. A structure housing a toilet, lavatory and such other facilities as may be applicable in this
article.
Sewer connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances from the drain outlet of a
trailer or motor home to the inlet of the corresponding service riser pipe of the sewage system serving the park.
Sewer service riser pipe. That portion of a sewer service which extends vertically to the ground elevation and
terminates at a space.
Space. A plot of ground without [sic] a park designated for the accommodation of one unit, together with such
open space as required by this article. This term also shall include the terms “lot,” “stand” and “site.”
Trailer or motor home or unit or recreational vehicle. Includes trailer homes and travel trailers, and means a
vehicle which stands on wheels and is built to be towed by a motor-driven vehicle. A motor home (recreational
vehicle) is a self-propelled vehicle that stands on wheels. Both are built to federal and state specifications to be
licensed for operation on public roads and highways, and are not considered mobile homes.
Trailer or motor home park. A parcel of land authorized by the city council and not prohibited for such use by
deed restrictions, for the purpose of renting trailer or motor home spaces on a temporary basis.
Water connection. The connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to
the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within a trailer or motor home.
Water riser pipe. That portion of the private water service system serving a park which extends vertically to the
ground elevation and terminates at a designated point at a trailer or motor home space.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.301), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.002 Placement of manufactured home or modular building outside park
A HUD-code manufactured home or modular building may be maintained on any private plot of land zoned for
such dwellings in the city outside a designated park area if the following criteria are met:
(1) The lot on which a single manufactured home or modular building is placed is no less than
seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet and no less than seventy (70) feet frontage.
(2) The manufactured home or modular building must be underpinned or enclosed to ground level.
(3) The manufactured home or modular building must be hooked up to utilities in accordance with
all city ordinances or codes relating to safety or sanitary provisions.
(4) No manufactured home shall be placed behind an existing dwelling, whether it be conventional
or modular in structure.
(5) A permit shall be required for HUD-code manufactured homes installed after the effective date
of this article. Any person seeking to move or place a HUD-code manufactured home on any lot,
property or tract of land outside of an established park within the city must receive a permit.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.304), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.003 Placement of mobile homes prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/508
From and after the effective date of these provisions, it shall be unlawful to place any mobile home, as opposed
to a manufactured home, in the city. Manufactured homes shall be allowed upon compliance with all relevant
provisions of this article. Those mobile homes now present in the city shall be unaffected by this section;
however, said mobile homes may not be moved to any new location in the city. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A
(3.305), adopted 12/28/01)
State law reference–Authority to prohibit installation of mobile homes used for residences, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec.
1201.008.
Sec. 3.07.004 Exceptions
Any new manufactured home delivered and installed by a licensed retailer or installer shall be exempt from the
requirements of this article as to quality of construction and construction standards, including but not limited to
wiring and plumbing, so long as such home is maintained in substantially the same condition as when purchased
and installed; provided that this exemption shall expire upon sale or conveyance of the manufactured home by
the purchaser at retail to any third party. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.310), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.005 Applicability of state and federal standards; severability
If any provision of this article or the application of any provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid,
the invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications hereof which can be given effect without the
invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable.
Further, no provision or term of this article shall be interpreted as adding any additional requirement to any
federal or state standard for the quality, construction and/or requirements for any manufactured home, but shall,
with respect to manufactured homes, be applied to those homes that do not at any time meet any such applicable
standards, or that because of damage, deterioration or a failure to clean and maintain do not comply with such
laws and this article. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.311), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.07.006–3.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Design and Construction Requirements
Sec. 3.07.031 General standards
Manufactured home design and construction shall conform to generally accepted standards of the manufactured
home industry and the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Code. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302),
adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.032 Foundation, supports and underpinning
(a) Placement of a manufactured home on a manufactured home stand by jacks or supports shall be such as to
insure the retention of the mobile home in a fixed position.
(b) All manufactured homes must be leveled and its foundation must be single blocked up to thirty inches
(30") in height from the ground level and double blocked or [if] between thirty inches (30") to forty-eight inches
(48"), and forty-eight inches (48") is maximum, except any gap, opening or space between the frame and ground
level which exceeds forty-eight inches (48") must have a foundation designed by a certified engineer. The design
must be signed and sealed by the engineer and be approved by the CEO.
(c) A fire-resistive skirting, or underpinning, shall be installed around the bottom of the perimeter of any
manufactured home to the ground within thirty (30) days from the installation.
(d) The placement of the manufactured home and which shall be finished with not less than two (2) coats of
paint [sic] or be constructed of such materials not requiring painting (galvanized metal not included).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/508
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(a)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.033 Space requirements and maximum occupancy
The minimum square footage of heated area for any manufactured home shall be 600 square feet. The maximum
number of occupants of a manufactured home shall be limited to the number determined on the basis of the
square feet of floor area of habitable space, exclusive of habitable space used for cooking purposes, in
accordance with the following:
(1) 150 square feet for one (1) or two (2) occupants;
(2) 250 square feet for three (3) occupants; and
(3) 80 square feet additional for each occupant thereafter.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.034 Ceiling height
Habitable space shall have a minimum ceiling height of seven feet (7') over fifty percent (50%) of the floor area,
and the floor area where the ceiling height is less than five feet (5') shall not be considered in computing gross
floor area. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(c)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.035 Bathrooms and toilets
Bathrooms and toilets shall have provisions for privacy and shall be provided with floors of moisture-resistant
material. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(d)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.036 Use of bathrooms and kitchens for sleeping purposes prohibited
Bathrooms, toilet rooms, kitchens and kitchenettes shall not be used for sleeping purposes. (Ordinance 28-1201-
(1), ex. A (3.302(e)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.037 Exits
A manufactured home shall have a safe and unobstructed primary exit and an emergency exit located remote
from the primary exit. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(f)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.038 Light and ventilation
(a) Habitable space. A manufactured home shall be provided with natural light and ventilation adequate for
the intended use of each habitable space in accordance with the following:
(1) Window area shall equal at least ten percent (10%) of the floor area of each habitable space;
and
(2) Openable area of windows and other openings used for natural ventilation of each habitable
space shall equal at least forty-five percent (45%) of the required window area, or mechanical
ventilation shall be provided as set forth in this section.
(b) Nonhabitable space. A manufactured home shall be provided with light and ventilation adequate for the
intended use of nonhabitable space in accordance with the following:
(1) Kitchenettes, bathrooms, and toilet rooms shall be provided with light of sufficient intensity
and so distributed as to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions and the safe use of the space
and the appliances, equipment and fixtures; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/508
(2) Kitchenettes, bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation consisting
of openable areas of not less than one and one-half (1-1/2) square feet for bathrooms and toilet
rooms, and not less than three (3) square feet for kitchenettes, or mechanical ventilation shall be
provided as set forth in this section.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(g)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.039 Plumbing standards
The following shall apply to plumbing in a manufactured home:
(1) A manufactured home shall contain:
(A) A kitchen sink;
(B) A flush type water closet;
(C) A bathtub or shower; and
(D) A lavatory.
(2) Hot and cold water supply shall be provided at the kitchen sink, bathtub or shower, and
lavatory. Cold water shall be supplied to water closets and urinals.
(3) The plumbing system shall be designed and arranged so as to facilitate connecting to approved
exterior water supply and sewage disposal systems, provide adequate water supply to all plumbing
fixtures and dispose of all liquid wastes therefrom.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(h)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.040 Heating units
The following shall apply to heating units in a manufactured home:
(1) A manufactured home shall contain:
(A) Space heating equipment; and
(B) Water heating equipment.
(2) Areas allowed for installation of space heating and water heating equipment shall provide
adequate clearance so that the surface of adjacent combustible materials will not exceed a safe
temperature. Curtains and draperies shall not be used in such areas.
(3) Space and water heating units shall be of an approved type for installation in a manufactured
home. Fuel-burning water heaters and furnaces other than those having a sealed combustion space
shall not be located in sleeping rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
(4) Space heating units shall have sufficient capacity to maintain a minimum inside temperature of
70 F, based on the average of the recorded annual minimum outside temperatures for the locality, and
shall be provided with a manual or automatic temperature control device.
(5) Water heater units shall have sufficient capacity to deliver at each hot water outlet an ample
supply of water at a minimum temperature range of 130 to 140 F, and such units shall be provided
with safety devices arranged to relieve hazardous pressures and excessive temperatures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/508
(6) Electrical space and water heating equipment shall be an approved type and shall have
adequate circuit protection devices.
(7) Gas and liquid fuel-burning equipment shall be specifically designed for the type of fuel used.
Flues and vents shall be suitable for the type of fuel used and shall be installed so that the surface of
adjacent combustible material will not exceed a safe temperature.
(8) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using utility gas shall have a valve that will
automatically shut off the flow of gas to the main burner when the pilot flame is extinguished.
(9) Automatically operated heat-producing equipment using liquefied petroleum gas shall have a
valve that will automatically shut off the flow of gas to the pilot light and main burner when the
flame is extinguished.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(i)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.041 Heating ventilation
The following shall apply to heating ventilation of manufactured homes:
(1) Fuel-burning space and water heating units shall be vented. Other fuel-burning equipment shall
be vented where the discharge of products of combustion into the space where the equipment is
installed would be unsafe.
(2) Liquid fuel-burning equipment shall be vented and shall be provided with means to prevent
spilling of fuel.
(3) Fuel storage containers and gas cylinders shall be mounted outside the manufactured homes, or
in a space that is vented to the outside and is vapor-tight to the inside.
(4) Warm air supply ducts and fittings shall be of noncombustible material.
(5) Return air ducts shall be of noncombustible material where exposed to temperatures which are
unsafe for combustible materials.
(6) Return air grills indoors and partitions shall be of a permanent non-closable type. Openings for
return air shall not be located in bathrooms, toilet rooms or kitchenettes.
(7) Mechanical ventilation, when required, shall exhaust air at rates not less than the following:
(A) For habitable space: 2 air changes per hour;
(B) For bathroom and toilet rooms: 25 cfm; and
(C) For kitchenettes: 100 cfm.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(j)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.042 Air conditioning
Air conditioning for habitable space provided in lieu of mechanical ventilation shall supply an amount of air not
less than that set forth in this article with at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the required quantity taken from
the outside. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(k)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.043 Electrical system
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/508
The following standards shall apply to the electrical system in manufactured homes:
(1) A manufactured home shall contain an electrical wiring system and service equipment.
(2) Electrical wiring shall have adequate capacity for designed lighting and appliance equipment.
Individual circuits shall contain overload protection devices.
(3) At least one receptacle outlet shall be provided for each multiple of twelve (12) linear feet of
wall space or major fraction thereof in each habitable space and kitchenette. Bathrooms and toilet
rooms shall have permanently installed lighting fixtures and switches located so as not to be an
electrical hazard.
(4) Exterior equipment shall be weatherproofed to insure protection of equipment from the
elements. Service equipment shall have means of quick disconnection from the source of supply.
(5) Provision shall be made for grounding non-current-carrying metallic parts of the electrical
system. Such grounding shall be common to one external supply point. Provision shall be made for
exterior source grounding of the electrical system.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(l)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.044 Cooking and refrigeration equipment
The following standards shall apply to cooking and refrigeration units in a manufactured home:
(1) A manufactured home shall contain cooking equipment and refrigeration equipment.
(2) Electrical cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an approved type for installation in a
manufactured home and shall have adequate circuit protection devices.
(3) Gas-burning cooking and refrigeration equipment shall be of an approved type for
manufactured home installation and connections to rigid pipe shall be made with approved flexible
metal gas appliance connectors.
(4) Fuel storage shall conform to the requirements of fuel storage for heating.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(m)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.045 Interior maintenance
Floors, walls, ceilings, furnishings and fixtures shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Exits shall
be maintained free of obstructions. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(n)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.046 Garbage and refuse containers
Suitable containers shall be provided for the temporary storage of garbage and refuse within the manufactured
home. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(o)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.047 Screen doors and window screens
From May 1st to October 1st, entrances to the manufactured home shall be provided with self-closing type
devices or screens, and windows and other openings used for ventilation shall be appropriately screened.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(p)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.048 Pest control
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/508
Manufactured homes shall be maintained free of insects, vermin and rodents. Extermination shall be effected in
conformance with generally accepted practice. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(q)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.049 Storage of flammable materials
Flammable cleaning liquids and other flammable materials shall be stored in a safe, approved manner.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.302(r)), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.07.050–3.07.080 Reserved
Division 3. Manufactured Home Parks
Sec. 3.07.081 License required; application
It shall be unlawful to establish, maintain or operate any manufactured home park in the city without first having
obtained a license therefor. Application for such licenses shall be made in writing to the city secretary in
compliance with ordinances relating to license applications, and shall contain the name of the applicant, the
location of the proposed park and the number of manufactured homes to be accommodated. (Ordinance 28-
1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(a)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.082 Plan required
Each such application shall be accompanied by a plat or sketch showing the size and location of all buildings
and structures. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.083 License fee
The annual fee for such licenses shall be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(c)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.084 Attendant
A responsible attendant, along with the licensee, shall be in charge of each manufactured home park while in
operation to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article relating to the conduct of such parks.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(d)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.085 Spacing requirements
(a) Each manufactured home shall be allotted a site of not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. No
manufactured home shall be parked closer than five (5) feet to the side lot lines of a manufactured home park if
the abutting property is improved property, or closer than ten (10) feet to a public street, alley or building. Each
individual manufactured home site shall abut or face on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than
twenty feet in width, which space shall have unobstructed access to a public highway or alley.
(b) There shall be an open space of at least ten (10) feet between the sides of every manufactured home and at
least five (5) feet between the ends of every manufactured home.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(e)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.086 Water supply
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes from the city water supply system shall be
supplied to meet the requirements of said manufactured home park. A water meter shall be installed in each such
park and the licensee shall be responsible for paying for all fees and charges made for the use of water in such
park. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(f)), adopted 12/28/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/508
Sec. 3.07.087 Sewage disposal
Each manufactured home park shall provide sewage hook-ups for each individual trailer site and the licensee
shall pay all fees and charges for sewage hook-ups and service provided by the city in said manufactured home
park. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(g)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.088 Garbage collection
It shall be the duty of the owner, his agent or caretaker to provide for the collection and removal of garbage or
other waste material and to otherwise maintain the park in a clean and sanitary condition. (Ordinance 28-1201-
(1), ex. A (3.303(h)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 3.07.089 Lighting
The park shall be kept properly and adequately lighted at all times so that the grounds shall be safe for occupants
and visitors. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.303(i)), adopted 12/28/01)
Secs. 3.07.090–3.07.120 Reserved
Division 4. Unfit Dwellings
Sec. 3.07.121 Generally
(a) Units subject to condemnation procedures. In addition to the standards set forth in article 3.05 of this
chapter, any mobile home or manufactured home shall be subject to condemnation procedures when found to
have any of the following defects:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe or vermin-infested that it
creates a serious hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health
or safety of the occupants or of the public.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.306), adopted 12/28/01)
(b) Manufactured homes more than five years old; installation permit; inspection. No manufactured home that
was manufactured more than five years prior to the proposed date of installation shall be installed, located or
occupied within the city after the date of this article. Save and except for a manufactured home delivered and
installed by a licensed retailer or installer, no manufactured home may be located, installed or occupied within
the city without a permit being issued by the city. The fee for such permit and required inspection shall be stated
in the city fee schedule, and no such mobile home or manufactured home shall be located, installed or occupied
within the city that is not inspected and found to be in compliance with all the applicable codes and ordinances
of the city. (Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.306), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.122 Service of notice; placarding
Whenever the CEO has determined that a mobile home or manufactured home displays defects as described in
this article or article 3.05, he shall give written notice to the responsible parties as provided in article 3.05 of
such and shall placard the mobile home or manufactured home as unfit for human habitation in accordance with
the following:
(1) Such written notice shall include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification of
the mobile home or manufactured home location.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/508
(2) The placard shall be placed on the main entrance of the mobile home or manufactured home
and read: “THIS MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME IS UNFIT FOR HUMAN
HABITATION; THE USE OF THIS MOBILE OR MANUFACTURED HOME FOR HUMAN
HABITATION IS PROHIBITED AND UNLAWFUL.”
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.307), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.123 Compliance with notice
The responsible parties of the mobile home or manufactured home shall have ten (10) days from the date of
service of the notice to bring the unfit dwelling into compliance with the provisions of this article. (Ordinance
28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.308), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 3.07.124 Procedure upon noncompliance with notice
(a) Condemnation proceedings. After the expiration of ten (10) days from the date of service of notice of unfit
dwelling, the building standards commission shall hold a public hearing on all condemnation proceedings
resulting from noncompliance following the procedures and the provisions of this article and article 3.05. The
procedures set forth in article 3.05 for a dangerous building shall be the applicable procedures.
(b) Appeals. The decision of the building standards commission may be appealed as provided in section
3.05.121.
(c) Notice of condemnation. Following the public hearing determining the mobile home or manufactured
home to be unfit for human habitation, the building standards commission or the city council, if appealed, shall
immediately adopt a ordinance condemning the mobile home or manufactured home and requiring the occupants
to vacant the premises.
(d) Vacating mobile home or manufactured home. One of the following procedures is to be used when
required to vacate the mobile home or manufactured home:
(1) Any occupant of a mobile home or manufactured home condemned as unfit for human
habitation under the provisions of this section shall vacate said mobile home or manufactured home
within thirty (30) days after adoption of said ordinance by the city council.
(2) The owner or occupant of a mobile home or manufactured home which has been condemned
under the provisions of this article may move said mobile home or manufactured home outside the
city limits. Such action shall be deemed in compliance with this article.
(e) Further occupancy restricted. Once the occupant or occupants of a mobile home which has been
condemned and placarded as unfit for human habitation vacate said premises, no person shall again use said
premises for human habitation until approval is secured from and such placard is removed by the CEO. The
CEO shall remove such placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.309), adopted 12/28/01; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.08 TOURIST COURTS AND CAMPS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.08.001 Definitions
When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them
in this section:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/508
Automobile tourist court or camp. Any lot, tract, or parcel of land upon which accommodation is provided for
two or more automobile trailer or house cars used by transients as living or sleeping quarters by the day, week or
month where a charge is or is not made.
Automobile trailer or house car. Any structure used as sleeping or living quarters which may be driven, towed
or propelled from one location to another without change in structure or design thereof, whether or not the same
be supported by wheels.
Camp cottage. Any building or structure used by a single family as living or sleeping quarters.
City health officer. The health officer of the city and his representatives.
Department of public health. Synonymous with health officer; such department, person or official appointed,
created, or established by authority of the city, and entrusted with the regulation, control and supervision of
matters pertaining to the general health of the citizens of the community.
Tourist court or camp. Any lot, tract or parcel of land upon which two or more single-family camp cottages, or
structures of a temporary nature for living and sleeping purposes, are located and maintained for the
accommodation of transients by the day, week or month where a charge is or is not made.
Unit. Any plot or parcel of ground upon which is erected any camp, cottage, accommodation of any automobile
trailer or house car or structures of a temporary nature for living and sleeping purposes.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.401)
Sec. 3.08.002 Notice of violation
Before any prosecution shall be instituted for violation of any provision of this article involving the installation
of plumbing fixtures or connection with the public sanitary sewer, or other regulation, compliance with which
involves a structural addition or alteration of any building, the person against whom the complaint has been
made, or against whom such complaint is about to be filed, shall be given ten (10) days, after written notice by
the city health officer, to correct or change any such condition or conditions existing which do not comply with
the terms of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 3.420)
Sec. 3.08.003 Site requirements; drainage
All land used as a tourist court or camp or automobile tourist court or camp shall be located on well-drained sites
of ample size free from heavy or dense growth of brush or weeds. The land shall be free from marsh and shall be
graded or storm sewered to insure rapid drainage during and following rain. (1996 Code, sec. 3.406)
Sec. 3.08.004 Water supply
Each site used as a tourist park or camp, or as an automobile tourist park or camp, shall be provided with an
adequate supply of water of safe sanitary quality approved by the city health officer. Where water from sources
other than that of the municipal supply is proposed to be used, the source of the supply shall first be approved by
the city health officer, who shall make regulations providing for the periodic examination of the water and
proper protection of same. (1996 Code, sec. 3.407)
Sec. 3.08.005 Garbage collection; sewage disposal
Each tourist or automobile court or camp shall be provided with safe and adequate facilities for the collection
and removal of waste and garbage, and shall provide a proper and acceptable sewer system either by connection
to the city sewer system where such is available, or to septic tank, all of which shall comply with all laws and
ordinances and with regulations prescribed by the city health officer. (1996 Code, sec. 3.408)
Sec. 3.08.006 Sleeping rooms
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/508
Each sleeping room in any tourist court or camp shall have a cubic content of not less than one thousand (1,000)
cubic feet, and shall have not less than two (2) windows, the total area of which shall be not less than twentyfive
(25) square feet, each of which windows shall be well screened. No single room shall have its greatest
dimension more than twice its minimum dimension, and height from floor to plate shall be not less than seven
(7) feet. (1996 Code, sec. 3.409)
Sec. 3.08.007 Floors
Each cottage site or location shall be well drained, and if the floor is concrete, the surface of such floor shall be
not less than four (4) inches above the adjoining ground level. If the floor is of wood, the surface thereof shall be
raised not less than twelve (12) inches above the ground level. (1996 Code, sec. 3.410)
Sec. 3.08.008 Area of units
Each unit or site reserved for the accommodation of any automobile trailer or camp court shall have an area of
not less than five hundred seventy-six (576) square feet, exclusive of driveways, and shall be at least twenty-four
(24) feet wide; it shall be defined clearly by proper markers at each corner, and shall be level, free from rock and
weeds, and well drained. No cottage, trailer or house car shall be placed or erected closer than five (5) feet from
the property line separating the court from adjoining property, measuring from the nearest point of the cottage,
trailer, or house car. (1996 Code, sec. 3.411)
Sec. 3.08.009 Entrances and exits
Entrance drives shall be graveled or surfaced, and shall not be less than eighteen (18) feet wide, well marked in
the daytime and lighted at night. All entrances and exits from the camp shall be well marked and so arranged
that control and supervision may be exercised by the management. (1996 Code, sec. 3.412)
Sec. 3.08.010 Toilet facilities
Each court or camp upon which two or more cottages, trailers, or camp cars are erected or placed, and where
private conveniences for each site or cottage are not provided, shall provide, at locations hereinafter defined,
toilets, urinals, wash basins, slop basins, showers or baths, water faucets, or spigots in accordance with the
following:
(1) One toilet or stool for the female sex for every ten (10) units or fraction thereof;
(2) One toilet or stool and one urinal stall for the male sex for every twenty (20) units or fraction
thereof;
(3) Each toilet room having three (3) toilets or fraction thereof shall be provided with one lavatory
or wash basin;
(4) One shower or bathtub shall be provided for each sex for each ten (10) units or fraction thereof;
(5) All toilets, basins and showers shall be placed in properly constructed buildings located not
more than three hundred (300) feet from any cottage or trailer unit served;
(6) Buildings shall be well-lighted at all times, day or night, well-ventilated with screened
openings, and constructed of such moisture-proof material as shall permit rapid and satisfactory
cleaning, scouring and washing;
(7) The floors shall be of concrete or other impervious material, elevated not less than four (4)
inches above grade, and each room provided with floor drains;
(8) Slop sinks or basins with water supply over shall be provided to serve each four (4) units and
shall be constructed in accordance with design, size and material approved by the city health officer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/508
(1996 Code, sec. 3.413)
Sec. 3.08.011 State laws for hotels applicable; registration of patrons
Each tourist court or camp, or automobile court or camp, shall be operated in conformity with all the state laws
now in force with respect to hotels. Each person engaging accommodations in said tourist court or camp, or
automobile court or camp, or cottage, shall register and give the following information to the manager, operator
or person in charge thereof: name, residence, automobile license plate number, and the state in which it is
registered. (1996 Code, sec. 3.414)
Sec. 3.08.012 Combined courts or camps
Nothing in this article shall prevent the combination of a tourist court or camp and an automobile court or camp,
provided the requirements of each are fully complied with. The regulations of this article shall apply to such
combined courts and camps if such courts or camps contain a total of two (2) units. (1996 Code, sec. 3.415)
Sec. 3.08.013 Separation of toilet and bathing facilities; toilet partitions
Toilet and bathing facilities shall be in separate rooms, or partitioned apart in such a manner as to provide
privacy and promote cleanliness. Each toilet provided in a community toilet house shall be partitioned apart
from any other toilet in the same room. The floor surface around the commode shall not drain onto the shower
floor. (1996 Code, sec. 3.416)
Sec. 3.08.014 Toilet floors and walls
Toilet floors and walls shall be of impervious material, painted white or a light color, and kept clean at all times.
Shower stalls shall be of tile, plaster, cement, or some other impervious material and shall be kept clean at all
times. If a shower stall is of some impervious material other than tile, cement, or plaster, it shall be painted white
or some light color, and kept clean at all times. The floor of any bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be
of some impervious material, and the walls of the bathroom, other than the shower stall, shall be papered with
canvas and wallpaper and kept clean at all times. (1996 Code, sec. 3.417)
Sec. 3.08.015 Utility service to trailer coaches
If utility services are provided for trailer coaches, the following rules shall be followed:
(1) Electrical connections. Electrical connections, if provided for trailer coaches, shall be made
from suitable overhead outlets and shall conform to standard construction details insofar as safety
service, etc., are concerned.
(2) Ground space. Ground space for each trailer coach shall be in conformity with section 3.08.008
of this article.
(3) Water. Water furnished trailer coaches shall be in conformity with section 3.08.004 of this
article.
(4) Sewer connections. For sewer connections to trailer coaches, the following rules shall be
observed:
(A) Traps. Each sewer lateral shall terminate with a “P” trap and then shall be extended to
grade and terminate not less than four (4) inches above the ground surface. When not
connected, this opening shall be protected with a covering to exclude dirt and foreign objects
from being placed in it.
(B) Protection. Extension through the ground shall be protected by a metal casing or concrete
mount.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/508
(C) Connector. Each outlet for trailer units shall be provided with a flexible connector
furnished by the trailer coach operator.
(D) Automatic disconnection. Flexible connectors shall be so arranged as to readily clamp
into the trailer coach outlet and the connection so designed that, in case of emergency, such as
fire, the trailer coach may be pulled out and the connection automatically disconnected without
damage to the trailer coach or the piping.
(E) Length of connector. The sewer outlet for connecting each trailer coach shall be located
centrally so that a flexible connector of sufficient length (provided by the trailer park operator)
may connect with the trailer sewer outlet located on the right side of the trailer and just behind
the wheel housing.
(5) Gas fuel. All safety regulations shall be followed in the furnishing of gas fuel of any type for
trailer coaches.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.418)
Sec. 3.08.016 Garbage and refuse containers
No owner or lessee of any public or private premises shall permit to accumulate upon his premises any garbage
or refuse except in covered containers approved by the health officer. Such containers shall be constructed of
metal or wood in such manner as to be strong, not easily corrodible, rodent-proof, and insect-proof, and shall be
kept covered at all times except when refuse is being deposited therein or removed therefrom. In case garbage
and one or more types of refuse are disposed of separately, separate containers may be required by the health
officer. (1996 Code, sec. 3.419)
Secs. 3.08.017–3.08.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 3.08.041 Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, or operate within the corporate limits of the city, or the
police jurisdiction of the city, any tourist court or camp, or automobile tourist court or camp, or any location, lot
or parcel of ground for the use of transients by the day, week, month, or season, where a charge is or is not made,
unless such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit from the city manager. (1996 Code, sec. 3.402)
Sec. 3.08.042 Filing of plans; issuance; appeals
Any person applying for a permit to establish a tourist or automobile court or camp shall first file with the city
clerk a copy of the complete plan of the proposed court or camp. This plan, with the legal description of the
property shown, shall be drawn to scale and shall show clearly all the area to be used for camp purposes, all
proposed locations and sites for camp cottages or trailers or house cars, the location of all proposed sanitary
conveniences, laundry buildings and slop sinks, the proposed method of sewage disposal or removal, and the
plan for water supply and lighting. On new construction, a typical plan for the proposed cottages, baths, toilets,
lavatories, basins, sinks, wash rooms, and laundries shall be filed with the application. Before any permit shall
be issued by the city manager, the application and plans must be duly approved by the city manager and the city
health officer. Should the city health officer refuse to approve the application and plans, the applicant shall have
the right to appeal to the city mayor within five (5) days from the date of said refusal. The appeal shall be
perfected by writing a letter to the city mayor stating that an appeal is desired. The city mayor, after a hearing at
a time set by the mayor, shall either affirm, modify or otherwise change the action of the city health officer and
shall forthwith certify his decision to the city health officer and to the applicant. If no appeal is made of the
refusal of the city health officer to grant said permit in the time provided, the refusal of the city health officer
shall be final. (1996 Code, sec. 3.403)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/508
Sec. 3.08.043 Fee established
Upon approval of said application by the city health officer, or after favorable action by the city mayor, the
applicant shall pay to the city manager as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, and
thereupon such applicant shall receive a permit in writing for the establishment, operation and maintenance of a
tourist court or camp, or automobile trailer court or camp. The provisions of this section shall not be applicable
to any tourist court or camp or automobile trailer court or camp or trailer home already established in the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.404)
Sec. 3.08.044 Applicability of fee; building permit
The fee required under the provisions of this article shall not be collected from any tourist court or camp in
existence prior to November 13, 1951, but shall be applicable only to any tourist or automobile court or camp
thereafter established. The annual renewal fee shall be stated in the city fee schedule. After a permit has been
obtained under this article from the city manager, the applicant shall then apply to the city manager and obtain a
building permit. (1996 Code, sec. 3.405; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 3.09 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 3.09.001 Statutory authorization
The legislature of the state has, in section 16.315, V.T.C.A., Water Code, delegated the responsibility to local
governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the city does ordain as
follows. (1996 Code, sec. 3.801)
Sec. 3.09.002 Findings of fact
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general
welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods
and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from
flood damage.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.802)
Sec. 3.09.003 Statement of purpose
It is the purpose of his article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/508
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains;
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone
areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and
(7) Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.803)
Sec. 3.09.004 Methods of reducing flood losses
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or
cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters;
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage;
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.804)
Sec. 3.09.005 Definitions
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the
meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Appeal. A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a
request for a variance.
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater
chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map
(FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, zone A
usually is refined into zone A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood. The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Critical feature. An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood
protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.
Development. Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Elevated building. A nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO,
AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or, in the case of a building in zone V1-30, VE, or V,
to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the elevated floor, elevated above the ground
level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water, and (ii)
adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/508
magnitude of the base flood. In the case of zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, “elevated
building” also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings
sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of zone V1-30, VE, or V, “elevated
building” also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of “elevated building,” even though the
lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls, if the breakaway walls meet the standards of section
60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
Existing construction. For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced before the effective date of the FIRM, or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. “Existing construction” may also be referred to as “existing structures.”
Flood or flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency
Management Agency has delineated the boundaries of the flood, and mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion
areas having special hazards have been designated as zone A, M, and/or E.
Floodplain or floodprone area. A land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see
definition of flooding).
Flood protection system. Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated,
and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the areas within a community subject to a “special flood hazard” and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These
specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Levee. A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with
sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from
temporary flooding.
Levee system. A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as
closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering
practices.
Lowest floor. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure
in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.
Manufactured home. A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and
is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For
floodplain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and
other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term
“manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
Mean sea level. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate
map are referenced.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/508
New construction. For floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community.
Start of construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was
within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of
a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling, nor does it
include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers
or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of
accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.
Structure. A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground,
as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial improvement. Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either (i) before the improvement or repair is
started, or (ii) if the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the
purpose of this definition “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the
external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state
inventory of historic places.
Variance. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article. (For full requirements see section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance
Program regulations.)
Violation. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain
management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance required in section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (a)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) [of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations] is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation. The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or
other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or
riverine areas.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.805)
Sec. 3.09.006 Lands to which this article applies
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. (1996 Code, sec.
3.806)
Sec. 3.09.007 Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/508
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency on its flood hazard
boundary map (FHBM), Community No. 480794, dated 1/30/76, and any revisions thereto, are hereby adopted
by reference and declared to be a part of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 3.807)
Sec. 3.09.008 Establishment of development permit
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. (1996 Code,
sec. 3.808)
Sec. 3.09.009 Compliance
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the
terms of this article and other applicable regulations. (1996 Code, sec. 3.809)
Sec. 3.09.010 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (1996 Code, sec. 3.810)
Sec. 3.09.011 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.811)
Sec. 3.09.012 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is
based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas
of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (1996
Code, sec. 3.812)
Secs. 3.09.013–3.09.040 Reserved
Division 2. Administration
Sec. 3.09.041 Designation of floodplain administrator
The mayor is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this
article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to
floodplain management. (1996 Code, sec. 3.813)
Sec. 3.09.042 Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/508
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably
safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this
article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been
obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including section 404 of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions), the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency, which is
the state water development board, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit
evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any
watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 3.09.007, the
floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of
division 3 of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.814)
Sec. 3.09.043 Permit procedures
(a) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished
by him/her and may include but not be limited to plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, and the location
of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
(1) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(2) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be
floodproofed;
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential
floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of section 3.09.072(2);
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development;
(5) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 3.09.042(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the
provisions of this article and the following relevant factors:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/508
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters
and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use;
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.815)
Sec. 3.09.044 Variance procedures
(a) The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this
article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or
administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report
variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the
National Register of Historic Places or the state inventory of historic places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this article.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of onehalf
acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 3.09.043(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the
lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach
such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/508
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge would result.
(i) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the
cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(j) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
(1) The criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) are met; and
(2) The structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages
during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.816)
Secs. 3.09.045–3.09.070 Reserved
Division 3. Flood Hazard Reduction Standards
Sec. 3.09.071 General standards
In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions are required for all new construction and
substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant
to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating,
ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/508
and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during
conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.817)
Sec. 3.09.072 Specific standards
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section
3.09.007, section 3.09.042 or section 3.09.073(c), the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood
elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 3.09.043(a)
(1), is satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction and substantial improvements of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered
professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in
accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such
certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such
structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Manufactured homes.
(A) Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A shall be installed using
methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement,
manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or
frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local
anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
(B) All manufactured homes shall be in compliance with subsection (1).
(1996 Code, sec. 3.818)
Sec. 3.09.073 Standards for subdivision proposals
(a) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall be consistent with
sections 3.09.002, 3.09.003, and 3.09.004 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/508
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions,
shall meet the development permit requirements of section 3.09.008 and section 3.09.043 of this article and the
provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development,
including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 3.09.007 or section 3.09.042(8) of this article.
(d) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have adequate
drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, shall have public utilities
and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
(1996 Code, sec. 3.819)
ARTICLE 3.10 SPRINKLER SYSTEMS
Sec. 3.10.001 License requirements; bond; permit
(a) License requirements.
(1) The connection of a landscape irrigation system to a water supply must be performed by either
a licensed irrigator, a licensed installer, or an individual within the sight of and under the direct
control of a licensed irrigator.
(2) This clarification of rule does not affect the exemptions from licensure requirements provided
in section 1903.002 V.T.C.A., Occupations Code. Included in these exemptions is any person licensed
by the state board of plumbing examiners.
(Ordinance adopted 5/10/99)
(b) Bond. A one thousand dollar ($1000.00) license and permit bond will be required.
(c) Permits and fees. Permits and fees are as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(1996 Code, art. 3.600(b), (c))
State law reference–Irrigators, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1903.
Sec. 3.10.002 Minimum size of water meter
The sprinkler system is not to be installed on any size smaller than a one-inch (1") water meter. (1996 Code, art.
3.600(d))
ARTICLE 3.11 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.11.001–3.11.030 Reserved
Division 2. Construction in Right-of-Way†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/508
Part I. In General
Sec. 3.11.031 Definitions
As used in this division, all words shall have the common meaning of such word, and the following terms shall
have the meaning indicated below, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
Actual cost. Any cost incurred by the city in relation to construction activity in, over, under, through, along or
across the streets or rights-of-way within the city limits, including but not limited the costs of staff supervision
and overview of such activity while such activity exists, any costs or charges for special assignment of police
officers to monitor, escort, or otherwise provide services to protect the public from such activities, and any other
similar fees reasonably incurred by the city for and with respect to such activity.
Building inspector (herein “building inspector” or “inspector”). The person, his staff or employees, or entity
designated by the city or appointed to perform the duties and responsibilities set forth herein within the corporate
limits of the city, or, if none has been appointed, the mayor.
Construction activity (sometimes referred to herein as “work”). Shall include, but is not limited to, the causing
or carrying out of any man-made change in any property or facility through building, erecting, installing,
bulkheading, filling, mining, dredging, clearing, paving, grading, excavating, boring, drilling, or the addition,
removal or alteration of any facility or any improvement to property, including altering of the size of any
facilities, or other similar work or activity in, over, under, through, along or across the rights-of-way or streets
within the city limits.
Contractor. Shall include, but is not limited to, the person possessing a permit, franchise or license agreement as
required under this division and all persons actually performing, directing, monitoring, managing or overseeing
any construction activity, work or other such similar activity in, over, under, through, along or across any streets
or rights-of-way within the city limits.
Excavation. Any man-made formation of a cavity, hole or hollow by way of any means of digging, plowing,
quarrying, uncovering, blasting, scooping, drilling, dredging, bulldozing, relocating or making cuts, openings,
borings or other action or processes to form a cavity, hole or hollow.
Facility/facilities. Any plant, equipment and property, including, but not limited to, duct spaces, manholes,
poles, towers, utility pipes, pipes, conduits, lines, wires, transmission media, underground and overhead
passageways or other equipment, structures and appurtenances, which are located in, over, under, through, along
or across the rights-of-way or streets.
Fees. All applicable fees referenced herein and as set forth in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances.
Installation. The addition, removal, repair or alteration of any facility located in, over, under, through, along or
across the rights-of-way or streets.
Owner. Any person(s) having financial interests in property or facilities located in, over, under, through, along or
across streets and rights-of-way in the city, including the person directing the actions of any contractor, paying a
contractor, or for whose benefit the actions of the contractor are undertaken.
Permanent structure. Any facility located in, over, under, through, along or across the rights-of-way or streets
within the city limits that occupies, affixes or otherwise is to remain in the same location for a period of time of
more than thirty (30) days.
Person. An individual human, partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other partnership or
other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, association or corporation of any kind, including but not
limited to any provider of any utility service or public service, as those terms are defined below.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/508
Public service. Any business or commercial activity which is not included in the definition of “utility service”
that requires the use of the public streets or rights-of-way for the location of any facility to provide services to
persons or property situated within the city, including but not limited to cable television service, and services
using transmission media, other than telephone, taxi service or solid waste collection.
Rights-of-way. The surface of, and the space above and below, any and all present and future public
thoroughfares, public utility easements, public ways, public grounds, public waterways and, without limitation
by the foregoing, any other public property within the corporate limits of the city.
Routine maintenance. Minor alteration, repair, or service of an existing facility necessary for the upkeep or
continued functioning of such existing facility, unless the alteration, repair, or service requires excavation or
temporary closure of nonresidential traffic lanes.
Streets. The surface of, and the space above and below, any and all present and future public streets, avenues,
highways, boulevards, drives, roads, bridges, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public roadways within the city
limits and any highways, county roads or other public roadways for which the city has an agreement or contract
to control, regulate or maintain.
Transmission media. All cables, fibers, wires, tubes, pipes or other physical devices used to transmit and/or
receive communication signals, whether analog, digital or of other characteristics, and whether for voice, video
or data, or other purposes, which are physically located in the rights-of-way or streets.
Utility service. Shall have its common meaning and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, electric,
water, wastewater, gas and telephone service.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.901), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.032 Jurisdiction of city; authorization required
(a) The city shall have exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, over, under, through, along and across
the streets and rights-of-way within the city limits, and may provide for the improvement thereof by paving,
repaving, raising, draining, or otherwise the use thereof [sic]. The provisions, without limitations, of law
providing for assessments against abutting property for street improvements are expressly adopted. Such
exclusive dominion, control and jurisdiction in, over, under, through, along and across the streets and rights-ofway
of the city shall also include, but not be limited to, the power to regulate, locate, remove or prohibit the
location, installation, alteration or removal of any type of facility or other property in, over, under, through,
along or across any streets or rights-of-way. The location, alteration or removal, including the route, of all
facilities within the rights-of-way or streets shall be subject to the reasonable direction of the city.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any owner or contractor, including his or her agents, servants, independent
contractors, or employees, to occupy or obstruct any portion of the right-of-way or streets or to perform any
construction activity, or to cause another to do the same, for any purpose, in, over, under, through, along or
across any street or right-of-way in the city without first having made all applications for permits and, when
required, obtained all permits therefor, together with a bond, if required, approved by the building inspector in
such sum as shall be fixed by the building inspector, conditioned that the principal therein will discharge all
claims of every character arising from or occasioned by such occupancy or construction activity or by reason of
damages or injuries sustained by persons or property because of such occupancy, construction activity,
excavation or other such activity thereon and discharge all judgments obtained, together with all costs attached
thereto against the city by reason of any such claim, injury or damage sustained. The contractor and owner
carrying on any construction activity or excavation shall keep all streets and rights-of-way adjacent to such
construction activity or excavation carried on by such contractor or owner in a clean, safe and orderly condition,
and unobstructed, except as provided in this division, during all such activities, and shall restore all such streets,
rights-of-way, facilities and other structures damaged, altered or injured in any way to as good condition as they
were before the beginning of such activities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/508
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to use or occupy any street or right-of-way in the city for the purpose of
providing abutting, adjoining or other property with any utility service, or with any public service, without
having first obtained a franchise or license issued and approved by the city council, except as specifically
provided otherwise by state law.
(d) Construction activity, excavation, obstruction or other work shall cease immediately upon the issuance of a
stop work order from the building inspector or from any authorized law enforcement agent of the city. It shall be
unlawful to remove a stop work order placed upon a construction or work site until compliance with this
division has been accomplished. No work so ordered to stop shall commence after issuance of the stop work
order until the violation has been corrected and the building inspector in writing authorizes the contractor to
begin again.
(e) It shall be unlawful and a violation of this division for any person, contractor or owner to maintain an
existing excavation within the city, or to work upon or assist in any way in the execution or operation of any
such excavation, without an excavation permit having been issued by the authority of the city in accordance with
this division.
(f) It shall be unlawful for the owner of any building or property abutting on any street or right-of-way in the
city, or any tenant occupying such building or property, or any other person, to construct, build, operate or
maintain any building, facility, or part thereof, including a show window, which extends over any part of any
street or right-of-way in the city.
(g) It shall be unlawful to erect, remove, repair, install, build or alter, in any fashion whatsoever, any posts,
poles, towers or other facilities that are erected for the purpose of bearing wires, cables or any other transmission
media upon which such are placed or are to be placed, or to alter in any fashion any existing posts, poles, towers
or other facilities that are used in connection with any telegraph, electric light, telephone, street railway,
transmission media, radio or like purpose, and none shall be erected, placed, kept or maintained upon any street
or right-of-way within the city, unless a written permit shall have first been obtained from the building inspector
to erect, install, remove, repair, build or alter, in any fashion whatsoever, such posts, poles, towers or other such
facility.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.902), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.033 Bond; liability
Any person considering any construction activity, installation of facilities, excavation, cutting, boring, digging or
demolition activity in, over, under, through, along or across the streets or rights-of-way within the city limits,
and who is not under a written contract, franchise, license or other express written agreement with the city, shall
post a bond, make a cash deposit with the city, or provide other suitable forms of financial security as
determined by the building inspector in an amount that approximates the projected costs of inspection,
observation, labor, equipment, materials, and overhead associated with the permit work and the restoration,
reconstruction and/or repair of the cut, work or excavation in compliance with the standards and requirements
set forth in exhibit A of this division, as estimated in writing and in advance of construction.
(1) Bond required. A good and sufficient bond shall be filed with the application for the permit
required by this division, executed by a bonding company, which bond shall be approved by the
building inspector as to form and sufficiency as provided in appendix A of Ordinance 2004-04-12
(10). The bond shall be conditioned, among other things, that the contractor shall faithfully, at his or
her own expense, furnish all proper materials, tools and appliances, and perform, execute, construct
and complete all such work undertaken by such contractor, and observe and comply with the
specifications, requirements and provisions of this division. The bond shall remain in effect at all
times when excavation or construction activities are in good faith actually commenced or prosecuted.
Editor's note–Appendix A is not printed herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/508
(2) Maintenance provisions in bond.
(A) Every permittee issued a permit under this division shall be bound and obligated to
construct all work, and use such materials in the construction thereof, so that the same shall be
and remain for and during a period of not less than one (1) year from and after the date of
completion in good, sound, smooth and serviceable condition and free from all cracks, breaks,
disintegration, undue wear, scaling or departures from true line or grade, or other defects which
might impair the permanence or usefulness of the work or construction activity or surrounding
facilities, streets or rights-of-way; however, such cracks as may appear in expansion joints, or
cuts between blocks, shall not be deemed to be defects unless in the opinion of the building
inspector such cracks are excessive in opening or deflecting of the surface.
(B) Each such bond issued pursuant to this division shall continue in effect for and during the
maintenance period of one (1) year following the completion of the work, construction activity
or repair by the permittee, contractor, or owner as to any and all work, repair or construction
commenced on the ground during one year after the completion of the repair and restoration by
the permittee, contractor or owner directing, monitoring or benefiting from the cut, excavation
or construction activity performed and for which the bond was given.
(C) Each bond issuer shall promptly adjust, pay and settle all legitimate claims for damages
or injuries that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing
such work, construction activity or excavation or by reason of any defects therein caused or
arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction or repair thereof.
(D) Each bond issuer shall hold the city free and harmless from liability on all claims for
damages that may result by reason of carelessness or negligence in the manner of performing
such work, construction activity or excavation or by reason of any defects therein caused or
arising from careless, negligent or imperfect construction or repair thereof, for a period of
twelve (12) months from the date of the completion of the work.
(3) Withdrawal of surety on bond. On written notice to the building inspector and the contractor,
any surety on a bond issued pursuant to this division may withdraw from all liability thereon on
account of any and all future work undertaken by the contractor and for which excavation or
construction activity was not begun before the delivery of the notice. After receipt of such, the
contractor shall not begin any new work unless and until the contractor shall provide and procure the
approval of a new bond in the same manner as required for the first bond. No bond or surety may be
withdrawn after the permitted work is commenced.
(4) Emergency conditions. In the event emergency conditions warrant immediate response by an
affected person, the building inspector may waive and/or modify normal standard procedures
outlined herein to promulgate standards or requirements to expeditiously address the resolution of the
emergency conditions; provided that, in any such event, the contractor shall obtain a permit for such
work on the first business day of the city following performance of the work.
(5) Decision binding on contractor and sureties. In any question as to when any work was actually
begun, the decision of the building inspector shall be conclusive on the contractor and the sureties on
all such bonds.
(6) Liability of contractor and sureties for defective work. A contractor whose work, construction
activities or excavations are completed, or caused to be completed, by the city shall, on completion of
such work and receipt of a certified bill of the cost thereof prepared by the mayor, pay to the city, on
its order, the cost of the work. The sureties on the contractor's bond shall be liable for all items and
amounts listed in the certified bill of costs submitted to the contractor by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/508
(7) Liability of contractor and sureties for maintenance and repair work. If any defects develop
during the one (1) year guaranty period established by this division which, in the opinion of the
building inspector, are due in any measure to defects of workmanship or material, such contractor
shall remedy, repair or reconstruct such work, or any part thereof, as may be required by the building
inspector, and such work shall be known as maintenance and repair work and such sureties or
contractor's bond shall be fully liable for any default of such contractor under this section.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.904), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.034 Alteration, obstruction or occupation of city facilities or land
All city facilities and lands shall not be altered, obstructed or occupied without the express written permission of
the city council. Facilities not owned by the city shall not be located closer than three feet (3') laterally and three
feet (3') horizontally from any city-owned facility located underground without express written permission from
the city council. Additionally, no facilities may be located in, over, under, through, along or across any parks,
recreational land or other similar city-owned property which is not a street or street right-of-way without the
express written permission of the city council. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.905), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.035 Duties and responsibilities of permittees
The contractor, owner and persons to whom permits are issued shall, during the period for which the permit is
issued, and as provided in section 3.11.033, have all of the duties and responsibilities as identified in this
division and other applicable ordinances of the city, and as provided for in state and federal law. The owner, and
its agents, assigns, contractors and subcontractors installing the facilities, shall continually have the duties
identified in this division, for so long as facilities or property under the control of any such owners, and any
subsequent owners thereof, are located in the rights-of-way or streets, to perform pursuant to the terms of this
division.
(1) Duty to barricade and protect. Every person to whom a permit is issued under this division
shall have a duty to ensure each contractor and subcontractor, employee, agent or assign prosecutes
such work diligently and in a good and workmanlike manner, and safeguard and protect the public on
or using the street, right-of-way, or other places where the work is being performed, from accidents,
injury or damage, by placing barriers, lights and other sufficient safeguards, including a watchman, if
necessary, around all cuts, openings, excavations, installation site and materials, implements and
tools upon the premises used in connection with the construction activity, and shall conform to the
provisions of this division and all requirements of the building inspector during the prosecution and
completion of such activity.
(2) Supervision of work. It shall be the duty of the person who shall cause to be made any hole,
cut, trench, excavation, mound, embankment, installation or other obstruction in any street or rightof-
way, and it shall likewise be the duty of the president and the superintendent or manager of any
corporation that is the owner or contractor, to carefully guard or cause to be guarded such hole,
trench, excavation, mound, embankment, installation or other obstruction while the same may exist
and not to suffer the same to remain there beyond a time reasonably sufficient for the completion of
the construction activity, removal of the obstruction, and to repair the portion of such street or rightof-
way or any facility or property affected thereby so as to restore the same to its condition just
previous to such activity.
(3) Duty to promptly repair. It shall be the duty of the owner, contractor and the permittee in whose
behalf the hole, trench, mound, excavation, construction activity, installation or other obstruction or
intrusion shall be made or has been made in the streets or rights-of-way of the city to protect the same
while such condition exists and to promptly [repair] the same so as to leave the street or right-of-way
in at least as good condition as before the work. All facilities, streets, sidewalks or other structures or
property damaged, altered or injured, in any fashion, shall be restored with similar material and
workmanship to that existing before the same was damaged, altered or injured through any actions of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/508
the owner, contractor or persons employed in any fashion thereby. All work shall be done to the
satisfaction of the building inspector, whose duty it shall be to inspect the same after it has been done.
(4) Removal and reconstruction where work defective. All construction activities undertaken in the
streets and rights-of-way of the city are declared to be wholly subject to the exclusive control of the
city, and whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector, any such work shall not have been duly
completed within a reasonable time or shall have been executed in a defective manner, whether
because of bad workmanship or material or because not true to lines or grades or specifications
required therefor, then, upon written demand or notice from the building inspector, such contractor,
or the owner of a permanent structure remaining therein, shall promptly remedy, complete or remove
and reconstruct such incomplete or defective construction all as the building inspector may require,
and these provisions shall also comprehend and apply to all repairs, installations and maintenance
activities. If the contractor or owner shall fail or refuse so to do within a reasonable time to be
specified in writing by the building inspector, then, if the building inspector shall so order, such work
shall be completed, corrected or removed and wholly or partially reconstructed by the city, or at its
instance, in such manner as in the opinion of the building inspector may be necessary to make such
work as good as originally required, and such work may be done by contract or otherwise, under the
provisions of this division and the direction of the building inspector.
(5) Excavations. All excavations in the streets and rights-of-way are declared to be wholly subject
to the exclusive control of the city, and whenever, in the opinion of the building inspector, any such
work shall not be in compliance herewith, and the permit issued, and exhibit A of this division, then
upon written demand or notice from the building inspector, such contractor shall promptly remedy,
complete or fill the excavation all as the building inspector may require. All excavations made into
any street or right-of-way shall be repaired to the same condition such street, right-of-way or other
property was prior to such excavation. Any excavation located in or over the rights-of-way or streets
within the city limits shall and does constitute a nuisance when maintained or permitted to exist by
any person in an unwholesome or nauseous condition, or in a manner by which stagnant water
accumulates, or in a manner in which water collects where it is possible and probable stagnant water
accumulates, or in a manner in which water collects where it is possible and probable mosquitoes will
breed, or in a condition where rats could harbor, or in a manner and condition constituting a breeding
place for flies, or in a manner and condition where filth, garbage, trash, debris or other discarded
material accumulates and is deposited, or is maintained or permitted to exist in an unfenced, open
condition, accessible to children or other members of the public, or is maintained and worked in such
a manner as to disturb, affect or destroy the lateral support of or block or otherwise impede traffic on
any street, alley, road or right-of-way, or that is maintained or permitted to exist in any condition
which constitutes a possible and probable medium of transmission of disease to or between human
beings, or to maintain or permit to exist any one or more of the above-enumerated conditions.
(6) Relocation of facilities. All persons placing facilities in the right-of-way or streets or owning,
operating or maintaining facilities in, over, under, through, along and across the rights-of-way or
streets of the city shall be responsible for the relocation and costs of relocation of such facilities when
the public health or safety necessitates relocation or when such facilities are located therein without a
permanent occupation permit, license or franchise as appropriate for the occupation.
(A) Permanent relocation. Upon thirty (30) days' written notice by the city, the owner of a
facility shall begin relocation of its facilities within the rights-of-way or streets at the owner's
own expense when deemed essential by the city for the public's health and safety or to permit
the widening or straightening of streets, water or sewer projects or any other public works
project. The notice by the city shall specify the new location for the owner's facilities along the
rights-of-way or streets. The city shall have the right to move any facilities within the rights-ofway
or streets to cure or otherwise address a public health or safety concern, to widen or
straighten streets, water or sewer projects or other public works projects or when no permit for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/508
occupation has been granted and the owner refuses to move the facilities. The city shall assess
the reasonable costs and expenses of moving the facilities against the owner.
(B) Temporary relocation. Upon thirty (30) days' written notice by the city, the owner of a
facility shall temporarily relocate any portion of its facilities within the rights-of-way or streets
at the owner's own expense when deemed essential by the city for the public's health and safety
or to permit construction activities of the city or water or sewer projects or any other public
works project. The notice by the city shall specify the affected areas where the facilities are
located and the area for temporary relocation of the owner's facilities along the rights-of-way or
streets. The city shall have the right to move any facilities within the rights-of-way or streets to
cure or otherwise address a public health or safety concern, or to widen or straighten streets,
water or sewer projects or other public works projects or construction activities where the
owner refuses to move the facilities. The city shall assess the reasonable costs and expenses of
moving the facilities against the owner.
(C) Temporary removal of aerial wires. The owner of aerial wires, on the request of any
person, shall remove or raise or lower aerial wires within the city temporarily to permit the
moving of houses or other bulky structures. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or
lowering of wires shall be paid by the benefited party or parties, and the owner of the wires may
require such payment in advance. The owner shall be given not less than five (5) business days'
advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
(7) Traffic interference. The owner and contractor shall endeavor to minimize disruptions to the
efficient use of the rights-of-way and streets by pedestrians and vehicular traffic, and the rights-ofway
and streets shall not be blocked for a longer period than shall be reasonably necessary to execute
all construction, maintenance and/or repair work. Prior to blocking any street or right-of-way the
owner and/or contractor shall obtain a permit as required herein.
(8) Maintenance of facilities. The owner of any facility and person holding a certificate of
occupancy, license or franchise shall be responsible for ensuring the continued maintenance, repairs,
removal of any nuisances and other such upgrades or repairs to maintain such facility in a safe and
good workmanlike condition. Any clearing of vegetative growth interfering with such facilities that is
determined by the building inspector to be a nuisance shall be removed, cut or cleared at the sole cost
and expense of the owner of the facility or holder of the certificate of occupancy, license or franchise.
Threats that impose an immediate threat to the public health, safety or welfare that is an emergency
condition that will not allow notice under this section may be immediately abated by the city and
notice of the abatement and costs for the expenses incurred will be forwarded to the owner or holder
of the certificate of occupation, franchise or license for reimbursement to the city as required in
section 3.11.037.
(9) Tree trimming. The owner of facilities located within the rights-of-way or streets shall not trim
any trees upon or overhanging the rights-of-way without first obtaining a permit as provided in
section 3.11.072. All activities and costs necessary to protect and preserve the facilities from damage
due to trees shall be the responsibility of the owner of such facilities.
(10) Violations; notice; failure to abate.
(A) In the event the building inspector shall determine that a situation exists which
immediately affects the health, safety and well-being of the general public and that immediate
action is necessary, said building inspector may take such action as shall be necessary, including
issuing citations for violations of the terms and provisions hereof to the owner or contractor
committing such violation, as may be deemed appropriate and necessary.
(B) In the event the building inspector determines a situation constitutes an immediate threat
to the public health, safety and welfare, and the owner or contractor is absent or fails to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/508
immediately remedy the violation, the city council may, at a regular session or at an emergency
session called for the purpose of considering the issue, upon evidence heard, determine that an
emergency exists and order such action as may be required to protect the public health, safety
and welfare, including ordering repair or abatement of the nuisance. In such event, the city may
also prosecute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to recover its costs.
(C) In the event any owner or contractor shall fail or refuse to remedy any of the conditions
or violations indicated by the building inspector within ten (10) days after notice is sent, the city
may do such work or cause the same to be done, and pay therefor, and charge the expenses in
doing or having such work done or improvements made to the owners of the facility or
contractors performing such construction activities, whereupon such charge shall be a personal
liability of such person to the city.
(D) Such notice may be in writing, served upon such owner and/or contractor in person by an
officer or employee of the city, or may be by letter addressed to such owner or contractor at
their post office address, or, if personal service may not be had, or the owner and contractor's
address be not known, then notice may be given by publishing a brief summary of such order at
least once in the official newspaper of the city, by posting a notice on or near the site or location
of each facility or property upon which the violation relates, or by posting notice on a placard
attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property or facility to which the violation
relates and addressed “Facility Improvements” “To Whom It May Concern,” and such
publication shall be deemed sufficient notice.
(E) In the event any owner is mailed a notice in accordance with subsection (D) and the
United States Postal Service returns the notice as “refused” or “unclaimed,” the validity of the
notice is not affected, and the notice is considered as delivered.
(F) Notices provided by mail or by posting as set forth in subsection (D) may provide for
year-round abatement of the nuisance and inform the owner that, should the owner commit any
other violation of the same kind that poses a danger to the public health and safety on or before
the first anniversary of the date of the notice, the city without further notice may abate the
violation at the owner's expense and assess the costs against the property.
(G) Appeals from a decision of the building inspector identifying a violation or nuisance shall
be filed within five (5) days after the notice to abate a nuisance or notice of a violation of this
division in writing to the city secretary. The procedures for appeal shall otherwise be the same
as required in section 3.11.078 herein.
(11) Emergencies. In the case of fire, disaster, or other emergencies threatening life or property, as
determined by the city, the city may remove or repair only the part of the facility required to be
removed or repaired to remove such threat; provided, however, the city shall first use its reasonable
efforts to notify the owner of such threat and allow the owner to remove or repair the part of the
facility required to be removed or repaired to remove such threat. In such event, neither the city, nor
any agent, contractor or employee thereof, shall be liable to the owner or its customers or third parties
for any damages caused them or the facility, such as for or in connection with protecting, breaking
through, moving, removing, altering, tearing down, or relocating any part of the facility.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.906), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.036 Inspection; correction of violations
For the purposes of administering and enforcing this division, employees of the city building inspector
department and authorized law enforcement entities (herein “inspecting official”) shall have the right to enter
into and upon any lands within the city limits in or upon which excavation, installation, repairs or any other
construction activities exist or on any lands on which operations are being conducted in creating an excavation,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/508
repair or installation, to examine and inspect such lands and excavations, repairs or installations, to determine
whether such operations are in violation of this division and to further determine whether all permits have been
secured as required.
(1) Cessation of operations; stop work order. If the inspection provided for above reveals that the
excavation, installation, repair or construction activity is being operated or maintained in violation of
the permit issued, including a certificate of occupation, the inspecting official may immediately give
notice in writing to the person in charge at the site to stop all work or construction activities or the
owner thereof, setting forth therein the reason for the issuance of the stop work order. If no such
person is available, the leaving of such a written notice on the equipment located at the site or upon a
stake at the entry of the site where the excavation, installation, repair or construction activity is
occurring shall be deemed compliance with this section.
(2) Time limit for correction. After issuance of the notice as provided for above, there shall be no
further operation of the excavation, installation, repair or any other construction activity until the
violations complained of by the inspecting official have been remedied. The contractor shall have
three (3) days from the date of receipt of the complaint notice from the inspecting official to remedy
the violations complained of and to request the inspection by the inspector to verify that the
violations complained of have been remedied and that the construction activity is ready for additional
inspection.
(3) Failure to remedy violation. In the event a contractor or owner fails to remedy the violation
complained of as provided, the building inspector shall notify the city council of the violations
discovered and request that a hearing be set for a revocation of the contractor's and owner's permit as
provided in section 3.11.080 herein. A continuation of work or operation of the construction activity,
other than to remedy the violation complained of, after written notice has been received by the
contractor or owner to cease the construction activity shall constitute a violation of this division.
(4) Right of city to repair or correct. The city may immediately repair any sites or locations within
the streets or rights-of-way where there exist conditions which constitute a nuisance or are otherwise
dangerous or hazardous and create a imminent threat to the public health or safety; when the
contractor or owner is performing construction activities, excavations, installations or repairs without
the appropriate permit; or when the contractor or owner is performing construction activities,
excavations, installations or repairs contrary to the terms of this division, other applicable city
ordinances, state or federal law and refuses to correct such situation immediately upon direction from
the building inspector or where such threat is imminent.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.907), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.037 Responsibility for costs of damages
The reasonable costs and expenses for repairing, reconstructing or correction of any construction activity,
excavation, addition, removal or alteration of a facility or any other alteration thereof to any street, right-of-way,
or facilities located thereon, within the city, without a permit or express written contract or written agreement
with the city, shall be charged against the persons, the corporation, company, or entity actually responsible for
the actions; the owner(s) responsible for directing another or for whose benefit such activity was undertaken
which caused the damage to the street or right-of-way; and/or the permittee in whose name the permit to perform
such activities was issued. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.908), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.038 City's rights reserved
Nothing in this division grants permission for the occupation, obstruction, excavation, repair or alteration of any
street or right-of-way of the city, and any such use shall be subject to consent of the city at its sole discretion.
Additionally, nothing in this division shall be construed as an assumption by the city, or its officers and
employees, of any responsibility to supervise construction activities, to ensure adequate safety precautions by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/508
contractors or to protect any owners or customers of any facilities located in, over, under, through, along or
across the rights-of-way or streets, or the owners of any property abutting, adjacent or within the rights-of-way
or streets, from any damages caused to the facilities located therein or as the result of the construction activities
thereto. Further the city reserves the right to vacate any street or right-of-way at its sole discretion. If the city
vacates or otherwise abandons a right-of-way or street or any portion thereof, the city, with or without notice to
any permittee, may cancel any permits for such portion of a right-of-way or street without compensation or
reimbursement to the permittee for any expenses associated with moving any facilities located therein, unless
otherwise agreed in writing. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.909), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.039 Enforcement
(a) The civil and criminal provisions of this division shall be enforced by those persons or agencies designated
by municipal authority and may be enforced by any law enforcement agent of the city.
(b) If applicable, default and revocation of any and all permits granted to allow construction activities in the
streets or rights-of-way subject to the procedural guidelines herein and any agreement which applies to the rightof-
way user may be permanently enforced subject to any limitations imposed by federal or state law.
(c) In imposing the penalties and the amount, the city may weigh all applicable factors, such as damages
caused by the violation, reasons for the violation, the seriousness of the violation, and all other factors.
(d) Monetary civil penalties and injunctive relief may be imposed in the manner prescribed by either local or
state law.
(e) In addition, the city council may order specific performance of any actions required by this division or
required by a franchise, license or permit or any other agreement or authorization.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.910), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.040 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this division, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be liable
for a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein. (Ordinance 2004-
04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.911), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.041 Court proceedings
Upon the request of the city council, the city attorney or other authorized attorney shall file an action in the
district courts to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this division, or to obtain declaratory judgment,
and to seek and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or to recover damages or costs incurred in an amount
sufficient for the city to undertake any construction, repair, alteration or other activity necessary to bring about
compliance with a requirement regarding the streets or rights-of-way and established pursuant to this division
and other applicable ordinances of the city. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.912), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.042 Indemnification of city
Owners and contractors shall indemnify, defend, and hold the city and its officers and employees harmless from
and against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses, expenses, fees (including reasonable
attorney's fees and costs of defense), proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability, and suits of any
kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury (including death), property damage, or other harm for which
recovery of damages is sought, that is found by a court of competent jurisdiction to be caused solely by the
negligent act, error, or omission of any agent, officer, director, representative, employee, affiliate, or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/508
subcontractor of a permittee installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the rights-of-way or streets.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.913), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.043 Governmental immunity
Nothing in this division shall be deemed to waive, modify or amend any legal defense available at law or in
equity to either the city or its officers and employees nor to create any legal rights or claims on behalf of any
third party. This division is solely for the benefit of the city and public services and utility services and does not
create or grant rights, contractual or otherwise, to any other person or entity. Neither the city, nor its officers and
employees, waives, modifies or alters to any extent whatsoever the availability of the defense of governmental
immunity under the laws of the state. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.914), adopted 5/10/04)
Secs. 3.11.044–3.11.070 Reserved
Part II. Permits
Sec. 3.11.071 Filing of application
Application for a permit required by section 3.11.032 of this division shall be addressed to the city secretary and
made on a form furnished for that purpose, detailing the extent, character and purpose of any construction
activity or other work to be performed. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.072 Activities requiring permit
The owner or contractor for all construction activities, installations, repairs and similar activities required by
section 3.11.032 must have applied for and been issued all of the permits required for the proposed activity. A
permit fee shall not be required from any holder of a franchise, license or holder of a permanent occupation
permit to perform any minor alteration of an existing facility necessary to initiate service or repair service or for
routine maintenance to an individual customer's property unless the repair or maintenance requires excavation or
temporary closure of nonresidential traffic lanes. Franchise license holders must obtain a permit, but permit fees
will be waived. In the case of damage to city property or extraordinary circumstances, franchise license holders
shall be subject to engineer and professional fees, repair costs, actual costs, and other fees provided by this
division. The types of activities which must have a permit issued pursuant to this division are:
(1) Excavation of right-of-way or street. Any person considering excavation, cutting, boring,
digging or demolition activity in, over, under, through, along or across the streets or rights-of-way
within the city limits shall, in advance of same, submit a design plan to the city for review and
comment and shall secure proper permits and/or approvals and pay the fees as required in section
3.11.073.
(2) Construction activity in right-of-way or street. Any person considering adding, repairing,
removing or altering any facility or foliage, whether owned by such person or not, in, over, under,
through, along or across the streets or rights-of-way within the city limits shall, in advance of same,
submit a design plan to the city for review and comment and shall secure proper permits and/or
approvals and pay the fees as required in section 3.11.073.
(3) Permanent structures occupying right-of-way or street. Any permanent structure, appurtenance,
or facilities located in, over, under, through, along or across the streets or rights-of-way within the
city limits shall, in advance of installation, placement or construction, submit a design plan and
specifications as required herein and as required by the building inspector for review and comment
and shall secure the proper permits and/or approvals and pay fees as required in section 3.11.073.
Permanent structures, appurtenances or facilities located in, over, under, through, along or across the
streets or rights-of-way within the city limits at the time of passage of this division shall have (60)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/508
days to submit an application for a permit and secure such permit before enforcement action may be
taken.
(4) Temporary obstruction of the right-of-way or street. Any person desiring to temporarily occupy
or obstruct any portion of any street or right-of-way within the city for the purpose of placing thereon
material or rubbish for or from construction activities, obstructing any portion of any street or rightof-
way for any purpose whatsoever connected with any construction activities or erection,
installation, removal, alteration or repair of any facility, or other structure or excavation that will
temporarily obstruct any street or right-of-way shall apply to the building inspector for a permit for
such temporary obstruction and shall secure the proper permits and/or approvals and pay fees as
required in section 3.11.073.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(A)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.073 Fees established
In the event an application is made for a permit to perform any construction activity in any of the streets or
rights-of-way, such permit shall be subject to the following permit fees to cover the costs and expenses of the
city. Acceptance of any such permit shall constitute an acceptance by the permittee of the conditions of the
permit and any of the obligations and duties to repair any cut, damage, injury or excavation in full compliance
with the requirements set forth in exhibit A of this division, incorporated herein as if fully transcribed herein.
Payment for each such permit shall be made with the application for the permit. No permit shall be issued for
less than the required permit fee. Permit fees shall be waived for holders of a current franchise with the city.
However, franchise license holders will be subject to all engineer and professional fees, repair costs, actual costs,
and other fees provided by this division in the case of damage to city property or extraordinary circumstances.
(1) Construction permit minimum fee. The fee for each permit required pursuant to this division
for any construction activities, other than excavations, including but not limited to installation,
removal, repair, addition or other alteration of any facilities or foliage in the rights-of-way or streets,
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, plus the
amount of any other permit fees, actual costs, and any engineering or other professional fees
reasonably incurred by the city for and with respect to such permit. In the event that the permit is
recommended for issuance, an additional fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city
Code of Ordinances per calendar month for the duration of the permit shall be paid in advance prior
to issuance of the permit for the purpose of inspecting the site during the construction process.
(2) Excavation permit fee. The fee for each permit required pursuant to this division for any
drilling, boring, cutting or otherwise any excavation of any portion of the rights-of-way or streets
shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, plus the
amount of any other permit fees, actual costs, and any engineering or other professional fees
reasonably incurred by the city for and with respect to such permit. In the event that the permit is
recommended for issuance, an additional fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city
Code of Ordinances per calendar month for the duration of the permit shall be paid in advance prior
to issuance of the permit for the purpose of inspecting the site during the excavation process.
(3) Professional fees. The city shall be fully reimbursed for all reasonable costs associated with
activities in the streets or rights-of-way pursuant to this division that require inspection, review or
any other reasonable overview or actions by an engineer or other professional. All engineer and other
professional fees shall be paid prior to issuance of a permit. Permits shall not be issued and may not
be maintained by any person owing engineer or other professional fees to the city.
(4) Actual costs. The city shall be fully reimbursed for all costs incurred by the city associated with
construction activity conducted pursuant to this division, including but not limited to the costs of staff
supervision and overview of such activity while such activity exists, any costs or charges for special
assignment of police officers to monitor, escort, or otherwise provide services to protect the public
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/508
from such activities, and any other similar fees reasonably incurred by the city for and with respect to
such activity.
(5) Plumbing permit fees. Any person who desires to install, repair or alter any pipes, lines, tubes
or pipes for which any water, solid waste, gas, oil or other such product may flow, in or under the
rights-of-way or streets, shall submit to the chief plumbing inspector plans and specifications
showing the proposed improvements. It shall be the duty of the chief plumbing inspector, when such
plans and specifications have been submitted to him, to make an inspection of the proposed
improvements. An inspection fee, as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of
Ordinances, for each linear foot of pipeline to be built or installed shall be paid by the applicant
before such permit is issued.
(6) Electrical permit fees. Any person who desires to build, erect, alter, install, repair or remove
any poles, posts, towers or other similar facilities for which any wires, cables, electrical wires or
transmission media are located or will be located shall submit to the chief electrical inspector plans
and specifications showing the proposed improvements and existing conditions on such poles, posts,
towers or such similar facility. It shall be the duty of the chief electrical inspector, when such plans
and specifications have been submitted to him, to make an inspection of the proposed improvements.
An inspection fee, as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, for
each pole, post, tower or similar facility to be built, installed, altered or erected shall be paid by the
applicant before such permit is issued.
(7) Certificate of occupation fee. The fee for each certificate of occupation required pursuant to
this division for a permanent structure to occupy any right-of-way or street, [shall be] as set forth in
the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, per month per linear foot of street or
right-of-way so occupied, and shall be paid in advance annually from the original date of the issuance
of the certificate of occupation.
(8) Temporary obstruction of right-of-way or street. A special assessment for temporary
obstruction or occupation of any right-of-way or street shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, to reimburse the city for costs of increased supervision
and overview of such site while such obstruction exists, plus any costs or charges for special
assignment of police officers to monitor, escort, or otherwise provide services to protect the public
from the construction activities or excavation and any other similar fees reasonably incurred by the
city for and with respect to such temporary obstruction.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(B)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.074 Duration
All activities or construction authorized by a permit issued under this division shall be commenced within six (6)
months after the date of issuance of the permit and thereafter be continuously prosecuted or such permit is void
and the person whom the permit was issued must make a new application before commencing any further
activities or construction. Each permit issued shall be issued for a specific time period with a maximum period
of one year, after which period the permit is void and the person to whom the permit was issued must make a
new application for a new permit for each succeeding year or portion thereof. If the permit is allowed to expire,
the person shall apply for and procure a new permit, paying the fee therefor as before, prior to proceeding with
any such work. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(C)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.075 Application requirements
(a) General requirements. Applications for permits required by this division shall be made to the building
inspector and must be made in writing by the person to do the work, the contractor, or his authorized agent, that
[and] will be submitted in duplicate upon forms provided to the building inspector for that purpose. An
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/508
application for such permit may be deposited at the office of the city secretary for delivery to and action by the
building inspector. Such application shall contain:
(1) Date the application is submitted.
(2) Name, address, phone, fax and other pertinent information of the owner(s) and name of all
contractor(s), including subcontractors, employed, or that will be employed, to perform any portion
of any construction activity or excavation.
(3) Name of the person actually presenting the application to the inspector.
(4) Name, address, phone, fax and other pertinent information of the person(s) designated to be the
24-hour contact or emergency contact at all times while the permit is active. The applicant must
immediately notify the building inspector, in writing, if such emergency contact changes, and no later
than 24 hours after such change, to maintain an active permit.
(5) Exact location and legal description of any property, streets or rights-of-way where the
construction activities or excavation is proposed to occur.
(6) To the extent that information can be reasonably obtained, all design plans shall show the
location of other permanent structures, facilities and utilities which will be crossed or paralleled
within eight (8) feet of the location of the proposed permanent structure and identify the owner(s)
thereof, including the topography of the area to be affected, and other development and protective
measures, considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to, and protection of, the adjacent
property and facilities.
(7) A fee, appropriate to the number and kinds of installations, alterations, removals or
construction activities to be made or activities to be performed, as provided by this division.
(8) Proof of insurance or bond in the type and amount as determined by the director of financial
services or his/her designee based upon the size and type of project.
(A) An applicant must provide proof of liability insurance in the total amounts determined by
the director of financial services to be proper.
(B) The coverage must be on an “occurrence” basis and must include coverage for personal
injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical damages, and underground, explosion
and collapse hazards as applicable to the size and type of project.
(C) Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is
required to notify the city in writing not fewer than thirty (30) days before canceling, failing to
renew, or reducing policy limits.
(D) The applicant shall file the required original certificate of insurance or bond prior to any
commencement of work.
(9) A description of the work to be performed. Where deemed necessary by the inspector to
accomplish the objectives of this division, applications shall be accompanied by as many copies of
specifications, plans and a complete layout drawn to scale and in detail to show the nature and
character of the work to be performed as the inspector may deem necessary. The plan or diagram
shall show the manner in which the installations or construction activities are to be made or the
character of any of the repairs to existing installations or construction activities. When such plans,
specifications and layout are demanded, it shall be a violation of this division for any person to
perform construction activities or install any part of the electrical, plumbing, cables, facilities or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/508
structure or perform further excavation or construction activity until the appropriate inspector
approves such installation or construction activity.
(10) Estimated duration of any construction activity, installation and/or excavation which will
result in the disturbance or modification of any rights-of-way, streets or property and the exact
locations for each such disruption or disturbance, including an estimation of the duration of each
disruption or disturbance at each location.
(11) Excavations. If any site is to be excavated the application must include:
(A) The purpose or reason for the removing or moving of the soil;
(B) The quantity in cubic yards of soil to be moved or removed;
(C) The location where the soil will be moved or deposited;
(D) Identification of each building, residence or structure within one hundred fifty (150) feet
of the proposed excavation;
(E) A positive statement that the proposed excavation shall not block, encumber or close any
street or disturb the lateral support thereof;
(F) A positive statement that the proposed excavation is not and shall not be located in an
area which has a public record restrictions or covenants prohibiting such a use of the property;
(G) The proposed slopes and lateral supports to be used in the excavation shall be set forth;
(H) The present and proposed arrangements made for surface water drainage;
(I) The safety precautions to be installed and maintained at the site, such as fences around the
excavation, traffic-control devices and drainage systems to keep the excavation from collecting
water within or creating a hazard to workers, travelers and citizens;
(J) Specifications of all materials to be used in repair of the excavation;
(K) The intended use or condition of the land upon completion of the excavation process;
(L) Such other pertinent data as the building inspector may require.
(12) Permanent structures. If a permanent structure is to be added or remain within any street or
right-of-way, the owner(s) of such structure must complete an application for certificate of
occupation for the permanent occupation of the right-of-way, including:
(A) The person or firm which will operate or maintain the permanent structure;
(B) The origin point and the destination of the permanent structure;
(C) A description of the substance to be transported through the permanent structure;
(D) Engineering plans, drawings and/or maps with summarized specifications showing the
horizontal and vertical location of all permanent structures, including covering depths, poles,
towers, etc., and the location of any shut-off valves or other such disconnect locations, where
applicable. If the city has a computer-generated mapping system, the applicant will provide
final as-built plans in a format compatible with uploading into the city's system;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/508
(E) A description of the consideration given to matters of public safety and the avoidance, as
far as practicable, of existing inhabited structures and congregated areas;
(F) Detailed cross-section drawings of all streets, rights-of-way and easement crossings to be
affected;
(G) The design criteria under which the permanent structure will be constructed and
maintained; and
(H) Any other pertinent data as the building inspector may require.
(13) Certificated telecommunications providers. If the applicant for a permit purports to be a
telecommunications entity, in addition to the above required information the applicant shall include:
(A) Specifications as to the form of transmission media to be utilized;
(B) Design plans and specifications concerning the transmission media;
(C) A copy of the certificate of convenience and necessity, certificate of operating authority
or service provider certificate of operating authority from the public utilities commission
authorizing local exchange telephone service in the city; and
(D) Verification of current payment of all fees and right-of-way fees to the public utilities
commission.
(14) Other such pertinent information as the inspector may be require.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(D)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.076 Review of application
The city council shall have the power and reserves the authority to refuse any application for a permit, including
a certificate of occupation, under this division to any person, contractor or owner who has not complied with this
division, has previously failed to comply with the terms, requirements or standards of any prior permit issued for
a similar project, or has failed to provide bond as required. Additionally, the city council shall have the power
and reserves the authority to refuse, modify or amend any application for permit under this division where the
particular location within the city limits, by reason of such particular location and the character and value of the
permanent improvements already erected on or approximately adjacent to the particular location in question, and
the use of which the land and surroundings are adopted for health and safety reasons, or any of them, when in
the building inspector's opinion, or on appeal to the city council in the city council's opinion, the excavating,
operation of an excavation or addition or alteration of any such proposed facility on such particular location or
construction activity might constitute a nuisance, be injurious to public health, be a public hazard to its
inhabitants as a whole or to a substantial number of its inhabitants or travelers, or be a disadvantage to the city in
its planned growth, or otherwise have a negative impact on the property values of property within the city.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(E)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.077 Factors to be considered
(a) In considering and reviewing all plans submitted and applications for permits, including a certificate of
occupation, the building inspector shall be guided by the general purpose of orderly municipal planning, and the
prohibiting of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or health hazard or
endangering the lives or property of others. As aids in accomplishing these purposes, the following points shall
be considered by the inspector in reviewing applications for permits; however, such aids shall not be exclusive in
the inspector's consideration and ultimate recommendation:
(1) The plan's compliance with all provisions of this division and other ordinances of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/508
(2) The environmental impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing natural
resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding properties and
neighborhood.
(3) The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious use and design,
maintenance of property values, and negative impacts.
(4) The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system.
(5) Surface water drainage and water drainage facilities of the excavation or installation, including
soil and earth erosion by water and wind.
(6) Lateral supports of the excavation, including protections for existing buildings, facilities,
streets and other property to be affected thereby.
(7) Condition [in] which excavation, construction activities or installation to be maintained and
safeguards to be taken to prohibit creating a nuisance, health hazard, attractiveness to children, and
features provided to dispense with the endangering of the lives and property of the public.
(8) Proposed use or condition of land upon completion of the excavation process, construction
activity or installation.
(9) Protection, access and encumbrance such installation, construction activity or excavation will
have upon existing facilities and the location of the facilities in reference to the proposed excavation
or installation, including the size, quantity, location and permanent nature of the all facilities
currently located or proposed to be located therein.
(10) Such other facts as may bear or relate to the coordinated, adjusted and harmonious physical
development of the city.
(b) In arriving at the ultimate recommendation, the inspector may attach such special conditions thereto as
may be reasonably necessary to attain the overall purpose of this division.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(F)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.078 Appeals
Appeals from permit denial or granting, including a certificate of occupation, shall be made to the city council.
(1) In the event an applicant is refused a permit, (s)he may, not later than ten (10) days from the
date of receiving notice of such refusal, appeal to the city council for a public hearing on the refusal
by directing a letter to the city council setting forth therein the date of denial of the permit and the
reasons the applicant feels he has been wronged in being refused the permit.
(2) In the event the inspector recommends that the permit be granted, any citizen of the city may,
within ten (10) days of the recommendation to grant the permission by the inspector, appeal to the
city council for a public hearing on the question of granting or refusal, as the case may be, of the
permit by directing a letter to the city council addressed to the office of the city secretary, at the city
hall, setting forth therein the date of the recommendation of the inspector and the reasons the person
so appealing feels that (s)he has been or will be injured by the action from which (s)he is taking such
appeal.
(3) Upon the filing of such appeal, the right to operate under any such permit shall be suspended
until final determination by the city council and then in accordance with the final decision of the city
council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/508
(4) The city council shall, on receiving such notice of appeal, direct the city secretary to place it on
the city council's work agenda to be considered in the due order of city business. The city secretary
shall then notify the appellant as to the date and place where the city council will consider the appeal
and publish a notice one time in the official newspaper at least five (5) days before the date when the
city council will consider the appeal.
(5) The city council, on conducting the public hearing regarding the appeal, may, by majority vote
of all the council, either grant or refuse to grant the permit. In the event the permit is granted, the
permit shall be issued.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(G)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.079 Conditions
All permits, including certificates of occupation, shall be issued based upon the representations made within the
application for the permit, information provided from the applicant, and all plans and specifications submitted
with the application. Violations of any conditions of the permit or the general conditions listed herein shall
constitute a forfeiture of all rights and privileges granted by the permit(s). The following general conditions of
permit are in addition to the specific conditions identified in the specific permit:
(1) Permit holders may not deviate from the plans and specifications approved with the permit
without prior written permission from the building inspector and amendment of such permit.
(2) Permit holders must comply at all times with the requirements of this division and other
applicable city ordinances as well as state and federal laws.
(3) No permit issued under the terms of this division shall ever be transferred, sold, assigned, or
otherwise disposed of in any manner to any other person without the written consent of the building
inspector.
(4) No permit shall be issued for less than the required permit fees.
(5) Bonds must be maintained at all times applicable to the permitted project.
(6) All applications for permit must contain complete and accurate information, plans and
specifications for the project.
(7) No work shall be done under any permit issued under this division except as stated in the
permit and in compliance with state and federal laws. The permittee shall ensure compliance at all
times therewith.
(8) The building inspector shall at all times have authority to make inspection of the project site
and stop all work not in conformity with the permit, ordinances of the city or state or federal law. A
copy of all permits shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection at
all times when construction or installation work is occurring. It shall be a violation of this division to
interfere with a building inspector in the performance of his or her duties.
(9) Any changes to the information provided in the application approved by the building inspector
must be submitted to the building inspector within 72 hours after the information has changed to
amend the permit and, if such changes are of a sufficient degree to cause reconsideration, the building
inspector have the same rights granted in an original application as to approval or denial of such
amendments.
(10) Approval of a permit does not constitute an agreement to undertake construction activities
contrary to state, federal or city requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/508
(11) No permanent structure shall remain in the right-of-way or street without all proper permits
and a current occupation permit authorizing permanent occupation.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(H)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.080 Revocation
Any permit, including a certificate of occupation, issued under this division, where a notice to cease operations
or activities thereunder is issued, and such notice is not immediately complied with, shall constitute grounds for
immediate revocation of any and all permits, or portion thereof, issued for the project when the following
conditions exist:
(1) A violation of any condition of the permit;
(2) A violation of any provisions of this division or any other applicable ordinance or law relating
to the specifications of the permit, excavations, construction or installation of the type of facility
being installed, repaired, altered or removed;
(3) Failure to cease construction activities or correct such violations as directed by the building
inspector; or
(4) The existence of any condition or the doing of any act constituting or creating a nuisance or
endangering the lives or property of others.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(I)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.081 Appeals
Any person who has been issued a permit, including a certificate of occupation, pursuant to this division, who is
aggrieved by a revocation or other action by the building inspector may appeal to the city council by filing with
the city secretary a written notice thereof within five (5) calendar days from the date of the revocation of the
permit or other action of the building inspector, including, but not limited to, notices to repair and stop work
orders. A fee, as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of the city Code of Ordinances, shall be collected for
processing the appeal. The aggrieved person shall be given a hearing before the city council, in due order of
business, after which the city council may modify or overrule the inspector's decision. Written notice of the time
and place of such hearing shall be served upon the person to whom the permit was granted at least five (5) days
prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall also contain a brief statement of the grounds to be relied
upon for revoking such permit. Notice of the hearing may be given by personal delivery thereof to the person to
be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to such
person to be notified at the address appearing in the application. During the appeal process, all work shall be
stopped at the construction site while the appeal is pending. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(J)),
adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.082 Franchise holders
Utility service providers and public service providers having a current franchise or license with the city shall not
be required to obtain a certificate of occupation, shall be required to obtain all applicable permits, shall be
governed by the terms of the franchise or license agreement, and shall be exempt from paying any permit fees
when required hereby to obtain a permit, but shall be subject to all engineer and professional fees, repair costs,
actual costs, and other fees provided by this division, and shall otherwise be subject to, bound and governed by
each and every term and provision of this division except as explicitly exempted in the franchise or license
agreement, or where terms or conditions of the franchise or license agreement conflict with the provisions of this
division, the terms and conditions of the franchise or license agreement shall govern. Unless otherwise exempted
by a current franchise or license agreement, the utility service provider or public service provider shall:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/508
(1) Complete all applications for permits required herein, but shall not be required to pay the fees,
except as provided in this division;
(2) Provide the city the information required in the application;
(3) Coordinate with the city as directed by the public works director based upon the size of the
project and construction activities;
(4) Apply for all permits not less than three (3) working days prior to commencing any activity for
which a permit must be issued as required by this division; and
(5) Provide an estimation of time for completion of each project.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2 (11.903(K)), adopted 5/10/04)
Sec. 3.11.083 Exemption from fees
Telecommunication entities that are certificated telecommunications providers by the state to service the city,
and pay the city compensation as required by chapter 283 of the Local Government Code, shall be exempt from
such fees as are set forth therein [herein] upon verification from the public utilities commission that the
telecommunications entity seeking a permit is, at the time of application, a certificated provider holding a
current certificate of convenience and necessity to service the city and is paying the city compensation as
required by chapter 283 of the Local Government Code. The telecommunications entity shall be subject to all
other provisions of this division for which the entity is not exempt. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), sec. 2
(11.903(L)), adopted 5/10/04)
State law reference–Management of public right-of-way used by telecommunications provider, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch.
283.
Exhibit A. Special Provisions for Construction in City Streets and Right-of-Way
1. Permit. The person in charge of this installation shall have a copy of the permit and its attachments on the
job at all times. Deviations to the approved permit must have prior approval of the city. Utilities having a
franchise with the city shall not be required to obtain permits for street cuts but shall coordinate with the city as
advisable based on the size of the utility project and work.
2. Existing utilities. The exact location of any utilities or facilities that may conflict with the proposed
installation should be field verified by the installer during construction. The contractor will be responsible for
verifying the location both horizontal and vertical of all affected facilities whether by pot holing or hand digging
prior to any excavation or boring.
3. Safety. Warning and protective devices, including flagmen, shall be used to prevent creation of a traffic
hazard and to ensure the safety of the public as advisable and prudent considering the scope of the work. When
provided, such devices and flagmen shall be in accordance with the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Parking of employees' cars and trucks on both sides of the pavement will be prohibited, and all such vehicles
shall be parked on one side of the road and in no instance closer than a minimum of eight feet from the edge of
the pavement.
All construction equipment and materials stored on city right-of-way shall be limited to work in progress and
stored in such a manner and at such locations (a minimum of 30 feet from the nearest traffic lane) as not to
interfere with the safe passage of traffic.
4. Method of construction. Trench width shall be held to a minimum and backfilled to a density
approximating that of the adjacent soil in a manner satisfactory to the city. The fill material shall be installed in
six-inch (6") layers, each compacted to 95% density. A six-inch concrete slab shall be placed over the trench to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/508
extend 12 inches on each side of the trench. The top of the slab shall be two inches below the top of paving.
Alternatively, a six-inch layer of asphalt may be substituted and compacted to the finished grade of adjacent
pavement.
5. Concrete strength requirements.
(a) Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of a batch design,
providing a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500)
pounds per square inch (psi). No. 4 deformed steel bars shall be used for reinforcing.
(b) Reinforced concrete pavements and monolithic curb. Concrete pavement and monolithic curb
properly and continuously reinforced shall be constructed of a concrete batch design, providing the
appropriate twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength. The minimum reinforcement shall be no. 4
deformed bars spaced at twenty-four (24) inches center to center, both ways.
(c) Reinforcing steel. All steel reinforcing for street and alley concrete paving shall be deformed
no. 4 bars at twenty-four inch (24") centers both ways and shall meet ASTM designation A15, A16,
or A408.
6. Pavement types and thicknesses.
(a) Collector and minor streets and alleys in residential areas.
(1) A six-inch (6") thickness of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced concrete
pavement on a compacted subbase shall be required.
(2) An alternate type of pavement may be eight-inch (8") thickness of compacted flexible
base on a compacted subbase with a 2-inch thickness of type C asphaltic concrete surface,
except in alleys. All alleys shall be paved with reinforced concrete.
(b) Collector streets and alleys in commercial or industrial areas. Collector streets and alleys shall
be designed and constructed with eight-inch (8") thickness of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi
reinforced concrete pavement on a compacted subbase.
[(c) Reserved.]
(d) Major thoroughfare construction. Thoroughfares shall be designed and constructed with an
eight-inch (8") thickness of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced concrete pavement on
a compacted subbase.
7. Access. Ingress and egress at all private and public streets and drives will be provided at all times.
8. Right-of-way and street restoration. All excess excavation, materials, supplies, etc., shall be removed from
the right-of-way after installation is complete and the right-of-way reshaped to its original section including
fertilizing, seeding and/or sodding as may be required when existing grass has been disturbed.
9. Right-of-way and street damage. The owner, contractor and permittee will be responsible for any damage to
the right-of-way or streets, including but not limited to the pavement structure, caused by settlement due to
pavement cuts. Contractors are responsible for obtaining exact facility locations from all utilities prior to
excavation. Such liability shall extend for a period of one (1) year from the date the repair of such pavement cut
is completed.
10. Excavation.
(a) Prior to beginning any excavation, trenching or digging which may damage a pipeline, cable,
wire or any other such apparatus or facilities located in, over or under the streets or rights-of-way of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/508
the city [such person] shall first obtain a permit before excavation and contact all of the owners of the
such pipeline, cable, wire or other facility and determine if the proposed excavation will cause
damage thereto.
(b) If physical contact is made with, or damage or injury is suspected to, any pipeline, cable, wire
or other such apparatus or facilities during any excavation, trenching, digging or other construction
activities, the person or contractor making the physical contact with, or suspecting the damage or
injury to, the pipeline, cable, wire or other apparatus or facilities shall immediately contact the
building inspector and the owner of the pipeline, cable, wire or other apparatus or facilities for any
necessary inspections and repairs.
(c) If, during any excavation, trenching or digging, the person or contractor so excavating,
trenching or digging notices or suspects damage or injury to any lateral supports to streets or other
facilities in the rights-of-way, streets or adjacent properties, such person shall immediately contact
the city and, if applicable, the owner of the property for any necessary inspections and repairs.
(d) All persons to whom permits may be granted to excavate the streets or rights-of-way shall, at
their own cost and expense, deliver at such place as may be designated by the building inspector for
such purpose all such surplus earth, dirt, stone, gravel or other material coming out of such
excavation as shall be necessary for the purpose of refilling the same.
11. Erosion. Erosion control measures (i.e., silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and
barricades must be in place before work begins. The permittee shall be responsible for stormwater management
erosion control that complies with city, state and federal guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be
limited to, silt fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion areas until
reasonable vegetation is established, and barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will
require wire-backed silt fencing.
12. Weekends/holidays. Construction work to be accomplished on weekends, nights or holidays will proceed
at the discretion of the building inspector; provided that emergency work required to be undertaken on
weekends, nights, holidays and outside of normal business hours shall be undertaken and completed in
compliance with Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10) and this exhibit, and the contractor shall obtain a permit therefor on
the first business day following the date of such work.
13. Notice. The permittee, contractor or subcontractor shall notify the building inspector not more than
twenty-four (24) hours after any damage to other utilities, facilities, or other appurtenances or property, whether
public or private. Once a permit has been issued, the permittee must notify the building inspector at least fortyeight
(48) hours prior to commencing any work or construction activity permit in such permit.
14. Liabilities. The city assumes no responsibility for conflict with existing utility lines, pipelines, highway
appurtenances or natural obstacles. Permittees, contractors and owners shall be responsible for the workmanship
and any damages by a contractor or subcontractor.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (10), ex. A, adopted 5/10/04)
Secs. 3.11.084–3.11.090 Reserved
Division 3. Use of Public Rights-of-Way by Wireless Network Providers
Sec. 3.11.091 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to:
(1) Assist the city in the competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory management of the physical
use, occupancy and maintenance of its public rights-of-way by wireless network providers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/508
(2) Secure fair and reasonable compensation for the physical use and occupancy of the public
rights-of-way by wireless network providers in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral
manner; and
(3) Assist the city in protecting the public health, safety, and welfare.
Sec. 3.11.092 Governing law
This division shall be construed in accordance with chapter 284 of the Texas Local Government Code (“the
code”) to the extent not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the United States or of the State of Texas.
Sec. 3.11.093 Definitions
For the purpose of this division, the definitions found in the city design manual for the installation of network
nodes and node support poles (“the design manual”) are hereby incorporated into this division and shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The following definitions as found in the
design manual are specifically applicable to this division:
Applicable codes.
(1) The city uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a
recognized national code organization; and
(2) Local amendments to those codes to the extent not inconsistent with chapter 284.
City. The City of Rockdale, Texas or its lawful successor.
City council. The municipal governing body of the City of Rockdale, Texas.
City manager. The city manager of the City of Rockdale, Texas, or designee.
Chapter 284. Texas Local Government Code, chapter 284.
Code. The Texas Local Government Code.
Collocate and collocation. The installation, mounting, maintenance, modification, operation, or replacement of
network nodes in a public right-of-way on or adjacent to a pole.
Decorative pole. A streetlight pole specially designed and placed for aesthetic purposes and on which no
appurtenances or attachments, other than specially designed informational or directional signage or temporary
holiday or special event attachments, have been placed or are permitted to be placed according to
nondiscriminatory city codes and ordinances.
Design district. An area that is zoned, or otherwise designated by municipal code, and for which the city
maintains and enforces unique design and aesthetic standards on a uniform and nondiscriminatory basis.
Easement. Shall include any public easement or other compatible use created by dedication, or by other means,
to the city for public utility purposes or any other purpose whatsoever. “Easement” shall include a private
easement used for the provision of utilities.
Federal Communications Commission or FCC. The Federal Administrative Agency, or lawful successor,
authorized to oversee cable television and other multi-channel regulation on a national level.
Highway right-of-way. Right-of-way adjacent to a state or federal highway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/508
Historic district. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated as a historic district under municipal, state, or
federal law.
Law. Common law or a federal, state, or local law, statute, code, rule, regulation, order, or ordinance.
Local. Within the geographical boundaries of the city.
Location. The city-approved and lawfully permitted location for the network node.
Micro network node. A network node that is not larger in dimension than 24 inches in length, 15 inches in width,
and 12 inches in height, and that has an exterior antenna, if any, not longer than 11 inches.
Municipal park. An area that is zoned or otherwise designated by the city as a public park for the purpose of
recreational activity.
Network node. Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and
a communications network. The term:
(1) Includes:
(A) Equipment associated with wireless communications;
(B) A radio transceiver, an antenna, a battery-only backup power supply, and comparable
equipment, regardless of technological configuration; and
(C) Coaxial or fiber-optic cable that is immediately adjacent to and directly associated with a
particular collocation; and
(2) Does not include:
(A) An electric generator;
(B) A pole; or
(C) A macro tower.
Network provider.
(1) A wireless service provider; or
(2) A person that does not provide wireless services and that is not an electric utility but builds or
installs on behalf of a wireless service provider:
(A) Network nodes; or
(B) Node support poles or any other structure that supports or is capable of supporting a
network node.
Node support pole. A pole installed by a network provider for the primary purpose of supporting a network
node.
Permit. A written authorization for the use of the public right-of-way or collocation on a service pole required
from the city before a network provider may perform an action or initiate, continue, or complete a project over
which the municipality has police power authority.
Pole. A service pole, city-owned utility pole, node support pole, or utility pole.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/508
Private easement. An easement or other real property right that is only for the benefit of the grantor and grantee
and their successors and assigns.
Provider. Has the same meaning as “network provider.”
Public right-of-way. The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street, public sidewalk, alley,
waterway, or utility easement in which the city has an interest. The term does not include:
(1) A private easement; or
(2) The airwaves above a public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Service pole. A pole, other than a city-owned utility pole, owned or operated by the city and located in a public
right-of-way, including:
(1) A pole that supports traffic-control functions;
(2) A structure for signage;
(3) A pole that supports lighting, other than a decorative pole; and
(4) A pole or similar structure owned or operated by a municipality and supporting only network
nodes.
Street. Only the paved portion of the right-of-way used for vehicular travel, being the area between the inside of
the curb to the inside of the opposite curb, or the area between the two parallel edges of the paved roadway for
vehicular travel where there is no curb. A “street” is generally part of, but smaller in width than the width of the
entire right-of-way, while a right-of-way may include sidewalks and utility easements. A “street” does not
include the curb or the sidewalk, if either are present at the time of a permit application or if added later.
Traffic signal. Any device, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically operated by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and to proceed.
Transport facility. Each transmission path physically within a public right-of-way, extending with a physical line
from a network node directly to the network, for the purpose of providing backhaul for network nodes.
User. A person or organization which conducts a business over facilities occupying the whole or a part of a
public street or right-of-way, depending on the context.
Utility pole. A pole that provides:
(1) Electric distribution with a voltage rating of not more than 34.5 kilovolts; or
(2) Services of a telecommunications provider, as defined by chapter 284, section 51.002, Utilities
Code.
Wireless service. Any service, using licensed or unlicensed wireless spectrum, including the use of wi-fi,
whether at a fixed location or mobile, provided to the public using a network node.
Wireless service provider. A person that provides wireless service to the public.
Wireless facilities. “Micro network nodes,” “network nodes,” and “node support poles” as defined in Texas
Local Government Code, chapter 284.
Sec. 3.11.094 Use and occupancy of public rights-of-way
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/508
(a) Pursuant to this division and subject to the design manual and the code, a wireless network provider has
the nonexclusive right to use and occupy the public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of constructing,
maintaining, and operating its facilities used in the provision of wireless facilities.
(b) The terms of this division shall apply to all wireless network providers' facilities used, in whole or part, in
the provision of wireless services throughout the city, including any annexed areas upon the effective date of
annexation or the date the city provides the company written notice, whichever date occurs later.
Sec. 3.11.095 Compliance with design manual and applicable codes
All wireless network providers shall comply with the terms of this right-of-way management ordinance, city
applicable codes, and the terms and conditions of the city's design manual.
Sec. 3.11.096 General construction and maintenance requirements
A network provider shall construct and maintain network nodes and network support poles described in the code
in a manner that does not:
(1) Obstruct, impede, or hinder the usual travel or public safety on a public right-of-way;
(2) Obstruct the legal use of a public right-of-way by other utility providers;
(3) Violate nondiscriminatory applicable codes;
(4) Violate or conflict with the city's publicly disclosed public right-of-way design specifications;
or
(5) Violate the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA).
Sec. 3.11.097 Permit applications
(a) Except as otherwise provided in chapter 284 of the code, a network provider shall obtain a permit or
permits from the city to install a network node, node support pole, or transport facility in a city public right-ofway.
(b) As required by chapter 284 of the code, the city shall not require a network provider to perform services
for the city for which the permit is sought.
(c) A network provider that wants to install or collocate multiple network nodes inside the municipal limits of
the city is entitled to file a consolidated permit application with the city for not more than 30 network nodes and
upon payment of the applicable fee(s), receive a permit or permits for the installation or collocation of those
network nodes.
(d) The network provider shall provide the following information in its permit applications:
(1) Applicable construction and engineering drawings and information to confirm that the
applicant will comply with the city's design manual and applicable codes;
(2) Any additional information reasonably related to the network provider's use of the public
rights-of-way to ensure compliance with the design manual and this division;
(3) A certificate that the network node(s) complies with applicable regulations of the Federal
Communications Commission; and certification that the proposed network node(s) will be placed
into active commercial service by or for the network provider not later than the 60th day after the
date of construction and final testing of each network node is completed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/508
(4) A certificate of insurance that provides that the network provider and its contractor has at least
$1,000,000.00 in general liability coverage.
(e) Exception. As provided in section 284.157 of the code, a network provider is not required to apply, obtain
a permit, or pay a rate to the city for:
(1) Routine maintenance that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or vehicular
lanes in a public right-of-way;
(2) Replacing or upgrading a network node or network pole with a node or pole that is
substantially similar in size or smaller and that does not require excavation or closing of sidewalks or
vehicular lanes in a public right-of-way; or
(3) The installation, placement, maintenance, operation, or replacement of micro network nodes
that are strung on cables between existing poles or node support poles in compliance with the
National Electrical Safety Code;
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (d) above, the network provider or its contractors shall notify the
city at least 24 hours in advance of work described in this subsection (d) [sic].
Sec. 3.11.098 Installation in historic districts or design districts
A network provider must obtain advance written consent from the city council before collocating new network
nodes or installing new node support poles in an area of the city that has been zoned or otherwise designated as a
historic district or as a design district if the district has decorative poles. The network provider shall be required
to comply with the general aesthetic requirements described in the city's design manual. The city has the
authority to designate new historic districts and design districts at a future date.
Sec. 3.11.099 Installation in municipal parks and residential areas
A network provider may not install a new node support pole in a public right-of-way without the city council's
discretionary, nondiscriminatory and written consent if the public right-of way:
(1) Is in a municipal park; or
(2) Is adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is:
(A) Not more than 50 feet wide; and
(B) Adjacent to single-family residential lots or other multifamily residences or undeveloped
land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions.
(3) In addition to the above, a network provider installing a network node or node support pole in a
public right-of way shall comply with private deed restrictions and other private restrictions in the
area that apply to those facilities.
(4) The network provider shall be further required to comply with guidelines set out in the city's
design manual.
Sec. 3.11.100 Municipal review process by the city
(a) Determination of application completeness. The city shall determine whether the permit application is
complete and notify the applicant of that determination:
(1) For network nodes and node support poles: No later than 30 days after the date the city receives
the permit application.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/508
(2) For a transport facility: No later than 10 days after the date the city receives the permit
application.
(b) Approval or denial of application. The city shall approve or deny a completed application after the date it
is submitted to the city:
(1) For network nodes: No later than 60 days after the date the city receives the complete
application.
(2) For network support poles: No later than 150 days after the date the city receives the complete
application.
(3) For transport facilities: No later than 21 days after the city receives the complete application.
(c) Basis for denial of application. If an application is denied by the city, it shall document the basis for the
denial, including the specific applicable city code provisions or other city rules, regulations, or other law on
which the denial is based. The documentation for the denial must be sent by electronic mail to the applicant on
or before the date that the city denies the application.
(d) Resubmission of denied application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified in the denial
application.
(1) The applicant has 30 days from the date the city denies the completed application to cure the
deficiencies identified in the denial documentation without paying an additional application fee, other
than any fee for actual costs incurred by the city.
(2) The city shall approve or deny the revised completed application after a denial not later than
the 90th day after the city receives the revised completed application. The city's review shall be
limited to the deficiencies cited in the denial documentation.
(e) Nondiscriminatory review. Each completed application shall be processed by the city on a
nondiscriminatory basis.
Sec. 3.11.101 Time of installation
A network provider shall begin installation for which a permit is granted not later than six months after final
approval of the application and shall diligently pursue installation to completion. The city mayor may in his/her
sole discretion grant reasonable extensions of time as requested by the network provider.
Sec. 3.11.102 Applicable fees and rental rates to the city
(a) As compensation for the network provider's use and occupancy of the city public rights-of-way, the
network provider shall pay application fees and annual public right-of-way rental rates as set forth below, which
shall be in lieu of any lawful tax, license, charge, right-of-way permit, use, construction, street cut or inspection
fee; or other right-of-way related charge or fee, whether charged to the network provider or its contractor(s)
within the city, except the usual general ad valorem taxes, special assessments and sales tax levied in accordance
with state law and equally applicable to all general businesses in the city.
(b) Network nodes.
(1) Application fee: The application fee shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code for each network node for up to but not more than 30 network nodes.
(2) Annual public right-of-way rate fee: The annual public right-of-way rate shall be as set forth in
the fee schedule in appendix A of this code per network node installed in the city public rights-ofway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/508
(3) Public right-of-way rate adjustment: As provided in section 284.054 of the code, the city may
adjust the amount of the annual public right-of-way rate not more than annually by an amount equal
to one-half the annual change, if any, in the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The city shall provide
written notice to each network provider of the new rate; and the rate shall apply to the first payment
due to the city on or after the 60th day following the written notice.
(c) Node support poles. The application fee for each network support pole shall be as set forth in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code.
(d) Transfer facilities.
(1) The application fee for each transfer facility shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A of this code.
(2) The annual transfer facility rental rate shall be as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code for each network node site located in a public right-of-way. However, no rate is required if
the network provider is already paying the city an amount equal to or greater than the amount of
other city right-of-way fees for access lines under chapter 283 of the code or cable franchise fees
under chapter 66 of the Texas Utility Code.
(e) Micro network nodes. No application fee is required for a micro network node if the installation is attached
on lines between poles or node support poles.
(f) Collocation of network nodes on service poles. Subject to the city's pole service agreement, the collocation
of network nodes on city service poles shall be at a rate as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code.
(g) City-owned municipal utility poles. A network provider shall pay an annual pole attachment rate for the
collocation of a network node supported by or installed on a city-owned utility pole based upon the pole
attachment rate consistent with section 54.024 of the Texas Utilities Code, applied on a per-foot basis.
(h) The city shall not seek or accept in-kind services in lieu of or as additional payment or consideration from
any user of the public rights-of-way for use of the public rights-of-way.
Sec. 3.11.103 Indemnity
As provided in section 284.302 of the code, a wireless network provider shall indemnify, defend, and hold the
city harmless from and against all liability, damages, cost, and expense, including reasonable attorney's fees,
arising from injury to person or property proximately caused by the negligent act or omission of the network
provider. The city shall promptly notify the network provider of any claims, demands, or actions (“claims”)
covered by this indemnity after which the network provider shall defend the claims. The network provider shall
have the right to defend and compromise the claims. The city shall cooperate in the defense of the claims. The
foregoing indemnity obligations shall not apply to claims arising solely from the negligence of the city;
however, they shall apply in the case of all claims which arise from the joint negligence of the network provider
and the city; provided that in such cases, the amount of the claims for which the city shall be entitled to
indemnification shall be limited to that portion attributable to the network provider. Nothing in this section shall
be construed as waiving any governmental immunity available to the city under state law or waiving any
defenses of the parties under state law.
Sec. 3.11.104 Effect on other utilities and telecommunication providers
Nothing in this division shall govern attachment of network nodes on poles and other structures owned or
operated by investor-owned electric utilities, electric cooperatives, telephone cooperatives, or
telecommunication providers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/508
(Ordinance 2017-09-11(4D) adopted 9/11/17)
ARTICLE 3.12 COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 3.12.001–3.12.030 Reserved
Division 2. Vacant Structures
Sec. 3.12.031 Definitions
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Building. Any enclosed structure designed for use as a habitation or for a commercial use, including engaging in
trade or manufacture.
City building official or building official. The designated building official for the city or his or her designated
representative.
City council or council. The city council of the city.
City engineer. The city engineer for the city or his or her designated representative.
City manager. The chief administrative officer designated by ordinance, or his or her designated representative.
City staff. The officers, employees and agents of the city assigned and designated from time to time by the city
manager and/or council, including but not limited to the city planner or city engineer, to review, comment and/or
report on issues with the enforcement of this division.
Owner. The person that owns the real property on which a building is situated, according to the real property
records of the county in which the property is located; or the records of the appraisal district in which the
property is located.
Secured. That all accessible means of ingress and egress to the vacant structure, including but not limited to all
exterior doorways and windows are locked so as to prevent unauthorized entry by vagrants and criminals.
Structure. That which is built or constructed.
Temporarily secured. That all accessible means of ingress and egress to the vacant structure, including but not
limited to all exterior doorways and windows are covered with plywood which has been nailed or bolted in place
so as to prevent unauthorized entry by vagrants and criminals.
Unit. A part of a building distinctly separated from other spaces within the building. It must be directly
accessible from an outer door or through an interior door in a shared hallway rather than by walking through
another building space.
Vacant structure. That all lawful commercial activity at the building has ceased, or reasonably appears to have
ceased, for 150 days; or the building contains more than three units (single building subdivided for multiple
businesses), 75 percent or more of which have not been used lawfully, or reasonably appear not to have been
used lawfully, for more than 150 days. Vacant structures have a water account but is not active.
Sec. 3.12.032 Applicability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/508
This division shall apply to all commercial vacant structures, which are now in existence or which may hereafter
be constructed or converted from other uses and which are in the city limits.
Sec. 3.12.033 Registration required
(a) An owner is required to register their building as vacant when they have no active water account with the
city or have it up for sale either by person or with a local agent. A person commits an offense if the person owns
a vacant building and fails to register within ninety (90) days from the date that written notice is issued by the
city building official to the owner. Written notice shall be issued to the vacant structure owner by means of
personal service, by first class mail to his/her last known address according to the Milam Appraisal District
records, or by posting on the property.
(b) Upon issuance of notice to register the vacant structure, the owner shall submit a registration application
with the city building official. The registration application shall be submitted on forms provided by the city. The
registration application shall include the following information supplied by the applicant:
(1) The address and legal description of the property.
(2) Name, mailing address, telephone number, and email address of all owners. Corporation or
corporate entities shall submit the same information pertaining to their registered agent.
(3) Name, address, and telephone number for any third party who the owner has entered into a
contract or agreement with for property management.
(4) Name and address of all known lienholders, tenants, and all other parties with an ownership or
possessory interest in the structure.
(5) Name, address, and [telephone number] of a person to contact in an emergency.
(6) Proof of comprehensive liability insurance for the property, of no less than $500,000.00 for
damages and personal injury, or $100,000.00 for personal injury in any one accident and a surety
bond for the value of the structure if insurance for the structure cannot be obtained. Said value shall
be the appraised value as determined by the Milam Appraisal District. This subsection is not
applicable to single-family residential structures. The insurance required herein shall remain in full
force and effect at all times during the registration term. Such insurance coverage shall specifically
name the city as an additional-insured. This insurance coverage shall cover all perils arising from the
activities relative to this agreement. A registration applicant shall be responsible for any deductibles
stated in the policy and shall not cause such insurance or bond to be canceled nor permit such
insurance or bond to lapse. All insurance certificates shall include a clause to the effect that the policy
shall not be canceled, reduced, restricted or otherwise limited until forty-five (45) days after the city
has received written notice as evidenced by a return receipt of registered or certified mail.
(7) Complete a vacant building plan containing a plan of action and time line for correcting all
existing violations, maintaining the building while vacant, renovating or repairing the building,
occupying or selling the building, and/or demolition of the building. The vacant building plan must
be updated every six (6) months that the building is required to be registered.
(8) Provide the number of buildings, dwelling units, swimming pools, spas, located in or on the
premises of the vacant building and the total area in square feet of the building, the number of stories
contained in the vacant building, the area in square feet of each story, and whether each story is
above below or below ground level and any other information reasonably necessary for use by first
responders in the event of a fire or other catastrophic event.
(9) Property owner shall post “No Trespass” signs on the property front door or window.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/508
(10) Vacant structure owners shall provide written notice to the city building official, including a
copy of the deed, of a change in ownership of the property and/or contact information for either the
owner or the designated manager. Written notice shall be provided to the city no later than 30 days
after said changes have occurred.
(c) Continued annual registration (from the original date of vacancy) of the property by the vacant structure
owner is required until said structure is deemed occupied and in compliance with all relevant code requirements
by the city building official.
(d) The vacant property will be reviewed annually by the city building official for compliance with section
3.12.036 of this division.
(e) The results of the review by the city building official may require the owner employ a structural engineer
to determine the existence of structural damage.
Sec. 3.12.034 Registration fees
A vacant structure property owner shall tender an annual registration fee in the amount established in the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code for all structures except single-family residential structures, plus an
inspection charge in an amount established in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. The registration fee
shall be pro-rated for the first time a property is registered with the city. Subsequent annual registration fees shall
be due and postmarked no later than January 31st of each year.
Sec. 3.12.035 Property manager or agent
(a) An owner of a vacant structure must designate a local manager for said structure and include the relevant
contact information for the designated manager upon registering the property with the city. Property managers
shall act as agents for the property owner for purposes of accepting legal service, however the vacant property
owner remains personally liable in criminal prosecutions for code violations.
(b) The property manager or agent must be available at the number listed at all times in the event of an
emergency or catastrophe. For all vacant properties except for single-family residential structures: the name and
telephone number of the property manager or agent must be posted at the front of the building, in large, legible
print.
Sec. 3.12.036 Standard of care for vacant property
The standard of care for all vacant structures shall be in accordance with the International Building Code, 2012
edition and any and all requirements of chapter 3 of this Code of Ordinances and amendments thereto. Failure to
maintain the vacant structure to the standard of care specified by the city is a violation of this division.
Neighboring businesses are encouraged to report vacant buildings/buildings in disrepair to the city code
enforcement official for action.
Sec. 3.12.037 Exemptions
An owner or an owner's authorization agent may apply for an exemption to the registration fee on an annual
basis. The city shall issue the exemption provided herein upon a finding that the applicant has complied with all
requirements for issuance of an exemption and the applicant has not made a false statement as to a material
matter in the application. A fee waiver is only valid for twelve (12) months.
(1) A vacant building which has suffered fire damage or damage caused by extreme weather
conditions may be exempted for a period of one (1) year from the date of the from the registration fee
this exemption is for the duration of one (1) year from the date of the fire or extreme weather event
[sic].
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/508
(2) A property owner who is determined to be indigent by the city must register the property and is
otherwise subject to this division but shall be exempt from the registration fees.
(3) Representatives of a property owner who is deceased and such deceased owner's estate is
subject to formal administration in the probate court must register the property and are otherwise
subject to this division but shall be exempt from the registration fees.
(4) A property owner who has obtained a building permit and is progressing in an expedient
manner to prepare the premises for occupancy must register the property and is otherwise subject to
this division but shall be exempt from the registration fees.
(5) Single-family residential structures are exempt from registration and registration fees.
Sec. 3.12.038 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions or terms of this division, or shall fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, except where a different penalty has been established by state law for such offense in
which event the penalty shall be fixed by state law and if deemed a violation of any provision which governs fire
safety, zoning or public health or sanitation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day the violation exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. The penalty provided herein shall be in addition to any other enforcement remedies that the city may
have under city ordinance and/or state law. Nothing herein shall preclude the city from taking administrative or
civil action as may be permitted by law.
(Ordinance 2017-07-10(9A) adopted 7/10/17)
CHAPTER 4
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
ARTICLE 4.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 4.01.001 Occupation tax on coin-operated machines
There is hereby assessed against the operator of each coin-operated machine, as defined in V.T.C.A.,
Occupations Code, chapter 2153, in the city, an occupation tax of one-fourth (1/4) of the state tax, per year per
machine. The occupation tax imposed hereby shall be due and payable to the city tax collector at the time the
operator pays the annual state tax on each coin-operated machine. (1996 Code, art. 4.800; Ordinance adopting
Code)
State law reference–Taxation of coin-operated machines, V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, sec. 2153.451.
ARTICLE 4.02 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES†
Sec. 4.02.001 Permit fee
The city shall levy and collect a fee equal to one-half (1/2) of the state fee from each premises licensed under the
Texas Liquor Control Act. (1996 Code, art. 1.700)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/508
State law references–Local fee authorized on alcoholic beverage permits, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 11.38; local fee
authorized on alcoholic beverage licenses, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code, sec. 61.36.
ARTICLE 4.03 GARAGE SALES
Sec. 4.03.001 Definitions
Garage sale. All sales entitled “garage sale,” “lawn sale,” “attic sale,” “rummage sale,” “flea market sale,” or
any similar casual sale of tangible personal property, not associated with a commercial business properly
licensed to do business in the city within an area properly zoned for such commercial business, which is
advertised by any means whereby the public at large is or can be made aware of the garage sale.
Goods. Includes any goods, warehouse merchandise or other property capable of being the object of a sale
regulated hereunder.
Person. Individuals, partnerships, voluntary associations, and corporations.
(Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 2, adopted 3/10/08)
Sec. 4.03.002 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article, or owning or occupying
real property on which a violation occurs, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, except where a different
penalty has been established by state law for such offense, and for any violation of any provision which governs
fire safety, zoning or public health or sanitation, which shall be punished by a penalty of fine not to exceed the
sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for such offense, and each and every day such violation is continued
shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 7, adopted 3/10/08)
Sec. 4.03.003 Exceptions
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or affect the following persons or sales:
(1) Persons selling goods pursuant to an order or process of a court of competent jurisdiction.
(2) Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public officials.
(3) Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal property which are
specifically named or described in the advertisement and which separate items do not exceed three
(3) in number.
(Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 6, adopted 3/10/08)
Sec. 4.03.004 Frequency and duration; hours
Garage sales shall not be conducted more than one time or for more than two consecutive days each calendar
quarter per year. In no event shall a garage sale be conducted either before 7:00 a.m. or after 7:00 p.m. on any
one day of sale. (Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 3, adopted 3/10/08)
Sec. 4.03.005 Removal of goods from public view after end of sale
All goods or tangible personal property, the object of a sale regulated hereunder, shall be removed from any
yard, lot, driveway or other outside location so that it is not capable of being viewed by the public from any
public roadway no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the end of the garage sale as specified in section
4.03.004 herein. (Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 4, adopted 3/10/08)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/508
Sec. 4.03.006 Signs
(a) The erection or placement of signs advertising a sale as regulated hereunder shall comply with section
14.02.123 regulating signs. However, any signs advertising a sale as regulated hereunder shall be exempt from
the permitting provisions of chapter 14.
(b) In addition, any and all signs placed or erected advertising a sale as regulated hereunder shall be removed
no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the end of the garage sale as specified in section 4.03.004 herein.
(Ordinance 2008-03-10 (5A), sec. 5, adopted 3/10/08)
ARTICLE 4.04 PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 4.04.001 Definitions
The following definitions shall apply to this article unless the context otherwise indicates:
Interstate commerce. Soliciting, selling, taking orders for, or offering to take orders for any goods, wares,
merchandise, photographs, magazines, or things which, at the time the order is taken, are in any federal district
or territory, any commonwealth, or any state other than Texas and shipped or introduced into the town in
fulfillment of such orders.
Itinerant vendor. Any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, who offers for sale food, beverages,
goods, merchandise, delivery, or services to be performed immediately or in the future, from a certain location
which is not within a building or structure for which a certificate of occupancy is required by the city. This term
shall not apply to businesses that operate from within a building or structure within the city for which a
certificate of occupancy is required but which display or sell food, beverages, goods, or merchandise outside the
building or structure. The term shall include itinerant merchant.
Motor vehicle. Any vehicle used for displaying, storing, or transporting of articles for sale by an itinerant vendor
which is required to be licensed and registered by the state department of motor vehicles. The term is to include
trailers, trucks, and automobiles.
Peddler. Any individual, whether a resident of this city or not, traveling by foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck
or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, for the sale of
goods, wares and merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future or immediate delivery,
or for services to be performed immediately or in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or
exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale or whether he or she is collecting advance payments on such
sales, or for proselytizing by any organization whether or not funds are solicited or exchanged. The word
“peddler” shall include the term “canvasser” or “solicitor.” The word “peddler” shall not include individuals
traveling to businesses, houses, or places at the invitation of the resident or owner.
Public way. All areas legally open to public use, such as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways,
parkways, alleys, and parks, as well as the interior of and areas surrounding public buildings.
Special event. Any occasion, including, but not limited to, fairs, shows, exhibitions, city-wide celebrations,
festivals, etc., within a specifically defined area of the city for a period of time established by the council.
Stand. Any newsstand, table, bench, booth, rack, handcart, pushcart, vehicle or any other fixture or device used
for the display or storage of articles offered for sale by an itinerant vendor or peddler. Such stands must be
located at least ten (10) feet away from all property lines adjacent to a street. All stands must be removed from
the property on which business is conducted each day.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/508
Transient merchant. Any individual, whether a resident of this town or not, who sells commodities from private
premises but remains at one place for the purpose of temporary periods only. This shall include merchants who
sell goods from vehicles along roadways; however, such sales are prohibited except on private property and only
with the permission of the owner of the property and proof of such permission.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.501, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.002 Penalty
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this article or failing to observe any provisions
hereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code for each offense, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ordinance 2011-01-10
(6A), sec. 4.516, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.003 Conducting business in public way
(a) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor to engage in business within any public
way within the city.
(b) Exemptions. This section specifically does not apply to the following:
(1) Itinerant vendors may locate within a designated public way in connection with a special event
approved by the city council and the appropriate body organizing and implementing the special
event;
(2) Farmers may sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them within a public way
and [at a] time designated by the city council;
(3) Ice cream vehicles may use the public ways provided they do not remain in one location for
longer than ten (10) minutes; or
(4) Peddlers may utilize streets and roads to travel from house to house or place to place in pursuit
of their business.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.502, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.004 Entering residential property; continuing unwanted solicitation
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor of merchandise or services to go on private residential
property unless specifically requested or invited by the owner or occupant of such private residence. Continued
efforts to peddle or to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the peddler/solicitor that he/she
does not wish to give anything or to buy anything from that peddler/solicitor is prohibited. (Ordinance 2011-01-
10 (6A), sec. 4.503, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.005 Display of “no soliciting” notice
It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor to go to any property [or] establishment for the purpose
of taking orders or the selling of merchandise or services if the establishment has posted a sign which states “No
Soliciting.” This warning must be displayed prominently at the entrance to the business. (Ordinance 2011-01-10
(6A), sec. 4.504, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.006 Sales tax permit
(a) Required. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor to engage in business within the city
without having obtained and presented a sales tax permit issued by the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/508
(b) Exemptions. The following are exempt from having to present a sales tax permit:
(1) Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them;
(2) Nonprofit organizations; or
(3) Any other business or activity exempt by the state comptroller from collecting a state sales tax.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.505, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.007 Hours and place of operation
(a) It is unlawful for any person acting as a peddler or solicitor to go in or upon the premises of a private
residence in the city prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 8:00 p.m. of any day, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on
Sunday or any other federally designated holiday, or on any day where the Department of Homeland Security
has declared an orange or red state of alert.
(b) No peddler or solicitor may peddle or solicit in the public streets, or from medians in the streets, within the
city limits, or in any way block, obstruct, or unduly hinder passage on public streets within the city limits.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.512, adopted 1/10/11)
Secs. 4.04.008–4.04.040 Reserved
Division 2. Permit
Sec. 4.04.041 Required; exemptions
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any peddler or itinerant vendor to solicit or to engage in business
within the city without first obtaining a permit as provided in this article.
(b) Exemptions.
(1) The following are excluded from permitting provisions:
(A) Newspaper carriers;
(B) Farmers who sell agricultural products that were raised or grown by them when located
within a public way and [at a] a time designated by the city council;
(C) Locally based nonprofit organizations, or local chapters or affiliates of these
organizations;
(D) Religious proselytizing or distribution of religious literature;
(E) Political speech;
(F) Canvassers who attempt only to distribute handbills or to solicit political support or to
determine opinions or sentiments;
(G) Persons conducting activities sanctioned and/or approved by local schools; or
(H) Peddlers and itinerant vendors operating within a designated public way in connection
with a special event approved by the city council and appropriate body organizing and
implementing the special event.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/508
(2) Persons who are exempt from the permitting requirements pursuant to this section shall be
subject to the provisions of sections 4.04.007 (hours and place of operation) and 4.04.005 (display of
“no soliciting” notice), and are encouraged to notify the city manager as to the approximate dates of
the door-to-door activities, and the areas in which they will be working.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.506, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.042 Application
Any peddler or itinerant vendor desiring to engage in business within the city must file a written application for
permit, and which shall provide the following information:
(1) Applicant's name, telephone number, address, birthdate, physical description and either:
(A) Driver's license number and state; or
(B) Social security number and an official government-issued picture identification card;
(2) If the applicant is peddling, proselytizing, or making solicitations for any commercial,
charitable or political organization, the name, telephone number and address of such organization;
(3) Full and complete list of goods or services to be sold;
(4) If different than or in addition to the applicant, for each individual involved as a peddler or
itinerant vendor: name, telephone number, address, birthdate, physical description, and either:
(A) Driver's license number and state; or
(B) Social security number and official government-issued picture identification card
number;
(5) Description (year, make, type) and license plate number and state of all motor vehicles to be
used in soliciting and peddling;
(6) A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of any felonies of any nature or any other
crimes of moral turpitude in this state or any other state; and, if having been so convicted, a full
statement as to the place of conviction and crime for which the applicant was convicted;
(7) Documentation from the owner of the property from which the permittee will operate
indicating consent to locate and conduct activities at that site under the permit for the time period
covered by the permit (Agreement to Grant permission for Use of Private Property form), if
applicable;
(8) If the applicant is representing a company or organization, documentation from the
company/organization that authorizes the applicant as a representative (Certificate of Authority to
Represent Company form).
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.507, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.043 Fee
(a) Generally. A nonrefundable application fee for an itinerant merchant permit shall be as provided for in the
fee schedule found in appendix A of this code and be paid upon application for such permit. Provided, however,
when any person, firm, company, partnership, corporation or association engages in any activity mentioned
herein through one or more agents or employees, such firm, in addition to said fee mentioned, shall pay a license
fee, in accordance with the fee schedule above, for each agent or employee so engaged.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/508
(b) Exemptions. The following are exempt from the permit fee:
(1) Any individual soliciting or peddling for a philanthropic, charitable, political or religious
organization, provided such activity is for the sole exclusive benefit of that organization and so long
as the person engaging in such activity does not receive compensation in the form of a commission,
salary, or other monies paid to him for such activity; or
(2) Any individual engaged in interstate commerce.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.508, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.044 Investigation; grounds for denial
A copy of the application for permit may be referred to the city police chief, who may undertake an investigation
of the applicant's record and background such as shall be reasonably necessary to protect the public. An
application for permit under this article may be reasonably denied where:
(1) Required application information is incomplete or incorrect;
(2) The applicant is currently wanted on a warrant for arrest;
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a felony involving theft, fraud, bribery, or perjury; or
(4) The applicant has been convicted of any offense reportable by the city to the state department
of public safety or the Federal Bureau of Investigation under “Index Crimes” part I and/or group A of
the National Incident Base Reporting System or Crime Index programs or other law enforcement
reporting system (e.g., aggravated assault, burglary, forcible rape, larceny-theft, motor vehicle theft,
murder, non-negligent manslaughter, and robbery).
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.509, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.045 Issuance; changes in information; appeals
(a) The city secretary shall review all information relevant to the issuance of a peddler's/itinerant vendor's
license and make the determination of whether said license is granted or denied. Said determination shall be
made within five (5) working days of the filing of an application or registration information.
(b) If the city secretary finds that all of the conditions precedent to the issuance of an itinerant vendor permit
have been met and the applicant is qualified to receive a peddler and itinerant vendor permit, the city secretary
shall issue the permit. Permits will be issued for a period of ninety (90) consecutive days from the date of
issuance.
(c) Permits issued under the provisions of this article are not transferable under any circumstance.
(d) Any changes to agents or itinerant vendors must be submitted as an addendum to the original application
and subject to the same permit fees and investigation. Failure to register new agents will be grounds for
cancellation of the permit.
(e) If the permit is denied, the applicant may appeal this decision, in writing, to the city manager, who may
affirm, modify or reverse the denial.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.510, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.046 Bond
A one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) surety bond payable to the city shall be required for the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/508
(1) Solicitors requiring (i) payment for goods or services, (ii) cash deposits or payment for future
delivery or who require a contract of agreement to finance the sale of goods or services for future
delivery, or (iii) for services to be performed in the future, shall furnish to the city a bond with the
application in the amount listed above. This bond is to be signed by the applicant and a surety
company authorized to do business in the state, conditioned:
(A) For the final delivery of goods or services in accordance with the terms of any order
obtained;
(B) To indemnify purchasers for defects in material or workmanship that may exist in the
goods sold and that are discovered within 30 days after delivery; and
(C) For the use and benefit of persons, firms, or corporations that may make a purchase or
give an order to the principal of the bond or to the agent or employee of the principal of the
bond.
(2) If the applicant is a person, firm, or corporation engaging in solicitation activities through one
or more agents or employees, only one bond is required for the activities of all the agents or
employee solicitors.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.511, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.047 Suspension
(a) The city manager or designee may, upon documented complaint or violation of law, suspend and
confiscate a permit issued under this article. Upon such suspension, all activity must cease immediately and the
peddler or solicitor must vacate the premises.
(b) Peddlers and solicitors whose permits are suspended have three (3) business days during which to request
an administrative review, in writing, of the suspension by the city manager or designee. If the request for
administrative review is not made within three (3) working days, the permit shall be automatically revoked with
no further action by the city required.
(c) Upon the permittee's request, the city manager or designee shall provide the permittee with written notice
containing particulars of any and all complaints against him or her, and the time, date and place for an
administrative review of the suspension. The city manager or designee will conduct an administrative review to
determine whether the permit shall be restored or revoked.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.513, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.048 Revocation
(a) After the registration provided for in this article has been issued, the city manager or his/her duly
authorized representative may revoke such registration if it is found that:
(1) The registration was obtained by false representation;
(2) The holder of the registration engages in any type of “hard sell” or disruptive tactics;
(3) The holder of the registration has violated any ordinance of the city or any law of the state in
connection with any soliciting by such holder or in connection with the collecting or attempted
collection of any account due to such registration holder or his employer or in connection with the
repossession or attempted repossession of goods sold;
(4) The holder of the registration misrepresents:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/508
(A) The purpose of the peddling or solicitation;
(B) The affiliation of those engaged in the peddling or solicitation;
(C) The issuance of any permit under this article as an endorsement or recommendation of
the peddling or solicitation;
(5) The holder of the registration is convicted of a felony, misdemeanor, or ordinance violation
involving a sexual offense, assault, possession or sale of a controlled substance, or any violent act
against person or property; also any judgment based upon or conviction for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation or involving moral turpitude; or
(6) The holder of the registration has endangered the health or safety of a citizen of the city.
(b) Revocation of any permit shall bar the permittee from eligibility for any permit under this article for a
period of one (1) year from the date of revocation.
(Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.514, adopted 1/10/11)
Sec. 4.04.049 Appeals
If the applicant for a permit under this article or the holder of such permit is dissatisfied with any holding or
finding of the city manager or designee, he or she shall have the right to appeal to the city council by filing a
written notice of such appeal with the city secretary within ten (10) days from the making and filing of such
decision of the city manager or designee. Upon filing of such notice of appeal, the application for the permit and
all papers possessed by the city manager or designee in connection with such application and such permit shall
be delivered to the city council. The appeal shall be heard by the council at its next available meeting after the
filing of the notice of appeal. Any decision of the city manager or designee which is not properly appealed shall
be final. (Ordinance 2011-01-10 (6A), sec. 4.515, adopted 1/10/11)
ARTICLE 4.05 CABLE TELEVISION*
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 4.05.001–4.05.030 Reserved
Division 2. Rate Regulation
Sec. 4.05.031 Title
The following regulations are hereby adopted and shall be known as the cable TV regulations for the city. (1996
Code, sec. 4.601)
Sec. 4.05.032 Definitions
Unless otherwise apparent, the following definitions shall apply in this division:
Affiliated programmer. A programmer with an ownership interest of five percent (5%) or more including general
partnership interests, direct ownership interests, and stock interests in a corporation where such stockholders are
officers or directors or who directly or indirectly own five percent (5%) or more of the outstanding stock,
whether voting or nonvoting. Such interests include limited partnership interests of five percent (5%) or greater.
Basic service tier. The basic service tier shall, at a minimum, include all signals of domestic television broadcast
stations provided to any subscriber (except a signal secondarily transmitted by satellite carrier beyond the local
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/508
service area of such station, regardless of how such signal is ultimately received by the cable system), any
public, educational, and governmental programming required by the franchise to be carried on the basic tier, and
any additional video programming signals or service added to the basic tier by the cable operator.
Cable operator. Any person or group of persons:
(1) Who provides cable service over a cable system within the city under a franchise issued by the
city, and who directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable
system; or
(2) Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and
operation of such a cable system.
Cable programming service. Includes any video programming provided over a cable system, regardless of
service tier, including installation or rental of equipment used for the receipt of such video programming, other
than:
(1) Video programming carried on the basic service tier as defined in this section;
(2) Video programming offered on a pay-per-channel or pay-per-program basis; or
(3) A combination of multiple channels of pay-per-channel or pay-per-program video
programming offered on a multiplexed or time-shifted basis so long as the combined service:
(A) Consists of commonly identified video programming; and
(B) Is not bundled with any regulated tier of service.
Commission. The Federal Communications Commission.
Small system. A cable television system that serves fewer than 1,000 subscribers. The service area of a small
system is determined by the number of subscribers that are served by a system's principal headend, including
any other headends or microwave-receive sites that are technically integrated to the system's principal headend.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.602)
Sec. 4.05.033 Information to be provided on monthly subscriber bills
A cable operator must provide the following information to subscribers on monthly bills:
(1) A statement substantially the same as the following: “The basic service tier rates and related
equipment and installation charges are regulated by the city. If you have any questions or comments
regarding these rates, you may call or write the city at 140 W. Cameron, 512/446-2511”; and
(2) The FCC community unit identifier for the cable system.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.603)
Sec. 4.05.034 Negative option billing
A cable operator shall not charge a subscriber for any service or equipment that the subscriber has not
affirmatively requested by name. This provision, however, shall not preclude the addition or deletion of a
specific program from a service offering, the addition or deletion of specific channels from an existing tier of
service, or the restructuring or division of existing tiers of service that do not result in a fundamental change in
the nature of an existing service or tier of service, provided that such change is otherwise consistent with
applicable regulations. A subscriber's failure to refuse a cable operator's proposal to provide such service or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/508
equipment is not an affirmative request for service or equipment. A subscriber's affirmative request for service
or equipment may be made orally or in writing. (1996 Code, sec. 4.604)
Sec. 4.05.035 Subscriber bill itemization
(a) Cable operators may identify as a separate line item of each regular subscriber bill the following:
(1) The amount of the total bill assessed as a franchise fee.
(2) The amount of the total bill assessed to satisfy any requirements imposed on the cable operator
by the franchise agreement to support public, educational, or governmental channels or the use of
such channels.
(3) The amount of any other fee, tax, assessment, or charge of any kind imposed by any
governmental authority on the transaction between the operator and the subscriber. In order for a
governmental fee or assessment to be separately identified under this section, it must be directly
imposed by a governmental body on a transaction between a subscriber and an operator.
(b) The charge identified on the subscriber bill as the total charge for cable service should include all fees and
costs itemized pursuant to this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.605)
Sec. 4.05.036 Rates for basic service tier
(a) Generally. Basic service tier rates are subject to regulation by the city in order to assure that they are in
compliance with the requirements of 47 U.S.C. 543. Rates that are demonstrated, in accordance with this
division, not to exceed the initial permitted per-channel charge or the subsequent permitted per-channel charge
as described below, or the equipment charges as specified in section 4.05.037, will be accepted as in compliance.
The maximum monthly charge per subscriber for the basic service tier offered by a cable operator shall consist
of a permitted per-channel charge multiplied by the number of channels on the tier, plus a charge for franchise
fees. The maximum monthly charges for the basic service tier shall not include any charges for equipment or
installations. Charges for equipment and installations are to be calculated separately pursuant to section 4.05.037
of this division.
(b) Initial permitted per-channel charge.
(1) For purposes of this section, the initial date of regulation for the basic service tier shall be the
date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that:
(A) The city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier;
and
(B) This division has been adopted by the city.
(2) For purposes of this section, rates “in effect on the initial date of regulation” or “in effect on
September 30, 1992” shall be the rates charged to subscribers for service received on that respective
date.
(3) The permitted per-channel charge on the initial date of regulation shall be, at the election of the
cable operator, either:
(A) A charge determined pursuant to a cost-of-service proceeding; or
(B) The charge specified in subsection (i), (ii), or (iii) of this subsection, as applicable:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/508
(i) If the operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in effect
on the date of initial regulation is equal to or below the benchmark per-channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the date of initial regulation,
then the permitted per-channel charge shall be the per-channel charge in effect on the date
of initial regulation, adjusted for equipment.
(ii) If:
a. The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in
effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per-channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of
regulation; and
b. The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in
effect on September 30, 1992, was above the benchmark per-channel charge;
then the permitted per-channel charge is nine-tenths of the per-channel charge
in effect on September 30, 1992, but no lower than the benchmark per-channel
charge, additionally adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the
initial date of regulation, for equipment, and for any changes in the number of
channels offered on the basic service tiers.
(iii) If:
a. The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in
effect on the date of initial regulation is above the benchmark per-channel charge, as
adjusted forward for inflation from September 30, 1992, until the initial date of
regulation; and
b. The operator's per-channel charge for the basic service tier and equipment in
effect on September 30, 1992, was below the benchmark per-channel charge;
then the permitted per-channel charge is the benchmark rate per-channel
adjusted for inflation from September 30, 1992, to the initial date of regulation,
for equipment, and for any changes in the number of channels offered on the
basic service tier.
(c) Subsequent permitted per-channel charge. After the initial date of regulation, the permitted channel charge
for the basic service tier shall be, at the election of the cable operator, either:
(1) A per-channel rate determined pursuant to a cost-of-service showing; or
(2) The prior permitted per-channel charge previously approved by the city, adjusted for inflation
and external costs in accordance with the price cap requirements set forth in subsection (d) of this
section.
(d) Price cap requirements.
(1) Inflation adjustments. Permitted per-channel charges for the basic service tier may be adjusted
periodically on account of inflation. Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of
inflation shall be based on changes in the Gross National Product Price Index (GNP-PI) published by
the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the United States Department of Commerce.
(2) External costs. Permitted per-channel charges for the basic service tier may also be adjusted for
changes in external costs measured on a per-channel, per-subscriber basis. To the extent external cost
increases are greater or less than the GNP-PI for the relevant period, the per-channel charge will be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/508
adjusted accordingly. Per-channel charges may not be increased if external costs other than franchise
fees increase at a rate less than inflation. Permitted per-channel charges also shall be decreased on
account of external costs to the extent such costs decrease from previous levels.
(A) External costs shall consist of costs in the following categories:
(i) State and local taxes applicable to provision of cable television service;
(ii) Franchise fees;
(iii) Costs of complying with franchise requirements, including costs of providing
public, educational, and governmental access channels as required by the city;
(iv) Retransmission consent fees; and
(v) Programming costs.
(B) The permitted per-channel charge for the basic service tier shall be adjusted on account
of programming costs and retransmission consent fees only for programming or broadcast
signals offered on that tier.
(C) The permitted per-channel charge shall not be adjusted for costs of retransmission
consent fees or changes in those fees incurred prior to October 6, 1994.
(D) The starting date for adjustments on account of external costs for the basic service tier
shall be the initial date of regulation or 180 days from September 1, 1993, if the initial date of
regulation occurs on or after 180 days from September 1, 1993.
(E) Changes in franchise fees shall not result in an adjustment to permitted per-channel
charges, but rather shall be calculated separately as part of the maximum monthly charge per
subscriber for the basic service tier.
(F) Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of increases in costs of
programming obtained from affiliated programmers shall be the lesser of actual increases or the
previous permitted rate level increased by the amount of inflation.
(G) Adjustments to permitted per-channel charges on account of increases in costs of
programming shall be further adjusted to reflect any revenues received by the operator from the
programmer.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.606)
Sec. 4.05.037 Rates for equipment and installation used to receive basic service tier
(a) Scope. The equipment regulated under this section consists of all equipment in a subscriber's location that
is used to receive the basic service tier, regardless of whether such equipment is additionally used to receive
other tiers of regulated programming service and/or unregulated service. Such equipment shall include, but is not
limited to:
(1) Converter boxes;
(2) Remote control units;
(3) Connections for additional television receivers; and
(4) Other cable home wiring.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/508
Subscriber charges for such equipment shall not exceed charges based on actual costs in accordance with the
requirements set forth below.
(b) Unbundling. A cable operator shall establish rates for remote control units, converter boxes, other
customer equipment, installation, and additional connections separate from rates for the basic service tier. In
addition, the rates for such equipment and installations shall be unbundled one from the other.
(c) Equipment basket. A cable operator shall establish an equipment basket, which will include all costs
associated with providing customer equipment and installation under this section. Equipment basket costs shall
be limited to the direct and indirect material and labor costs of providing, leasing, installing, repairing, and
servicing customer equipment, as determined in accordance with the cost accounting and cost allocation
requirements of section 4.05.038. The equipment basket shall not include general administrative overhead,
including general marketing expenses. The equipment basket may include a reasonable profit.
(d) Hourly service charge. A cable operator shall establish charges for equipment and installation using the
hourly service charge (HSC) methodology. The HSC shall equal the operator's annual equipment basket costs,
excluding the purchase cost of customer equipment, divided by the total person-hours involved in installing,
repairing, and servicing customer equipment during the same period. The purchase cost of customer equipment
shall include the cable operator's invoice price plus all other costs incurred with respect to the equipment until
the time it is provided to the customer. The HSC is calculated according to the following formula:
HSC =
EB - CE
H
Where:
EB = Annual equipment basket cost;
CE = Annual purchase cost of all customer equipment; and
H = Person-hours involved in installing and repairing equipment per year.
(e) Installation charges. Installation charges shall be either:
(1) The HSC multiplied by the actual time spent on each individual installation; or
(2) The HSC multiplied by the average time spent on a specific type of installation.
(f) Remote charges. Monthly charges for rental of a remote control unit shall consist of the average annual
unit purchase cost of the type of remote leased, including acquisition price and incidental costs such as sales tax,
financing and storage up to the time it is provided to the customer, added to the product of the HSC times the
average number of hours annually repairing or servicing a remote, divided by 12 to determine the monthly lease
rate for a remote, according to the following formula:
Monthly Charge =
UCE + (HSC x HR)
12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/508
Where:
HR = Average hours repair per year; and
UCE = Average annual unit cost of remote.
Separate charges shall be established for each significantly different type of remote control unit.
(g) Other equipment charges. The monthly charges for rental of converter boxes and other customer
equipment shall be calculated in the same manner as for remote control units. Separate charges shall be
established for each significantly different type of converter box and each significantly different type of other
customer equipment.
(h) Additional connection charges. The costs of installation and monthly use of additional connections shall be
recovered as charges associated with the installation and equipment cost categories, and at rate levels determined
by the actual cost methodology presented in the subsections (e), (f), and (g) of this section. An operator may
recover additional programming costs and the costs of signal boosters on the customer's premises, if any,
associated with the additional connection as a separate monthly unbundled charge for additional connections.
(i) Charges for equipment sold. A cable operator may sell customer premises equipment to a subscriber. The
equipment price shall recover the operator's cost of the equipment, including costs associated with storing and
preparing the equipment for sale up to the time it is sold to the customer, plus a reasonable profit. An operator
may sell service contracts for the maintenance and repair of equipment sold to subscribers. The charge for a
service contract shall be the HSC times the estimated average number of hours for maintenance and repair over
the life of the equipment.
(j) Promotions. A cable operator may offer equipment or installation at charges below those determined under
subsections (e) through (g) of this section, as long as those offerings are reasonable in scope in relation to the
operator's overall offerings in the equipment basket and not unreasonably discriminatory. Operators may not
recover the cost of a promotional offering by increasing charges for other equipment basket elements, or by
increasing programming service rates above the maximum monthly charge per subscriber prescribed by this
division. As part of a general cost-of-service showing, an operator may include the cost of promotions in its
general system overhead costs.
(k) Franchise fees. Equipment charges may include a properly allocated portion of franchise fees paid to the
city.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.607)
Sec. 4.05.038 Cost accounting and cost allocation requirements
(a) Applicability. The requirements of this section are applicable for purposes of rate adjustments on account
of external costs and for cost-of-service showings.
(b) Use of generally accepted accounting principles. Cable operators shall maintain their accounts in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, except as otherwise directed by the city.
(c) Accounts required. Cable operators shall maintain accounts in a manner that will enable identification of
appropriate costs and application of the city's cost assignment and allocation procedures to cost categories
necessary for rate adjustments due to changes in external costs and for cost-of-service showings. Such categories
shall be sufficiently detailed and supported to permit verification and audit against the company's accounting.
(d) Accounting level. Except to the extent indicated below, cable operators shall aggregate expenses and
revenues at either the franchise, system, regional, or company level in a manner consistent with practices of the
operator as of April 3, 1992. However, in all events, cable operators shall identify at the franchise level their
costs of franchise requirements, franchise fees, local taxes, and local programming.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/508
(e) Cost allocation requirements.
(1) For purposes of establishing expenses at the franchise level, cable operators shall allocate
expenses and revenues aggregated at higher levels to the franchise level based on the ratio of the total
number of subscribers served at the franchise level to the total number of subscribers served at the
higher level.
(2) Except to the extent indicated below, all categories of costs allocated to, or identified at, the
franchise level shall be allocated to the basic service tier based on the ratio of channels in the basic
tier to the total number of channels offered in the franchise area, including nonregulated and leased
commercial access channels. These costs shall be allocated to each tier of cable programming
services based on the ratio of channels in that tier to the total number of channels offered in the
franchise area.
(3) Costs of programming and retransmission consent fees, however, shall be allocated only to the
tier on which the programming or broadcast signal at issue is offered.
(4) Costs of franchise fees shall be allocated among equipment and installations, program service
tiers and subscribers in a manner that is most consistent with the methodology of assessment of
franchise fees by the city.
(5) Costs of public, educational, and governmental access channels carried on the basic tier shall
be directly assigned to the basic tier where possible.
(f) Common costs. Expenses which cannot be assigned to any single expense or service category shall be
described as common costs. Common costs shall be allocated to expense categories as follows:
(1) Wherever possible, common costs are to be allocated to service cost categories based on direct
analysis of the origin of the costs themselves.
(2) When direct analysis is not possible, common costs shall, if possible, be allocated to service
cost categories based on an indirect, cost-causative linkage to other costs directly assigned or
allocated to the service cost category.
(3) When neither direct nor indirect measures of cost allocation can be found, common costs shall
be allocated to each service cost category based on the ratio of all costs directly assigned and
attributed to a service cost category over total costs directly assignable and attributable.
(g) Unrelated expenses and revenues. Cable operators shall exclude from cost categories used to develop rates
for the provision of basic service tier and equipment any direct or indirect expenses and revenues not related to
the provision of such services. Common costs of providing the basic service tier and equipment and unrelated
activities shall be allocated between them in accordance with subsection (f) of this section.
(h) Part-time channels. In situations where a single channel is divided on a part-time basis and is used to
deliver service associated with different tiers or with pay-per-channel or pay-per-view service, a reasonable and
documented allocation of that channel between services shall be required along with the associated revenues and
costs.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.608)
Sec. 4.05.039 Costs of franchise requirements
(a) The costs of satisfying franchise requirements to support public, educational, and governmental channels
shall consist of the sum of:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/508
(1) All per-channel costs for the number of channels used to meet franchise requirements for
public, educational, and governmental channels;
(2) Any direct costs of meeting such franchise requirements; and
(3) A reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead.
(b) The costs of satisfying any other requirement under the franchise shall consist of the direct and indirect
costs, including a reasonable allocation of general and administrative overhead.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.609)
Sec. 4.05.040 Charges for customer changes
(a) This section shall govern charges for any changes in service tiers or equipment provided to the subscriber
that are initiated at the request of a subscriber after initial service installation.
(b) The charge for customer changes in service tiers effected solely by coded entry on a computer terminal or
by other similarly simple methods shall be a nominal amount, not exceeding actual costs, as defined in
subsection (c) of this section.
(c) The charge for customer changes in service tiers or equipment that involve more than coded entry on a
computer or other similarly simple method shall be based on actual cost. The actual cost charge shall be either
the HSC, as defined in section 4.05.037 of this division, multiplied by the number of person-hours needed to
implement the change, or the HSC multiplied by the average number of person-hours involved in implementing
customer changes.
(d) A cable operator may establish a higher charge for changes effected solely by coded entry on a computer
terminal or by other similarly simple methods, subject to approval by the city, for a subscriber changing service
tiers more than two times in a twelve-month period, except for such changes ordered in response to a change in
price or channel line-up. If a cable system adopts such an increased charge, the cable system must notify all
subscribers in writing that they may be subject to such a charge for changing service tiers more than the
specified number of times in any twelve-month period.
(e) Downgrade charges that are the same as, or lower than, upgrade charges are evidence of the
reasonableness of such downgrade charges.
(f) For thirty (30) days after notice of retiering or rate increases, a customer may obtain changes in service
tiers at no additional charge.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.610)
Sec. 4.05.041 Notification of proposed rate increase
(a) A cable operator shall provide written notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for
the basic service tier or associated equipment at least thirty (30) days before any proposed increase is effective.
The notice shall include a provision stating that protests to such prices may be filed with the city at 505 W.
Cameron Street. The notice shall also include a statement that such protests must be filed with the city no later
than thirty (30) days after the notice is received by the subscriber.
(b) In addition to the notice required in subsection (a), the cable operator shall give the city a minimum of (30)
days' advance written notification of any changes in rates for cable programming service or associated
equipment.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.611; Ordinance adopting Code)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/508
Sec. 4.05.042 Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates
A cable operator shall file its schedule of rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the city
within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been certified by the
commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier, or by November 15, 1993, whichever is later. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.612)
Sec. 4.05.043 City review of basic cable rates and equipment costs
(a) After a cable operator has submitted to the city for review its existing rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including increases in the baseline channel
charge that results from reductions in the number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or
the proposed rates will become effective after thirty (30) days from the date of submission to the city. Provided,
however, that the city may toll this 30-day deadline for an additional time by issuing a brief written order as
described in subsection (d) within thirty (30) days of the rate submission explaining that it needs additional time
to review the rates. The city may, at any time, require the cable operator to produce additional information,
including proprietary information, that the city deems necessary in order to make a rate determination. If
proprietary information is provided, the provisions of section 4.05.044 hereof will apply to such information.
(b) Upon receipt by the city, the cable operator's submittal shall be available for public inspection and
copying. Comments on the submittal by interested persons may be submitted in writing or orally at a city council
meeting held at any time during the initial 30-day review period. Written comments shall be addressed to the
city manager and must be received prior to the end of the 30-day review period.
(c) If a cable operator submits a proposed rate increase for review that appears to exceed the presumptively
reasonable level and does not include a cost-of-service showing to justify the rate, the city will permit the cable
operator to cure this deficiency and submit a cost-of-service showing.
(d) If the city is unable to determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the existing
or proposed rates are within the permitted basic service tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined in
sections 4.05.036 and 4.05.037 hereof, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant to
sections 4.05.038 and 4.05.045 hereof, seeking to justify a rate above the basic service tier charge as defined in
sections 4.05.036 and 4.05.037 hereof, the city may toll the 30-day deadline in subsection (a) of this section to
request and/or consider additional information or to consider the comments from interested parties as follows:
(1) For an additional ninety (90) days in cases not involving cost-of-service showings; or
(2) For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service showings.
The order tolling the effective date of the proposed rate shall explain why the city could not make the necessary
determination, and it shall also provide the cable operator an opportunity to cure any deficiencies in its original
filing. During the additional time periods provided in this subsection, comments from interested persons may be
submitted in writing, as provided in subsection (b) of this section, or orally during at least one city council
meeting during the period of abatement.
(e) If the city has availed itself of the additional ninety (90) or 150 days permitted in subsection (d) of this
section, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then the proposed rates will go into effect
at the end of the ninety (90) or 150 day periods, or existing rates will remain in effect at such times, subject to
refunds if the city subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates. Provided,
however, that, in order to order refunds, the city must have issued a brief written order to the cable operator by
the end of the ninety (90) or 150 day period permitted in subsection (d) of this section directing the operator to
keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of the rate in issue and on whose behalf such
amounts were paid.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.613)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/508
Sec. 4.05.044 Proprietary information
(a) If the city has required the cable operator to produce proprietary information under the provisions of this
division, the cable operator may submit therewith a request that such information not be made routinely
available for public inspection. A copy of the request shall be attached to and shall cover all of the materials to
which it applies and all copies of those materials. If feasible, the materials to which the request applies shall be
physically separated from any materials to which the request does not apply. If this is not feasible, the portion of
the materials to which the request applies shall be identified.
(b) Each such request shall contain a statement of the reasons for withholding the materials from inspection
and of the facts upon which those reasons are based. If the request is that the materials be withheld from
inspection for a limited period of time, that period shall be specified.
(c) Casual requests which do not comply with the requirements of subsections (a) and (b) of this section will
not be considered.
(d) Upon receipt of a request in compliance with subsections (a) and (b), the city will not grant routine public
access to the materials. A letter to that effect will be placed in a public file in lieu of the materials withheld from
public inspection.
(e) Provided, however, if a written request for the materials is received by the city pursuant to the Open
Records Act, chapter 552, Texas Government Code, the city will notify the person providing the materials of the
request for the materials. If the person providing the materials requests the city to do so, the city will request an
opinion from the attorney general, pursuant to the Open Records Act, regarding the public availability of the
materials. If the person providing the materials does not request the city to request an opinion from the attorney
general, the city may, at its option, either request such an opinion or provide the materials to the public.
(f) If the attorney general issues an opinion or letter ruling requiring the city to make the materials available to
the public, the materials will be made available for public inspection.
(g) If no request for confidentiality is submitted, the city assumes no obligation to consider the need for
nondisclosure.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.614)
Sec. 4.05.045 Burden of proof
(a) A cable operator has the burden of proving that its existing or proposed rates for basic service and
associated equipment comply with 47 U.S.C. 543 and sections 4.05.036 and 4.05.037 hereof.
(b) For an existing or a proposed rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment that is within the
permitted tier charge and actual cost of equipment as set forth in sections 4.05.036 and 4.05.037, the cable
operator must submit the appropriate FCC form to the city.
(c) For an existing or a proposed rate for the basic service tier that exceeds the permitted tier charge as set
forth in sections 4.05.036 and 4.05.037 hereof, the cable operator must submit to the city a cost-of-service
showing to justify the proposed rates. The cost-of-service showing must [be] in conformance with accounting
and cost allocation requirements as adopted and amended by the commission for cable system operators.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.615)
Sec. 4.05.046 Small systems
(a) Option 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/508
(1) A small system, as defined in section 4.05.032, may certify that the small system's initial rates
for basic service and associated equipment comply with section 4.05.036 hereof. A certification by a
small system under this section shall be filed with the city within thirty (30) days of receiving written
notification from the city that the city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the
basic service tier. The certification shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the
system, and shall be verified.
(2) Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon
complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to
verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of
section 4.05.044 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public.
(3) As used in this section, “initial rates” shall mean those rates charged by the small system
operator on the date on which the city gives written notice to the cable operator that:
(A) The city has been certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier;
and
(B) This division has been adopted by the city.
(4) If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small
system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for nonsmall
systems in this division.
(5) Subsequent rate filings by a small system operator shall comply in all respects with the
provisions of this division.
(b) Option 2.
(1) A small system, as defined in section 4.05.032, may certify that the small system's rates for
basic service and associated equipment, and subsequent rate increases, comply with section 4.05.036
hereof. A certification by a small system under this section for its initial rates shall be filed with the
city within thirty (30) days of receiving written notification from the city that the city has been
certified by the commission to regulate rates for the basic service tier. Certifications for subsequent
rate increases shall be filed with the city at the same time that notice is given to the small system's
subscribers of the proposed rate increase, in conformance with section 4.05.041 hereof. All
certifications shall be in writing, shall be signed by the general manager of the system, and shall be
verified.
(2) Such certification shall be subject to verification by the city on its own motion or upon
complaint by a subscriber. The city may request additional information from the operator in order to
verify the certification. In the event proprietary information is requested by the city, the provisions of
section 4.05.044 hereof shall control the availability of such information to the public.
(3) If the city determines that the small system's certification is in error, it shall so notify the small
system operator and shall require the small system to comply with all filing requirements for nonsmall
systems in this division.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.616)
Sec. 4.05.047 Written decision
(a) The city shall issue a written decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it disapproves an initial rate
for the basic service tier or associated equipment in whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in
whole or in part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the objections of interested
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/508
parties. The city is not required to issue a written decision that approves an unopposed existing or proposed rate
for the basic service tier or associated equipment.
(b) Public notice shall be given of any written decision required in subsection (a) of this section, by making
the text of any written decision available to the public, and by publication of the decision one time in the official
newspaper of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.617)
Sec. 4.05.048 Reduction of rates; prescription of rates
(a) The city may order a cable operator to implement a prospective reduction in basic service tier or associated
equipment rates where necessary to bring rates into compliance with the standards set forth in sections 4.05.036
and 4.05.037 hereof.
(b) The city may prescribe a reasonable rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment after it
determines that a proposed rate is unreasonable.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.618)
Sec. 4.05.049 Refunds
(a) The city may order a cable operator to refund to subscribers that portion of previously paid rates
determined by the city to be in excess of the permitted tier charge or above the actual cost of equipment, unless
the operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing which justifies the rate charged as reasonable. Before
ordering a cable operator to refund previously paid rates to subscribers, the city shall give the operator notice
and opportunity to comment. The operator's opportunity to comment upon the proposed refunds may be at any
meeting of the city council during the city's period of review of the operator's rates. If the city has extended its
review period under section 4.05.043(d), and has issued an accounting order under section 4.05.043(e), then the
operator, prior to refunds being ordered, may request an opportunity to appear before the city council to
comment upon the proposed refunds.
(b) An operator's liability for refunds is limited to a one-year period, except that an operator that fails to
comply with a valid rate order issued by the city shall be liable for refunds commencing from the effective date
of such order until such time as it complies with such order.
(c) The refund period shall run as follows:
(1) From the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction back in time to September
1, 1993, or one year, whichever is shorter.
(2) From the date the city issues an accounting order pursuant to section 4.05.043(e) hereof, and
ending on the date the operator implements a prospective rate reduction ordered by the city, or one
year, whichever is shorter.
(d) The cable operator, in its discretion, may implement a refund in the following manner:
(1) By returning overcharges to those subscribers who actually paid the overcharges, either through
direct payment or as a specifically identified credit to those subscribers' bills; or
(2) By means of a prospective percentage reduction in the rates for the basic service tier or
associated equipment to cover the cumulative overcharge. This shall be reflected as a specifically
identified, one-time credit on prospective bills to the class of subscribers that currently subscribe to
the cable system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/508
(e) Refunds shall include interest computed at applicable rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for
tax refunds and additional tax payments.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.619)
Sec. 4.05.050 Governing law; venue
This division shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of the state and city codes to the extent
that such codes are not in conflict with or in violation of the constitution and laws of the United States or the
state. All obligations of the parties hereunder are performable in the county. In the event that any proceeding is
brought to enforce the terms of this division, the same shall be brought in the county. (1996 Code, sec. 4.620)
Sec. 4.05.051 Compliance with Open Meetings Act
It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this division is passed is open to the public
as required by law and that public notice of the time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required,
in accordance with chapter 551, Texas Government Code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.621)
ARTICLE 4.06 OIL AND GAS WELL DRILLING AND PRODUCTION
Sec. 4.06.001 Purpose
The exploration, development, and production of oil and gas in the city are activities that necessitate reasonable
regulation to ensure that all property owners, mineral and otherwise, have the right to peaceably enjoy their
property and its benefits and revenues. It is hereby declared to be the purpose of this article to establish
reasonable and uniform limitations, safeguards and regulations for present and future above ground activity
related to oil and gas operation including the exploring, drilling, developing, producing, transporting and storing
of oil and gas and other substances produced in association with oil and gas within the city to protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the public; minimize the potential impact to property and mineral rights owners,
protect the quality of the environment and encourage the orderly production of available mineral resources.
Sec. 4.06.002 Definitions
All technical industry words or phrases related to the drilling and production of oil and gas wells not specifically
defined in this article shall have the meanings customarily attributable thereto by prudent and reasonable oil and
gas industry operators. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandonment. As defined by the Texas Railroad Commission and includes the plugging of the well and the
restoration of any drill site as required by this article.
Above ground activity. Oil and gas operations that occur at or above the surface of the ground, as defined by HB
40.
Agent. A person designated or appointed by an operator to sign the application for a permit and other documents
on behalf the operator.
Ambient noise level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite
of sounds from all sources at the location, constituting the normal or existing level of environment noise at a
given location.
Building or habitable building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or
occupancy. The term “building” shall be construed as if followed by the words “or portions thereof.”
City. The City of Rockdale.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/508
City code. The Code of Ordinances of the City of Rockdale.
City attorney. The city attorney of the City of Rockdale.
Closed loop mud system. A system utilized while drilling so that reserve pits are not used and instead steel bins
are used to collect all drilling waste.
Commission. The Texas Railroad Commission.
Daylight. The period from sunup to sundown as established for the city area by the NOAA Solar Calculator,
adjusted for daylight savings as necessary.
Decible (dB). A unit of measuring the intensity of a sound/noise and is equal to 10 times the logarithm to the
base 10 of the ratio of the measured sound pressure squared to a reference pressure, which is 20 micropascals.
Derrick. Any portable framework, tower, mast and/or structure, which is required or used in connection with
drilling or re-working a well for the production of oil and gas.
Drilling. Digging or boring a new well for the purpose of exploring for, developing or producing oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons, or for the purpose of injecting gas, water or any other fluid or substance into the earth.
Drilling operations. Drilling with drill pipe and pit, running casing, circulating mud and fluids, tripping tools
and setting production casing/tubing.
Drill site. The premises used during the drilling or reworking of a well or wells located there and subsequent life
of a well or wells or any associated operation.
Drought contingency plan. The City of Rockdale drought contingency plan.
Exploration. Geologic or geophysical activities, including seismic surveys, related to the search for oil, gas or
other subsurface hydrocarbons.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city as defined by state law.
Fee schedule. The list of fees found in appendix A of this code of the city.
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA). A separate administration within the United States
Department of Transportation (USDOT), established on January 1, 2000 pursuant to the Motor Carrier Safety
Improvement Act of 1999, dedicated to improving the safety of commercial motor vehicles (CMV) and saving
lives.
Fire department. The volunteer fire department of the city.
Firewall, berm and/or secondary containment. The rules and regulations of the commission and other state or
federal agencies describing the methods used to contain spills from storage tanks.
Flowback. The process of flowing a completed/fractured well for the purpose of recovering water and residual
sand from the gas stream prior to sending gas down a sales line.
Fracture or fracturing. The process of breaking up/fracture stimulation fracture of a rock formation.
Gas. Any fluid, either combustible or noncombustible, which is produced in a natural state from the earth and
which maintains a gaseous or rarefied state at standard temperature and pressure conditions and/or the gaseous
components or vapors occurring in or derived from petroleum or natural gas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/508
Inspector. The city inspector or inspectors designated by the city manager of the city, including city staff or
technical advisory consultants.
Nighttime. The period between sundown to sunup as established for the city area by the NOAA Solar Calendar,
adjusted for daylight savings as necessary.
Oil and gas well. Any well drilled, to be drilled, or used for the intended or actual production of oil or natural
gas. The terms “oil” or “gas” used in this article shall be interchangeable and shall mean either an oil well or gas
well operation.
Operation site. The area used for development and production and all operational activities associated with oil or
gas after drilling activities are complete.
Operator. For each well, the person listed on the railroad commission form W-1 or form P-4 for an oil or gas
well that is, or will be, actually in charge and in control of drilling, maintaining, operating, pumping or
controlling any well, including, without limitation, a unit operator. If the operator, as herein defined, is not the
lessee under an oil or gas lease of any premises affected by the provisions of this article, then such lessee shall
also be deemed to be an operator. In the event that there is no oil or gas lease relating to any premises affected by
this article, the owner of the fee mineral estate in the premises shall be deemed an operator.
Pad site. The operations area containing the well or wells and accessory building and equipment.
Permit. The surface permit required by the city for any proposed drill site.
Person. Both the singular and the plural and means a natural person, a corporation, association, guardian,
partnership, receiver, trustee, administrator, executor, and fiduciary or representative of any kind.
Protected use. A habitable building, including but not limited to, a residence, religious institution, public
building, hospital building, school or public park. Structures such as equipment buildings, pump houses and
agricultural barns that are occupied on a daily basis for less than four (4) hours each day shall not be considered
a protected use.
Public building. All buildings used or designed to and intended to be used for the purpose of assembly of
persons for such purposes as deliberation, entertainment, amusement, or health care. Public buildings include,
but shall not be limited to, churches, schools, theaters, assembly halls, auditoriums, armories, mortuary chapels,
dance halls, exhibition halls, museums, gymnasiums, bowling lanes, libraries, skating rinks, courtrooms,
restaurants, hospitals.
Public park. Any land area dedicated to and/or maintained by the city for traditional parklike recreational
purposes.
Religious institution. Any building in which persons regularly assemble for religious worship and activities
intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship or for propagating a particular form of religious
belief.
Residence. A house, duplex, apartment, townhouse, condominium, manufactured home or other building
designed for dwelling purposes, including those for which a building permit has been issued on the date the
application for an surface permit is filed with the city secretary.
Rights-of-way. Public rights-of-way including streets, easements and other property within the city and which is
dedicated to the use and benefit of the public.
Safety data sheet (SDS). Formerly known as MSDS or material safety data sheets to communicate the hazards of
hazardous chemical products.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/508
School. Any public and private, primary and secondary educational facilities providing education up through and
including the twelfth grade level and any licensed day care centers, meaning a facility licensed by the state or by
the city that provides care, training, education, custody, treatment or supervision for more than six children
under 14 years of age, and for less than 24 hours per day.
Street. Any street, highway, sidewalk, alley, avenue, recessed parking area or other public right-of-way,
including the entire right-of-way.
Surface permit. The permit required by the city signifying the city regulation of the above ground activity related
to an approved commission permit to drill an oil or gas well.
Tank. A container, covered or uncovered, used in conjunction with the drilling or production of oil, gas or other
hydrocarbons for holding or storing fluids.
Technical advisor. Such person(s) familiar with and educated in the oil or gas industry or the law as it relates to
oil or gas matters who may be retained from time to time by the city.
Well. A hole or holes, bore or bores, to any horizon, formation, or strata for the purpose of producing gas, liquid
hydrocarbon, brine water or sulphur water, or for use as an injection well for secondary recovery, disposal or
production of gas, or other hydrocarbons from the earth.
Sec. 4.06.003 City inspector
(a) Authority to issue orders. The city inspector shall have the authority to issue any orders or directives
required to carry out the intent and purpose of this article and its particular provisions. Failure of any person to
comply with any such order or directive shall constitute a violation of this article. The city inspector may be a
city staff member or may be a third-party consultant retained by the city.
(b) Authority to enter and inspect. The city inspector shall have the authority to enter and inspect any premises
covered by the provisions of this article to determine compliance with the provisions of this article and all
applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards or directives of the state. Failure of any person to permit access to
the city inspector shall constitute a violation of this article. The city inspector shall conduct periodic inspections
at least once a year of all permitted drill sites in the city to determine that the drill sites are operating in
accordance with proper safety parameters as set out in this article and all regulations of the commission.
(c) Authority to request records. The city inspector shall have the authority to request and receive any records,
including any records sent to the commission, logs, reports and the like, relating to the status or condition of any
permitted well necessary to establish and determine compliance with the applicable surface permit. Failure of
any person to provide any such requested material shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(d) Report violations. The city inspector will report any perceived violation of commission rules and
regulations (i.e. spillage) to the commission within twenty-four (24) hours after observation or after confirming a
report from a citizen.
Sec. 4.06.004 Operator's agent
Every operator of any well shall designate an agent, who is a resident of the state, upon whom all orders and
notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator so
designating such agent shall within one business week notify the city inspector in writing of any change in such
agent or such mailing address unless operations within the city are discontinued.
Sec. 4.06.005 Surface permit required
(a) Permit required. A person wanting to engage in and operate in oil or gas production activities shall apply
for and obtain a surface permit from the city after receiving the approved commission permit to drill. The permit
shall be for all above ground activity related to oil and gas operation. It shall be unlawful for any person acting
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/508
either for himself or acting as agent, employee, independent contractor, or servant for any person to drill any
well, assist in any way in the site preparation, reworking, fracturing or operation of any such well or to conduct
any activity related to the production of oil or gas without first obtaining a surface permit issued by the city in
accordance with this article. Such activities include, but are not limited to reworking, initial site preparation,
drilling, operation, construction of rigs or tank batteries, fracturing and pressurizing.
(b) No blanket permits. The operator must apply for and obtain a surface permit for each drill site. Each
proposed drill site shall require a separate permit and shall not be permitted on a “blanket” basis.
(c) Permit required to re-enter abandoned well. A surface permit shall not constitute authority for the reentering
and drilling of an abandoned well. An operator shall obtain a new surface permit in accordance with the
provisions of this article if the operator is re-entering and/or drilling an abandoned well.
(d) Permit expiration date. A surface permit shall automatically terminate, unless extended for one additional
period, if drilling is not commenced within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date of the issuance
of the surface permit. Drilling must commence within one hundred eighty (180) calendar days from the date of
the issuance of the surface permit in order to maintain the validity of the surface permit. The city inspector may
extend a surface permit for an additional one hundred eighty (180) calendar days upon request by the operator
and proof that the engineering site plan for the requested surface permit for such location has not changed.
(e) Other permits may be necessary. The surface permits required by this article are in addition to and are not
in lieu of any permit, which may be required by any other provision of this code or by any other governmental
agency.
(f) No additional permits or fees. No additional surface permit or filing fees shall be required for:
(1) Existing wells. Any wells, existing, previously permitted or approved by the city, within the
corporate limits of the city on the effective date of this article;
(2) Drilling commenced on effective date of article. Any wells which drilling has commenced on
the effective date of this article;
(3) Land annexed after effective date of article. Any wells in existence or on any wells on which
drilling has commenced on land annexed into the city after the effective date of this article; or
(1) Application filed prior to annexation. Any well that was planned for the land before the
ninetieth (90th) calendar day before the effective date of its annexation and one or more licenses,
certificates, permits, approvals, or other forms of authorization by a governmental entity were
required by law for such well and the completed application for the initial authorization was filed
before the date the annexation proceedings were instituted.
(g) No permit issued in floodway. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within any
floodway as defined by the most current FEMA map.
(h) Permits in floodplains. Surface permits may be issued on property located in a floodplain, provided that all
water and drilling materials must be in steel containers except for the concrete pad. An engineer's certificate
shall be provided showing no negative impact on water flow in the floodplain.
(i) City-owned property. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled on city-owned property
without the prior consent of the city council.
(j) Operator agrees to comply with article. By acceptance of any surface permit issued pursuant to this article,
the operator expressly stipulates and agrees to be bound by and comply with the provisions of this article. The
terms of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated in any surface permit issued pursuant to this article with
the same force and effect as if this article was set forth verbatim in such surface permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/508
Sec. 4.06.006 Surface permit application and filing fees
(a) The surface permit may only be issued subsequent to a commission approved permit associated with
exploration, drilling, production and transportation.
(b) Application in writing. Every application for a surface permit issued pursuant to this article shall be in
writing signed by the operator, or an appointed agent duly authorized to sign on his behalf, and filed with the
city secretary of the city. As soon as practical, city secretary shall have the application delivered to the city
inspector.
(c) Application accompanied by permit fee. Every application shall be accompanied by a permit fee for each
drill site as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A.
(d) Application shall include. An application for a surface permit shall include all the requirements of this
section of this article as well as impacted vegetation, creeks and other topographic features, adjacent building
and other structures and the measured distance from the well site to these buildings and structures, temporary
and permanent fencing and landscaping. The application shall include the following information:
(1) Date. The date of the application for a surface permit.
(2) Legal description. An accurate legal description of the lease property to be used for the oil or
gas operation. Property recorded by plat should reference subdivision, block and lot numbers.
(3) Map. Map showing proposed transportation route and road for equipment, chemicals or waste
products used or produced by the oil or gas operation and the number of truck trips, truck types and
weight, loaded and unloaded, turning movements associated with truck and vehicle traffic, proposed
access points and proposed traffic-control devices.
(4) Well name. Proposed well name.
(5) Surface owner name. Surface owner names(s) and address(es) of the lease property.
(6) Name mineral lessee. Mineral lessee name and address.
(7) Name operator. Operator/applicant name and address and if the operator is a corporation, the
state of incorporation, and if the operator is a partnership, the names and addresses of the general
partners.
(8) Person to receive reports. Name and address of individual designated to receive notice.
(9) Supervisory authority. Name of representative with supervisory authority over all oil or gas
operation site activities and a 24-hour phone number.
(10) Location of improvements. Location and description of all improvements and structures
within three hundred (300') feet of the well.
(11) Owners. Owner and address of each parcel of property within three hundred (300') feet of the
proposed drill site.
(12) Site plan. A site plan of the proposed operation site showing the location of all improvements
and equipment, including the location of the proposed well(s) and other facilities, including, but not
limited to, tanks, pipelines, compressors, separators and storage sheds. The site plan shall include all
existing utilities, public roadways, driveways, alleys, all public access points, floodways and
floodplains.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/508
(13) Emergency contact person. The name, address and 24-hour phone number of the person to be
notified in case of an emergency.
(14) Road maintenance agreement. An original executed citywide road maintenance agreement
signed and approved by city must be filed with the city secretary that provides that the operator shall
repair, at his own expense, damage to roads or streets caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any
activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production, transportation and operation of oil and
or gas wells, in accordance with the rights of the city to regulate above ground activity. City shall
determine degree of damage and dollar amount owed. Failure of operator to reimburse city within 30
days of billing may result in forfeiture of security bond.
(15) Public utilities. A description of public utilities required during drilling and operation.
(16) Water source. A description of the water source to be used during drilling.
(17) Fees. All required application and surface permit fees.
(18) Noise management plan. A noise management plan complying with all requirements of the
city. The noise management plan shall address the following:
(A) Description of proposed equipment and potential noise impacts. This analysis must
include a comparison of the potential noise generation with the applicable noise standards;
(B) Identify all noise mitigation techniques that will be implemented on the site including
blankets/curtains, sound walls, and mufflers for generators and motors, if any;
(C) Best management practices used to reduce the impact of noisier operations such as pipe
deliveries and use of horns for communication; and
(D) Maximum noise levels anticipated at the drill site.
(19) Screening. A screening, fencing and landscape plan detailing compliance with all landscape
and screening requirements required by this article, including a proposed schedule detailing the
timing of all landscaping, screening and fencing to be installed.
(20) Irrigation plan. A landscape irrigation plan as designed by a state-licensed professional
detailing the appropriate type of irrigation for the site; measures to be taken to adequately irrigate all
landscaping, including indicating the water source for irrigation and the proposed efforts to replace
dead or dying screening vegetation. All trees on site shall be irrigated by a bubbler system.
(21) Encroachment agreements. A copy of all applicable right-of-way encroachment agreements.
(22) Dust mitigation plan. A dust mitigation plan detailing measures to be implemented to mitigate
and suppress dust generated at the drill site and the private vehicle access route, including a mud
shaker for vehicles exiting the site.
(23) Waste. A waste management plan that addresses human, solid and drilling production waste.
(24) Third-party contracts. Copies of all third-party contracts related to:
(A) Emergency services, including firefighting and control of well;
(B) Site operations and maintenance; and
(C) Well monitoring and testing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/508
(25) Commission permit required. A copy of the approved commission permit to drill together
with attachments and survey plats which are applicable to the drill and operation sites.
(26) Stormwater pollution. A copy of the stormwater pollution prevention plan as required by the
environmental protection agency. A copy of the notice of intent shall be submitted to the city five (5)
calendar days prior to the commencement of any onsite activity.
(27) Depth of usable water. A copy of the determination by the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ) of the depth of useable quality groundwater.
(28) Insurance and security. Evidence of insurance and security requirements under this article.
(29) Sworn statement. A statement, under oath, signed by the operator, or designated
representative, that the information submitted with the application is, to the best knowledge and
belief of the operator or designated representative, true and correct.
Sec. 4.06.007 Surface permits; procedure
(a) Permit required. A surface permit shall be required for all proposed drill sites.
(b) Setback. Any application that has proposed a drill site that is three hundred feet (300') or less from a
protected use shall be rejected. This provision applies to any existing building, including but not limited to, a
residence, religious institution, public building, hospital building, school or public park or for which a building
permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city secretary. Drill sites located
more than three hundred (300') feet from such properties, may be approved by the city inspector. For the purpose
of such surface permit, the measurement of the three hundred (300') feet distance shall be made from the well
bore, in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the
building.
(c) Submit to Post Oak Savannah Groundwater Conservation District. Upon determination by the city
inspector that the permit application is complete, city inspector shall submit a duplicate copy of the permit
application to the Post Oak Savannah Groundwater Conservation District within ten (10) calendar days.
(d) Notice and sign. Upon notification by the city inspector that the permit application is complete, within ten
(10) days, operator/applicant shall publish notice in local newspaper for two consecutive weeks that a permit
application has been submitted to the city. Notice shall contain location of proposed well, name of
operator/applicant, mineral lessee name and contact information for operator/applicant and city inspector. Notice
shall direct questions to operator/applicant and concerns to city inspector. In addition, within the ten (10) days, a
sign will be erected on the drill site or the nearest public right-of-way, if the sign would not be visible from the
drill site. Sign shall indicate that an oil or gas well is proposed for the site, name of operator/applicant and
contact information for operator/applicant and the city inspector.
(e) Permitting procedure. After a complete permit application is submitted, the city inspector shall evaluate
the public impact of the proposed activity, including any comments that may be provided by the Post Oak
Savannah Groundwater Conservation District. The city inspector shall consider the proposed site and the
proposed above ground activity related to oil and gas operation or drilling program and shall identify restrictions
or conditions, including minimum separation distance for drilling or other operations, special safety equipment
and procedures, noise reduction levels, screening and any other requirements the city inspector deems
appropriate. If the proposed drill site are located more than three hundred (300') feet from a protected use for
which a building permit has been issued on the date the application for a permit is filed with the city secretary,
the Inspector may, consistent with state law, accept or reject the application in the interest of securing
compliance with this article, this code and/or to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. An
applicant may appeal a decision of the city inspector through the city manager to the city council.
(f) Well and tank battery setbacks for surface permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/508
(1) Setback from parks. Tank batteries, storage tanks, facilities and equipment, other than the well
itself, shall be located at least three hundred (300') feet from any public park or from any protected
use (unless prior consent is obtained through the city manager). The distance shall be calculated from
the closest tank batteries, facilities and/or equipment, in a straight line, without regard to intervening
structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of the building, or to the closest property line of the
park.
(2) Landscape buffer. There will be a minimum twenty-five (25') feet landscape buffer on all sides
of the area adjacent to and outside of the fencing on any pad site.
(g) Fencing for surface permit.
(1) Fences. Fences shall not be required on drill sites during initial drilling, completion or reworking
operations as long as 24-hour on-site supervision is provided. Within thirty (30) calendar
days after production has been established, the operation site shall be completely enclosed by an
opaque fence or separate opaque fences may be installed to enclose individual facilities on drill site,
such as pump jack, storage tanks or other production related facilities. The fences shall be a
minimum height of five (5') feet and not higher than eight (8') feet. All shall be built in a manner that
is safe enough to protect children in accordance with the attractive nuisance doctrine. In addition to
fences, a secured entrance gate shall be required. All gates are to be kept locked when the operator or
his employees are not within the enclosure.
(2) Gate specifications. The gate shall meet the following specifications:
(A) Each gate shall be not less than twelve (12') feet wide and the height of the fence and be
composed of two (2) gates, each of which is not less than six (6') feet wide, or one sliding gate
not less than twelve (12') feet wide. If two gates are used, gates shall latch and lock in the center
of the span. If fencing is intended to protect pump jack, storage tanks or other production
related facilities and no trucks will be inside enclosure, city inspector may specify a reasonable
sized walk through gate;
(B) The gates shall be of metal frame construction that meets the applicable specifications, or
of other approved material;
(C) The gates shall be provided with a combination catch and locking attachment device for a
combination padlock, and shall be kept locked, except when being used for access to the site;
(D) Operator must provide the fire department chief and the city inspector with a “Knox
Padlock” or “Knox Box with a key” to access the drill site to be used only in case of an
emergency. The fire chief shall determine the type. In the event a key is not provided or the lock
is inoperable, the fire department shall be authorized to cut a lock or chain to gain access.
(h) Landscaping. A plan for landscaping and irrigation shall be provided with the surface permit application.
Landscaping and irrigation shall be required as determined by city manager or designee along all sides of the
drill site with suitable screening done via a combination of trees and shrubs that complement the natural
character of the surrounding neighborhood. A three (3') feet separation should be maintained between the fence
and vegetative screening. Care should be taken when selecting trees and shrubs to anticipate the ultimate size of
the plant so that the tree or shrub maintains a three (3') feet separation from the fence at maturity. Measures
should be in place to cease irrigation once the trees and shrubs are established and shall not be less than two (2)
years, unless the city implements the drought contingency plan, in which case the irrigation will be in
accordance with said plan. The landscaping within ten years should characterize a natural screening of the pad
site within one hundred (100') feet from all sides. The site should be well kept and mowed at all times. The
following tree preservation and planting measures are required:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/508
(1) Tree spacing. A minimum twenty-five (25') feet landscape buffer outside the operation site
shall contain a tree for every forty (40') linear feet with no more than ten percent (10%) of the trees of
a small canopy and no more than fifteen percent (15%) of the trees of a medium canopy as identified
on the following table. Existing trees within the buffer may be counted as part of the required
plantings. The following requirements apply to all surface permits.
(A) A minimum retention of twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing trees will be required
as with other land uses unless removal is necessary for location of equipment as determined by
the city inspector.
(B) No more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the same species may be planted at one (1)
site.
(C) A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the planted trees must be an evergreen
species.
(D) The minimum size of tree planted will be three (3") inches in diameter measured one foot
above ground level. If the tree is multi trunk, the main stem will be given full credit for its
diameter and all other stems will receive one-half (1/2) credit. The total of all must be three (3")
inches or greater.
(E) All trees that die within two years of the date of project completion will be replaced by
another replacement tree. The replacement tree carries the same two-year replacement
requirement. A replacement tree that dies within two years of planting will be replaced by the
operator or agent, and a new two-year guarantee will begin at the time of replacement.
(F) All other interpretations of the regulations will be made by the city.
(2) Desirable trees. The following list of trees is considered desirable and adapted for the city area.
Planting of trees from this list is acceptable. Other trees will be considered by the city and granted on
a case-by-case basis. The approval of additional species will be judged on adaptability, long-term
health and growing characteristic of the tree type.
Common Name Scientific Name Canopy Size
Redbud Cercis Canadensis Small
Mexican Plum Prunus Mexicana Small
Cherry Laurel Prunus Caroliniana Medium
Eve's Necklace Sophora Affinis Medium
Crab Apple Malus Angustifolia Medium
Golden Raintree Koelrueteria Paniculata Medium
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/508
Cado Maple Acer Saccharum Large
Red Maple Acer Rubrum Large
Bigtooth Maple Acer Grandidentatum Large
Bur Oak Quercus Macrocrapa Large
Chinquapin Oak Quercus Muhlenbergii Large
Live Oak Quercus Virginiana Large
Shumard Red Oak Quercus Shumardii Large
Texas Red Oak Quercus Texana Large
Post Oak Quercus Stallata Large
Blackjack Oak Quercus Marilandica Large
Pecan Carya Illinoinensis Large
Lacebark Elm Ulmus Parvifolia Large
Cedar Elm Ulmus Crassifolia Large
American Elm Ulmus Americana Large
Bald Cypress Taxodium Distichum Large
Black Walnut Jugluns Nigra/J. Microcarpa Large
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/508
Green Ash Fraxinus Pennsylvanica Large
Texas Ash Fraxinus Texensis Large
Southern Magnolia Magnolia Grandiflora Large
(3) Clear cut prohibition. The clear cutting of trees is prohibited within the city. Cutting of trees,
grading and land clearing may be done, for oil or gas well drilling pad sites, in accordance with the
approved site plan. The remainder of the site beyond the pad and the landscape buffer shall not be
disturbed without approval in the permit.
(i) Vehicle routes for surface permit.
(1) Routes. Vehicles associated with drilling and/or production in excess of three tons shall be
restricted to such streets designated as either State Highway, Farm to Market, or truck routes or
commercial delivery routes by the city wherever capable of being used. The vehicles shall be
operated on a commercial delivery route only when it is not possible to use a State Highway, Farm to
Market, or truck route to fulfill the purpose for which such vehicle is then being operated.
Commercial delivery route means any street or highway so designated by the city council for the use
by any commercial motor vehicle, truck-tractor, trailer, semitrailer, or any combination thereof. All
vehicles shall comply with Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) regulations.
(2) Road maintenance agreement. A citywide road maintenance agreement will be required for the
above ground activity associated with any gas or oil well drilling operation that uses city maintained
streets for access to their well site, whether the wells are within the city limits or outside the city
limits. City shall determine degree of damage, the amount owed and shall bill the operator annually.
Failure of the operator to pay the amount owed within thirty days may result in forfeiture of bond or
letter of credit.
(3) Streets free from debris. The operator shall keep thoroughfares throughout the city free from
dirt, dust, mud or other debris deposited by vehicles involved in the well drilling or servicing or
pipeline installation process. The operator shall eliminate dirt, dust, mud or other debris
accumulations within two (2) hours of notification by the city. If for safety or other reasons, the city
elects to perform the removal, the cost of such removal shall be paid by the operator.
(j) Work hours for surface permit. Site development, other than drilling, shall be conducted only during
daylight hours. Truck deliveries of equipment and materials associated with drilling and/or production, well
servicing, site preparation and other related work conducted on the drill site shall be limited to daylight hours
except in cases of fires, blowouts, explosions and any other emergencies or where the delivery of equipment is
necessary to prevent the cessation of drilling or production. All formation fracture stimulation operations shall
be conducted during daylight hours as defined by this article. “Flowback” operations to recover fluids used
during fracture stimulation shall be exempt from work hour restrictions, subject to compliance with noise
restrictions contained in this article. All workover operations shall be restricted to daylight hours.
(k) Noise restrictions for surface permit. In no case shall any drilling, producing or other operations produce a
sound level greater than 78 decibels (dB) when measured at a distance of three hundred (300') feet from the
production equipment in question. If ambient noise level exceeds 78 dB, that ambient level will be the maximum
allowable noise level under all circumstances.
(1) Noise management plan. Prior to the issuance of a surface permit and the commencement of
operations, the operator shall submit a noise management plan, approved by the city, detailing how
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/508
the equipment used in the drilling, completion, transportation, or production of a well complies with
the maximum permissible noise levels of this section. The noise management plan must:
(A) Identify operation noise impacts;
(B) Provide documentation establishing the ambient noise level prior to construction of any
wellhead, compressor or compression facility; and
(C) Detail how the impacts will be mitigated. In determining noise mitigation, specific site
characteristics shall be considered, including but not limited to the following:
(i) Nature and proximity of adjacent development, location, and type;
(ii) Seasonal and prevailing weather patterns, including wind directions;
(iii) Vegetative cover on or adjacent to the site; and
(iv) Topography.
The operator shall be responsible for verifying compliance with this section and the noise
management plan after the installation of the noise generation equipment.
(2) Noise level. No well shall be drilled, re-drilled or any equipment operated at any location
within the city in such a manner so as to create any noise which causes the exterior noise level when
measured at the protected use receiver's/receptor's property line or from the closest exterior point of
the protected use structure or inside the protected use structure if access to the property is granted by
the receiver/receptor, that:
(A) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than five (5) dB during daytime hours and more
than three (3) dB during nighttime hours;
(B) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than ten (10) dB over the daytime average
ambient noise level during fracturing operations during daytime hours. No fracturing shall be
allowed during nighttime hours except for flowback operations related to fracturing as provided
in subsection (C) below;
(C) Exceeds the ambient noise level by more than three (3) dB during flowback operations
during nighttime hours.
(3) Predrilling noise level. The operator shall be responsible for establishing and reporting to the
city a continuous seventy-two (72) hour predrilling ambient noise level prior to the issuance of a
surface permit. The seventy-two (72) hour time span shall include at least twenty-four (24) hour
reading during either a Saturday of Sunday. The operator shall use the prior established ambient noise
level as the base for the installation of any new noise generation equipment unless the operator can
demonstrate that the increase in the ambient noise level is not associated with drilling and production
activities locate either on or off-site.
(4) Citation for violation. A citation may be issued immediately for failure to comply with the
provisions of this section. However, if the operator is in compliance with approved noise
management plan, and a violation occurs, the operator will be given twenty-four (24) hours from
notice of noncompliance to correct the violation from an identified source before a citation is issued.
Additional extensions of twenty-four (24) hour periods may be granted in the event that the source of
the violation cannot be identified after reasonable diligence by the operator.
(l) Tank specifications for a surface permit. The construction and installation of all tanks and permanent
structures shall conform to the requirements of the commission and any other local, state or federal agency. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/508
top of the tanks shall be no higher than fifteen feet (15'). All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of
the commission and the National Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five (25')
feet from any public right-of-way or property line. All transport trucks shall be filled on site, not on public
rights-of-way or streets.
(m) Inclusive of all provisions. All other provisions outlined in this article shall be required.
Sec. 4.06.008 Issuance of surface permits
(a) Permit approval or denial. It is the responsibility of the city inspector to review and approve or disapprove
based on the criteria established by this article all applications for surface permits for drill sites located more
than three hundred (300') feet from a protected use for which a building permit has been issued on the date the
application for a permit is filed with the city inspector. City inspector, within thirty (30) calendar days of the
receipt of a complete application, and remittance of all fees, insurance and security per the requirements of this
article for a surface permit, shall issue a surface permit for the drill site, including the installation of the
facilities.
(b) Building permits issued on date of fling application. The provisions of this article shall apply to any
dwellings or buildings for which an application for a building permit has been submitted on the date the
application for a surface permit is filed with the city inspector.
(c) Notice of denial. If the city inspector denies a surface permit application, he shall notify the operator in
writing of such denial stating the reasons for the denial. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the
written decision of the city inspector to deny the surface permit, the operator may:
(1) Cure the reason(s) for denial. Cure those conditions that caused the denial and resubmit the
application to the city inspector for approval and issuance of the surface permit; or
(2) Appeal. File an appeal through the city manager to the city council under the provisions
outlined in this article.
Sec. 4.06.009 Amended surface permits
An operator may request to amend a surface permit, to relocate a drill site or operation site that was shown on
the application, provided the distance from a protected use is not less than three hundred feet (300').
Sec. 4.06.010 Transfer of surface permit
(a) Written request. A surface permit may be transferred upon written request by the operator with the consent
of the city:
(1) Transferee agreement. If the transferee agrees to be bound by the terms and conditions of the
current surface permit and citywide road maintenance agreement;
(2) Update information. If all information previously provided to the city as part of the current
surface permit application is updated to reflect any changes; and
(3) Insurance and security. If the transferee provides the insurance and security required by this
article.
(b) Insurance and security. The insurance and security provided by the transferor shall be released if a copy of
the written transfer is provided to the city. The transfer shall not relieve the transferor from any liability to the
city arising out of any activities conducted prior to the transfer.
(c) Transfer fee. Applications for the transfer of surface permits shall be filed with the city inspector. The
application fee for the transfer as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A and shall accompany each surface
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/508
permit transfer application.
Sec. 4.06.011 Suspension or revocation of surface permit; effect
(a) Suspension or revocation. If an operator (or its officers, employees, agents, contractors, or representatives)
fails to comply with any requirement of a surface permit (including any requirement incorporated by reference
as part of the surface permit), the city inspector shall give written notice to the operator specifying the nature of
the failure and giving the operator a reasonable time to cure, taking into consideration the nature and extent of
the failure, the extent of the efforts required to cure, and the potential impact on the health, safety, and welfare of
the community. In no event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) calendar days unless the
failure presents a risk of imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the
operator's failure to provide periodic reports as required by this article.
(b) Failure to correct. If the operator fails to correct the noncompliance within thirty (30) calendar days from
the date of the notice, the city inspector may suspend or revoke the surface permit pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
(c) Appeal. Operator may, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the decision of the city inspector in
writing to suspend or revoke a surface permit, file an appeal through the city manager to the city council under
the provisions outlined in this article.
(d) No work performed during suspension or revocation. No person shall carry on any operations performed
under the terms of the surface permit issued under this article during any period of any surface permit
suspension or revocation or pending a review of the decision or order of the city in suspending or revoking the
surface permit. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the necessary, diligent and bona fide
efforts to cure and remedy the default or violation for which the suspension or revocation of the surface permit
was ordered for the safety of persons or as required by the city council.
Sec. 4.06.012 Periodic reports
(a) Report timing. The operator shall notify the city inspector of any changes to the following information
within one business week after the change occurs:
(1) Name. The name, address, and phone number of the operator;
(2) Name of person to receive notice. The name, address, and phone number of the person
designated to receive notices from the city (which person must be a resident of the state that can be
served in person or by registered or certified mail); and
(3) Emergency action response plan. The operator's emergency action response plan (including
“drive-to-maps” from public rights-of-way to each drill site).
(b) Contact information for person with supervisory authority. The operator shall notify the city inspector of
any change to the name, address, and 24-hour phone number of the person(s) with supervisory authority over
drilling or operations activities within one business day.
(c) Incident reports. The operator shall provide a copy to the city of any “incident reports” or written
complaints submitted to the commission within thirty (30) calendar days after the operator has notice of the
existence of such reports or complaints.
(d) Annual report. Beginning on December 31st after each well is completed, and continuing on each
December 31st thereafter, until the operator notifies the city inspector that the well has been abandoned and the
site restored, the operator shall submit a written report to the city inspector identifying any changes to the
information that was included in the application for the applicable surface permit that have not been previously
reported to the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/508
(e) Annual site inspection. The city inspector shall perform an annual site inspection to insure that the
operator is conducting operations in compliance with the surface permit and the provisions of this article and to
verify the accuracy of the information reported pursuant to this section. The operator shall pay an annual
inspection fee in an amount that as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A. The annual inspection fee shall be
paid no later than May 30th of each year.
(f) Follow up inspection. Incidents requiring notification to the commission shall require a follow up
inspection by the city inspector. The fee for said follow up inspection as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix
A. Fee shall be paid within thirty (30) calendar days of being notified of the need for a follow up inspection.
Sec. 4.06.013 Bond, irrevocable letter of credit, indemnity, insurance
(a) General requirements. The operator shall be required to perform the items listed below.
(1) Comply with terms of article. Comply with the terms and conditions of this article and the
surface permit issued hereunder.
(2) Restore to conditions existing prior to operation. Promptly clear drill and operation sites of all
litter, trash, waste and other substances used, allowed, or occurring in the operations, and after
abandonment or completion grade, level and restore such property to the same surface conditions as
nearly as possible as existed before operations.
(3) Indemnify and hold harmless. Indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents, and
employees from and against any and all claims, losses, damages, causes of action, suits and liability
of every kind, including all expenses of litigation, court costs, and attorney's fees, for injury to or
death of any person or for damage to any property arising out of or in connection with the work done
by operator under a surface permit:
(A) Where such injuries, death or damages are caused by operator's sole negligence or the
joint negligence of operator and any other person or entity; and
(B) Regardless of whether such injuries, death or damages are caused in whole or in part by
the negligence of operator.
(4) Pay fines. Promptly pay all fines, penalties and other assessments, including but not limited to
road damage, imposed due to breach of any terms of the surface permit; and
(5) Restore to former condition. Promptly restore to its former condition any public property
damaged by the oil or gas operation.
(b) Bond. Prior to the issuance of a surface permit the operator shall provide the city inspector with a security
instrument in the form of a bond. The bond shall be executed by a reliable bonding or insurance institution
authorized to do business in state, acceptable to the city. The bond shall become effective on or before the date
the surface permit is issued and shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of six (6) months after the
expiration of the surface permit term or until the well is plugged and abandoned and the site is restored,
whichever occurs first. The operator shall be listed as principal and the instrument shall run to the city, as
obligee, and shall be conditioned that the operator will comply with the terms and regulations of this article and
the city. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such bond to recover any fines, penalties or road damages
assessed under this article. The original bond shall be submitted to the city secretary with a copy of the same
provided to the city inspector.
(c) Letter of credit. In lieu of a bond, the operator may choose to provide, an irrevocable letter of credit which
shall be issued by a reliable bank authorized to do business in the state and shall become effective on or before
the date the surface permit is issued. The letter of credit shall remain in force and effect for at least a period of
six (6) months after the expiration of the surface permit term. The city shall be authorized to draw upon such
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/508
letter of credit to recover any fines or penalties or road damages assessed under this article. Evidence of the
execution of a letter of credit shall be submitted to the city secretary by submitting an original signed letter of
credit from the banking institution, with a copy of the same provided to the inspector.
(d) Security amount. The principal amount of any security instrument shall be fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00) for any single well. If, after completion of a well, the applicant/operator, who initially posted a fifty
thousand dollar ($50,000.00) bond or irrevocable letter of credit has complied with all of the provisions of this
article and whose well is in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, may submit a request to
the city inspector to reduce the existing bond or irrevocable letter of credit to ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
for the remainder of the time the well produces without reworking. During reworking operations, the amount of
the bond or irrevocable letter of credit shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00). An operator
drilling or reworking between one and five wells at any given time may elect to provide a blanket bond or
irrevocable letter of credit in the principal minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand dollars
($150,000.00). If the operator drills or reworks more than five wells at a time, the blanket bond or irrevocable
letter of credit shall be increased in increments of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) per each additional well.
Once the wells are in the producing stage and all drilling operations have ceased, the operator may elect to
provide a blanket bond or irrevocable letter of credit for the remainder of the time the well produces, without
reworking, as follows:
Number of Producing Wells Blanket Bond or Irrevocable Letter of
Credit Amount Required
Up to 10 wells $100,000.00
10 to 50 wells $150,000.00
More than 50 wells $200,000.00
(e) City council to determine sufficiency of security. If at any time after no less than a fifteen (15) day written
notice to the operator and a public hearing, the city council shall deem any operator's bond or irrevocable letter
of credit to be insufficient, it may require the operator to increase the amount of the bond or irrevocable letter of
credit up to a maximum of two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per well.
(f) Written notice of default. Whenever the city inspector finds that a default has occurred in the performance
of any requirement or condition imposed by this article, a written notice shall be given to the operator. Such
notice shall specify the work to be done and the period of time deemed by the city inspector to be reasonably
necessary for the completion of such work. After receipt of such notice, the operator shall provide the estimated
cost and, within the time therein specified, either cause or require the work to be performed, or failing to do so,
shall pay over to the city one hundred twenty-five (125%) percent of the estimated cost of doing the work. In no
event, however, shall the cure period be less than thirty (30) calendar days, unless the failure presents a risk of
imminent destruction of property or injury to persons or unless the failure involves the operator's failure to
provide periodic reports as required by this article. The maximum cure period shall not exceed forty-five (45)
calendar days. The city shall be authorized to draw against any bond or irrevocable letter of credit to recover
such amount due from the operator. Upon receipt of such monies, the city shall proceed by such mode as deemed
convenient to cause the required work to be performed and completed, but no liability shall be incurred other
than for the expenditure of said sum in hand. In the event that the well has not been properly abandoned under
the regulations of the commission and/or this article, such additional money may be demanded from the operator
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/508
as is necessary to properly plug and abandon the well and restore the drill site in conformity with the regulations
of this article.
(g) Other legal action. In the event the operator does not cause the work to be performed and fails or refuses to
pay over to the city the estimated cost of the work to be done, or the issuer of the security instrument refuses to
honor any draft by the city against the bond or irrevocable letter of credit, the city may proceed to obtain
compliance and abate the default by way of civil action against the operator, or by criminal action against the
operator, or by both such methods.
(h) Termination of securities. When the well or wells covered by said bond or irrevocable letter of credit have
been properly abandoned in conformity with all regulations of this article, and in conformity with all regulations
of the commission and notice to that effect has been received by the city, or upon receipt of a satisfactory
substitute, the bond or irrevocable letter of credit issued in compliance with these regulations shall be terminated
and cancelled.
(i) Insurance. In addition to the bond or irrevocable letter of credit required pursuant to this article, the
operator shall carry a policy or policies of insurance issued by an insurance company or companies authorized to
do business in the state. In the event such insurance policy or policies are cancelled, the surface permit shall be
suspended on such date of cancellation and the operator's right to operate under such surface permit shall
immediately cease until the operator files additional insurance as provided herein.
(1) General requirements applicable to all policies.
(A) The city, its officials, employees, agents and officers shall be endorsed as an “additional
insured” to all policies except employer's liability coverage under the operator's workers
compensation policy.
(B) All policies shall be written on an occurrence basis except for environmental pollution
liability (seepage and pollution coverage) and excess or umbrella liability, which may be on a
claims-made basis.
(C) All policies shall be written by an insurer with an A-: VIII or better rating by the most
current version of the A. M. Best Key Rating Guide or with such other financially sound
insurance carriers acceptable to the city.
(D) Deductibles shall be listed on the certificate of insurance and shall be on a “per
occurrence” basis unless otherwise stipulated herein.
(E) Certificates of insurance shall be delivered to the City of Rockdale, City Secretary, 505
West Cameron Avenue, Rockdale, Texas 76567, evidencing all the required coverage's,
including endorsements, prior to the issuance of a surface permit.
(F) All policies shall be endorsed with a waiver of subrogation providing rights of recovery
in favor of the city.
(G) Any failure on part of the city to request required insurance documentation shall not
constitute a waiver of the insurance requirement specified herein.
(H) Each policy shall be endorsed to provide the city a minimum thirty (30) calendar day
notice of cancellation, nonrenewal, and/or material change in policy terms or coverage. A ten
(10) calendar days notice shall be acceptable in the event of nonpayment of premium.
(I) During the term of the surface permit, the operator shall report, in a timely manner, to the
city inspector any known loss occurrence which could give rise to a liability claim or lawsuit or
which could result in a property loss.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/508
(J) Upon request, certified copies of all insurance policies shall be furnished to the city.
(2) Standard commercial general liability policy. This coverage must include premises, operations,
blowout or explosion, products, completed operations, sudden and accidental pollution, blanket
contractual liability, underground resources damage, broad form property damage, independent
contractors' protective liability and personal injury. This coverage shall be a minimum combined
single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property
damage.
(3) Excess or umbrella liability.
(A) Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) excess, if the operator has a standalone
environmental pollution liability (EPL) policy. Ten million dollars ($10,000,000.00) excess, if
the operator does not have a standalone EPL policy.
(B) Coverage must include an endorsement for sudden or accidental pollution. If Seepage
and pollution coverage is written on a “claims made” basis, the operator must maintain
continuous coverage and purchase extended coverage period insurance when necessary.
(4) Environmental pollution liability coverage.
(A) Operator shall purchase and maintain in force for the duration of the surface permit,
insurance for environmental pollution liability applicable to bodily injury, property damage,
including loss of use of damaged property or of property that has not been physically injured or
destroyed; cleanup costs; and defense, including costs and expenses incurred in the
investigation, defense or settlement of claims; all in connection with any loss arising from the
insured site. Coverage shall be maintained in an amount of at least one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per loss, with an annual aggregate of at least five million dollars ($5,000,000).
(B) Coverage shall apply to sudden and accidental pollution conditions resulting from the
escape or release of smoke, vapors, fumes, acids, alkalis, toxic chemicals, liquids or gases,
waste material or other irritants, contaminants or pollutants.
(C) The operator shall maintain continuous coverage and shall purchase extended coverage
period insurance when necessary. The extended coverage period insurance must provide that
any retroactive date applicable to coverage under the policy precedes the effective date of the
issuance of the permit by the city.
(5) Control of well.
(A) The policy shall cover the cost of controlling a well that is out of control, re-drilling or
restoration expenses, seepage and pollution damage as first party recovery for the operator and
related expenses, including, but not limited to, loss of equipment, experts and evacuation of
residents.
(B) One million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence/no aggregate, if available, otherwise
an aggregate of five million dollars ($5,000,000.00). Five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) sub-limit endorsement may be added for damage to property for which the
operator has care, custody and control.
(6) Workers compensation and employers liability insurance.
(A) Workers compensation benefits shall be state statutory limits.
(B) Employers liability shall be a minimum of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00)
per accident.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/508
(C) Such coverage shall include a waiver of subrogation in favor of the city and provide
coverage in accordance with applicable state and federal laws.
(7) Automobile liability insurance.
(A) Combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily
injury and property damage.
(B) Coverage must include all owned, hired and not-owned automobiles.
(8) Certificates of insurance.
(A) The company must be admitted or approved to do business in the state, unless a surplus
lines insurer writes the coverage.
(B) The insurance set forth by the insurance company must be underwritten on forms that
have been approved by the Texas State Board of Insurance or ISO, or an equivalent policy form
acceptable to the city, with the exception of environmental pollution liability and control of well
coverage.
(C) Sets forth all endorsements and insurance coverage according to requirements and
instructions contained herein.
(D) Shall specifically set forth the notice of cancellation, termination, or change in coverage
provisions to the city. All policies shall be endorsed to read:
“THIS POLICY WILL NOT BE CANCELLED OR NONRENEWED WITHOUT
THIRTY (30) CALENDAR DAYS ADVANCED WRITTEN NOTICE TO THE
OWNER AND THE CITY EXCEPT WHEN THIS POLICY IS BEING
CANCELLED FOR NONPAYMENT OF PREMIUM, IN WHICH CASE TEN (10)
DAYS ADVANCE WRITTEN NOTICE IS REQUIRED.”
(E) Original endorsements affecting coverage required by this section shall be furnished with
the certificates of insurance.
(j) Indemnification and express negligence provisions. Each surface permit issued by the city Inspector shall
include the following language:
“Operator does hereby expressly release and discharge, all claims, demands, actions, judgments, and
executions which it ever had, or now has or may have, or assigns may have, or claim to have, against
the City of Rockdale, Texas, and/or its departments, agents, officers, servants, successors, assigns,
sponsors, volunteers, or employees, created by, or arising out of personal injuries, known or
unknown, and injuries to property, real or personal, or in any way incidental to or in connection with
the performance of the work performed by the operator under a surface permit. The operator shall
fully defend, protect, indemnify, and hold harmless the City of Rockdale, Texas, its departments,
agents, officers, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers from and against
each and every claim, demand, or cause of action and any and all liability, damages, obligations,
judgments, losses, fines, penalties, costs, fees, and expenses incurred in defense of the City of
Rockdale, Texas, its departments, agents, officers, servants, or employees, including, without
limitation, personal injuries and death in connection therewith which may be made or asserted by
operator, its agents, assigns, or any third parties on account of, arising out of, or in any way incidental
to or in connection with the performance of the work performed by the operator under a surface
permit. The operator agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the City of Rockdale, Texas, its
departments, its officers, agents, servants, employees, successors, assigns, sponsors, or volunteers
from any liabilities or damages suffered as a result of claims, demands, costs, or judgments against
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/508
the city, its departments, its officers, agents, servants, or employees, created by, or arising out of the
acts or omissions of the City of Rockdale occurring on the drill site or operation site in the course and
scope of inspecting and permitting the surface of the oil or gas wells INCLUDING, BUT NOT
LIMITED TO, CLAIMS AND DAMAGES ARISING IN WHOLE OR IN PART FROM THE
NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF ROCKDALE OCCURRING ON THE DRILL SITE OR
OPERATION SITE IN THE COURSE AND SCOPE OF INSPECTING AND PERMITTING THE
ABOVE GROUND ACTIVITY RELATED TO OPERATIONS OF THE OIL OR GAS WELLS. IT
IS UNDERSTOOD AND AGREED THAT THE INDEMNITY PROVIDED FOR IN THIS
SECTION IS AN INDEMNITY EXTENDED BY THE OPERATOR TO INDEMNIFY AND
PROTECT THE CITY OF ROCKDALE, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS, AGENTS,
OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES FROM THE CONSEQUENCES OF THE
NEGLIGENCE OF THE CITY OF ROCKDALE, TEXAS AND/OR ITS DEPARTMENTS,
AGENTS, OFFICERS, SERVANTS, OR EMPLOYEES, WHETHER THAT NEGLIGENCE IS THE
SOLE OR CONTRIBUTING CAUSE OF THE RESULTANT INJURY, DEATH, AND/OR
DAMAGE.”
(k) Notice. The individual designated to receive notice shall be a resident of the state upon whom all orders
and notices provided in this article may be served in person or by registered or certified mail. Every operator
shall within one business week notify the city inspector in writing of any change in such agent or mailing
address unless operations in the city are discontinued and abandonment is complete.
Sec. 4.06.014 Technical regulations
(a) Onsite requirements.
(1) Abandoned wells. All wells shall be abandoned in accordance with the rules of the
commission. No structures shall be built over an abandoned well.
(2) Compliance. Operator shall comply at all times with all applicable federal, state and city
requirements.
(3) Discharge. No person shall place, deposit, discharge, or cause or permit to be placed, deposited
or discharged, any oil, naphtha, petroleum, asphalt, tar, hydrocarbon substances or any refuse
including wastewater or brine from any oil or gas operation or the contents of any container used in
connection with any oil or gas operation in, into, or upon any public right-of-way, alleys, streets, lots,
storm drain, pit, ditch or sewer, sanitary drain or any body of water or watercourse that may
ultimately enter into waters of the city, state or United States.
(4) Dust, vibration, odors. All drilling and production operations shall be conducted in such a
manner as to minimize, so far as practicable, dust, vibration, or noxious odors, and shall be in
accordance with the best accepted practices incident to drilling for the production of oil, gas and
other hydrocarbon substances in urban areas. All equipment used shall be so constructed and
operated so that, vibrations, dust, odor or other harmful or annoying substances or effect will be
minimized by the operations carried on at any drilling or production site or from anything incident
thereto, to the injury or annoyance of persons living in the vicinity; nor shall the site or structures
thereon be permitted to become dilapidated, unsightly or unsafe. Proven technological improvements
in industry standards of drilling and production in this area shall be adopted as they become available
if capable of reducing factors of dust, vibration and odor.
(5) Electric lines. All electric lines to production facilities shall be located underground. When
electric utility lines are located within three hundred (300') feet of the pad site and are determined to
be sufficient for operations, the operator may use fuel-powered generators only as a backup in the
event of a power failure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/508
(6) Emergency response plan. Prior to the commencement of any oil, gas or other hydrocarbons
production activities, operator shall submit to the city inspector an emergency response plan
establishing written procedures to minimize any hazard resulting from drilling, completion or
producing of oil or gas wells. Said plan shall use existing guidelines established by the commission,
and any other local, state or federal agency.
(7) Fire prevention; sources of ignition. Firefighting apparatus and supplies as approved by the fire
department and required by any applicable federal, state, or local law shall be provided by the
operator, at the operator's cost, and shall be maintained on the drilling site at all times during drilling
and production operations. Operators must identify sites with hydrogen sulfide (H2S) producing
wells and provide wind direction socks for those sites at the operator's sole cost. The operator shall be
responsible for the maintenance and upkeep of equipment required herein. Each well shall be
equipped with an automated valve that closes the well in the event of an abnormal change in
operating pressure. All wellheads shall contain an emergency shut off valve to the well distribution
line as required by the commission.
(8) Freshwater wells. It shall be unlawful to drill any oil or gas well, the center of which, at the
surface of the ground, is located within one thousand (1,000') feet to any freshwater well, except for
freshwater wells used solely for operation of the oil or gas well operation. The measurement shall be
in a direct line from the closest well bore to the freshwater well bore.
(9) Oil or gas emission or burning restricted. At no time shall the well be allowed to flow or vent
directly to the atmosphere without first directing the flow through separation equipment or into a
portable tank. Venting operations shall be required to comply with the noise regulations contained in
this article.
(10) Grass, weeds, trash. All drill and operation sites shall be kept clear of high grass, weeds, and
trash. All landscaping shall be continuously maintained in an acceptable manner.
(11) Hazardous plan. Hazardous materials management plan shall be on file with the fire marshal
and the city inspector. A safety data sheet (SDS) will be maintained at each location and shall be
readily available for fire personnel to review in the event of an emergency. Additionally, any
hazardous materials protected as “trade secret” shall be disclosed to fire personnel in the event of an
emergency, in accordance with commission rules.
(12) Lights. No person shall permit any lights located on any drill or operation site to be directed in
such a manner so that they shine directly on public roads, adjacent property or property in the general
vicinity of the operation site. To the extent practicable, and taking into account safety considerations,
site lighting shall be directed downward and internally so as to avoid glare on public roads and
adjacent dwellings and buildings within three hundred (300') feet.
(13) Closed loop mud systems. A closed loop mud system shall be used in conjunction with all
drilling and reworking operations for all surface permits, unless specifically waived by the city
council.
(14) Private roads and drill sites. Prior to the commencement of any drilling operations, all private
roads used for access to the drill site and the operation site itself shall be at least ten (10') feet wide,
have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14') feet and shall be surfaced with crushed rock, gravel or
ore and maintained to prevent dust and mud. Further, an ample supply of dust suppressant shall be
maintained on any private road used for access to the drill site so as to prevent dust during the
lifetime use of the road. In particular cases these requirements governing surfacing of private roads
may be altered at the discretion of the city inspector after consideration of all circumstances
including, but not limited to, the following: distances from public streets and highways; distances
from adjoining and nearby property owners whose surface rights are not leased by the operation; the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/508
purpose for which the property of such owners is or may be used; topographical features; nature of
the soil; and exposure to wind.
(15) Signs.
(A) A sign shall be immediately and prominently displayed adjacent to the public right-ofway
at the gate on the temporary and permanent site fencing erected pursuant to this article.
Such sign shall be durable material, maintained in good condition and, unless otherwise
required by the commission, shall have a surface area of not less than two (2) square feet nor
more than four (4) square feet and shall be lettered with the following:
(i) Well name and number;
(ii) Name of operator;
(iii) The emergency 911 number; and
(iv) Telephone numbers of two (2) persons responsible for the well who may be
contacted in case of emergency.
(B) Permanent weatherproof signs reading “danger no smoking allowed” shall be posted
immediately upon completion of the drill site fencing at the entrance of each drill site and tank
battery or in any other location approved or designated by the fire marshal of the city. Sign
lettering shall be four (4") inches in height and shall be red on a white background or white on a
red background. Each sign shall include the emergency notification numbers of the fire
department and the operator, well and lease designations required by the commission.
(16) Storage of equipment.
(A) Onsite storage is prohibited on the operation site. No equipment shall be stored on the
drilling or production operation site, unless it is necessary to the everyday operation of the well.
Lumber, pipes, tubing and casing shall not be left on the operation site except when drilling or
well servicing operations are being conducted on the site.
(B) No vehicle or item of machinery shall be parked or stored on any street, right-of-way or
in any driveway, alley or upon any operation site which constitutes a fire hazard or an
obstruction to or interference with fighting or controlling fires except that equipment which is
necessary for drilling or production operations on the site. The fire department shall be the
entity that determines whether equipment on the site shall constitute a fire hazard. Vehicles
containing hazardous materials shall be placarded according to National Fire Protection
Association requirements.
(17) Storage tanks.
(A) All storage tanks shall be equipped with firewalls, berms or secondary containment
system including lining with an impervious material. The firewall, berms or secondary
containment system shall be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other
local, state or federal agency. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain
the liquids from the storage tank.
(B) All tanks shall be set back pursuant to the standards of the commission and the National
Fire Protection Association, but in all cases, shall be at least twenty-five (25') feet from any
public right-of-way or property line. Each storage tank shall be equipped with a level control
device that will automatically activate a valve to close the well in the event of excess liquid
accumulation in the tank.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/508
(C) No meters, storage tanks, separation facilities, or other above ground facilities, other than
the wellhead and flow lines, shall be placed within any floodway as defined by the most current
FEMA map, without the prior consent of the city council.
(D) To the extent that it is technically feasible, all storage tanks, separators and compressors
serving multiple wells shall be kept as a group on a single site.
(18) Tank battery facilities. Tank battery facilities and/or storage tanks shall be equipped with a
remote foam line and a lightning arrestor system.
(19) Valves. Each well must have a shutoff valve to terminate the well's production. The fire
department shall have access to the drill site to enable it to close the shut-off valve in an emergency.
(20) Waste disposal. Unless otherwise directed by the commission, all tanks used for storage shall
conform to the following:
(A) Operator must use portable closed steel storage tanks for storing liquid hydrocarbons.
Tanks must meet the American Petroleum Institute standards. All tanks must have a vent line,
flame arrester and pressure relief valve. A fence applicable to the issued permit classification
must enclose all tanks. No tank battery/storage tank shall be within three hundred (300') feet of
any dwelling or other combustible structure.
(B) Drilling mud, cuttings, liquid hydrocarbons and all other field waste derived or resulting
from or connected with the drilling, reworking or deepening of any well shall be processed
through a closed loop mud system. All disposals must be in accordance with the rules of the
commission and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(C) Unless otherwise directed by the commission, waste materials shall be removed from the
site and transported to an offsite disposal facility not less often than every thirty (30) calendar
days. Water stored in onsite tanks shall be removed as necessary.
(D) All waste shall be disposed of in such a manner as to comply with the air and water
pollution control regulations of the state, and any other appropriate local, state or federal
agency.
(21) Watchman. The operator must keep a watchman or security personnel on-site during the
drilling or reworking of a well when other workmen are not on the premises.
(22) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including
wellheads, pumping units, tanks and secondary containment. When requiring painting of such
facilities, the city inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which
such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a
neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and
unobtrusive shades of green, blue, black and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city
inspector. The color of all tanks, fixed equipment and painted surfaces, including fences, shall be the
same throughout the pad site.
(23) Hydrogen sulfide. If a gas or oil field is identified as a hydrogen sulfide (H2S) field under
RRC, TCEQ, or EPA regulations, or if a well is producing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) gas over
applicable commission, and any other appropriate, state or federal agency standards, the operator
shall immediately stabilize and cease any additional oil or gas operations of that well or facility.
(24) Saltwater wells. No saltwater wells, or disposal wells shall be located within the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/508
(b) Well setbacks. Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful to drill any well, the center
of which, at the surface of the ground, is located:
(1) Boundary of drill site. Within twenty-five (25') feet from the boundary of the drill/operation
site;
(2) Storage tank. Within twenty-five (25') feet from any storage tank, or source of ignition;
(3) Public street. Within seventy-five (75') feet of any public street, road, highway or future street,
right-of-way or property line, or railroad right-of-way;
(4) Protected use. Within three hundred (300') feet from any protected use;
(5) Accessory building. Within one hundred (100') feet of any building accessory to, but not
necessary to the operation of the well; or
(6) Freshwater well. Within one thousand (1,000') feet to any freshwater well. The measurement
shall be in a direct line from the closest well bore to the freshwater well bore.
(c) General information. The distance shall be calculated from the well bore, in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, to the closest exterior point of any object listed in subsections (b)(1) through
(6) above.
(1) There will be a minimum of twenty-five (25') feet landscape buffer on all sides of the area
adjacent to and outside of the fence of the operation site.
(2) The distances set out in subsection (b)(1), (3) or (6) of this section may be reduced at the
discretion of the city council. The reduction of the distance requirement for freshwater wells is
subject to the commission regulations and any other appropriate local, state or federal agency.
(d) Installation of pipelines on, under or across public property.
(1) Franchise. The operator shall apply to the city for a franchise agreement on, over, under, along
or across the city streets, sidewalks, alleys and other city property for the purpose of constructing,
laying, maintaining, operating, repairing, replacing and removing pipelines so long as production or
operations may be continued under a surface permit issued pursuant to this article. Operator shall:
(A) Not interfere with or damage existing water, sewer or gas lines or the facilities of public
utilities located on, under or across the course of such rights-of-way.
(B) Furnish to the city inspector of the city a plat showing the location of such pipelines.
(C) Construct such lines out of pipe in accordance with the city codes and regulations
properly cased and vented if under a street.
(D) Grade, level and restore such property to the same surface condition, as nearly as
practicable, as existed when operations for the drilling of the well were first commenced.
(2) Drilling in streets prohibited. No surface permit shall be issued for any well to be drilled within
any of the streets or alleys of the city and/or projected streets or alleys shown by the current
master/thoroughfare plan of the city, and no street or alley shall be blocked or encumbered or closed
due to any exploration, drilling or production operations unless prior consent is obtained from the
city council. Any consent shall be temporary in nature and state the number of hours and/or days that
any street or alley may be blocked, encumbered or closed. The decision to authorize a license
agreement in accordance with this section shall be in the sole discretion of the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/508
Sec. 4.06.015 Cleanup and maintenance
This section applies to new surface permits as well as oil and gas wells that are in existence at the time of
adoption of this article. All drill sites shall be maintained to this cleanup and maintenance standard.
(1) Cleanup after well servicing. After the well has been completed or plugged and abandoned, the
operator shall clean the drill site or operation site, complete restoration activities and repair all
damage to public property caused by such operations within sixty (60) calendar days.
(2) Cleanup after spills, leaks and malfunctions. After any spill, leak or malfunction, the operator
shall remove or cause to be removed to the satisfaction of the city inspector all waste materials from
any public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. Cleanup operations must
begin immediately. If the owner fails to begin site cleanup within twenty-four (24) hours, the city
shall have the right to contact the commission in order to facilitate the removal of all waste materials
from the property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction.
(3) Free from debris. The property on which a drill site is located shall at all times be kept free of
debris, pools of water or other liquids, contaminated soil, weeds, brush, trash or other waste material.
(4) Painting. All production equipment shall be painted and maintained at all times, including
wellheads, pumping units, tanks, and buildings or structures. When requiring painting of such
facilities, the city inspector shall consider the deterioration of the quality of the material of which
such facility or structure is constructed, the degree of rust, and its appearance. Paint shall be of a
neutral color, compatible with surrounding uses. Neutral colors shall include sand, gray and
unobtrusive shades of green, blue, black and brown, or other neutral colors approved by the city
inspector.
(5) Blowouts. In the event of the loss of control of any well, operator shall immediately take all
reasonable steps to regain control regardless of any other provision of this article and shall notify the
city inspector as soon as practicable. The city inspector shall certify in writing, briefly describing the
same, to the city manager. If the city inspector, in his opinion, believes that danger to persons and
property exists because of such loss of well control and that the operator is not taking or is unable to
take all reasonable and necessary steps to regain control of such well, the city inspector may then
employ any well control expert or experts or other contractors or suppliers of special services, or may
incur any other expenses for labor and material which the city inspector deems necessary to regain
control of such well. The city shall then have a valid lien against the interest in the well of all
working interest owners to secure payment of any expenditure made by the city pursuant to such
action of the city inspector in gaining control of said well.
(6) Secondary containment. All storage tanks shall be equipped with a firewall, berm or secondary
containment system including lining with an impervious material. The firewall, berm or secondary
containment system shall be in accordance with the rules of the commission and any other local, state
or federal agency. Drip pots shall be provided at the pump out connection to contain liquids from the
storage tank.
Sec. 4.06.016 Plugged and abandoned wells
(a) Surface requirements for plugged and abandoned well. Whenever abandonment occurs pursuant to the
requirements of the commission, the operator so abandoning shall be responsible for the restoration of the drill
site to its original condition as nearly as practicable, in conformity with the regulations of this article.
(b) Abandonment. Abandonment shall be approved by the city inspector after restoration of the drill site has
been accomplished in conformity with the following requirements at the discretion of the city inspector:
(1) Derrick. The derrick and all appurtenant equipment thereto shall be removed from drill site;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/508
(2) Tanks. All tanks, towers, and other surface installations shall be removed from the drill site;
(3) Concrete foundations. All concrete foundations, piping, wood, guy anchors and other foreign
materials regardless of depth, except surface casing, shall be removed from the site, unless otherwise
directed by the commission;
(4) Holes and depressions. All holes and depressions shall be filled with clean, compactable soil;
(5) Waste. All waste, refuse or waste material shall be removed from the drill site; and
(6) Compliance. During abandonment, operator shall comply with all applicable sections in this
article.
(7) Permanent marker. A permanent abandonment marker pipe, with well identity and location
permanently inscribed shall be welded to casing and shall be at least four inches (4") in diameter with
a length of four feet (4') visible above ground level.
(c) Abandoned well requirement. The operator shall furnish the following at the discretion of the city
inspector:
(1) Commission approval. A copy of the approval of the commission confirming compliance with
all abandonment proceedings under the state law; and
(2) Notice. A notice of intention to abandon under the provisions of this section and stating the
date such work will be commenced. Abandonment may then be commenced on or subsequent to the
date so stated.
(d) Abandonment requirements prior to new construction. All abandoned or deserted wells or drill sites shall
meet the most current abandonment requirements of the commission prior to the issuance of any building permit
for development of the property. No structure shall be built over an abandoned well.
Sec. 4.06.017 Technical advisor
The city may from time to time employ a technical advisor or advisors who are experienced and educated in the
oil or gas industry or the law as it pertains to oil or gas matters. The function of such advisor(s) shall be to
advise, counsel or represent the city on such matters relating to oil or gas operations within the city as the city
may want or require and the effect thereof, both present and future, on the health, welfare, comfort and safety of
the citizens of the city. In the event such technical advisor(s) is employed for the purpose of advising, counseling
or representing the city relative to an operator's unique and particular set of circumstances, case or request
relating to this article, then the cost for such services of such technical advisor(s) shall be assessed against and
paid for by such operator in addition to any fees or charges assessed pursuant to this article. Prior to the
employment of a technical advisor, the city shall inform the operator of the intended scope of work and the
estimated costs and expenses. The employment of a technical advisor shall be approved by the city manager.
Sec. 4.06.018 Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ)
(a) Site plan required. All wells drilled, redrilled/reworked after the passage of this article that are located
within the ETJ of the city shall file a site plan with the city secretary showing the property boundaries and
location of said well and associated equipment. No fee shall be charged by the city for said filing.
(b) Road maintenance agreement. Any oil or gas well to be drilled or being drilled in the ETJ on the effective
date of this article, using trucks larger than 3 tons, that will be traveling on city maintained streets during
drilling, production, transportation or any other related activity must sign a citywide road maintenance
agreement. The agreement shall provide that the operator shall repair, at his own expense, damage to roads or
streets caused by the use of heavy vehicles for any activity associated with the preparation, drilling, production,
transportation and operation of oil and or gas wells. City shall determine degree of damage, dollar amount owed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/508
and bill annually. Operator shall provide the number of truck trips, truck types and weights, loaded and
unloaded. Agreement may also contain provisions to protect the health, welfare and safety of the citizens along
the streets being used, such as, speed limits, other traffic-control devices, days and times of usage, turning
movements, noise limitations, etc. Failure to sign and abide by the citywide road maintenance agreement will
result in the loss of the privilege to use city streets.
Sec. 4.06.019 Platting requirements for certain residential developments adjacent to oil or gas wells
(a) The provisions of this section shall apply to land in the city:
(1) Zoning. That is subject to any zoning designation which allows for a single-family dwelling;
(2) Distance. Where any portion of the boundary of the land is located within three hundred (300')
feet of the boundary of an existing drill site; and
(3) Plat. Whose developer is required to have a final plat prepared and approved pursuant to the
subdivision ordinance of the city.
(b) Plat note. The owner of land meeting the criteria set forth in this section shall, at the time of platting,
include on the face of the plat, framed in a bold line so as to be distinctly visible, in capital letters and in a
minimum type font size of fourteen (14) point, the following note: “Lots are located within 300 feet of an
approved oil and gas well site.” The owner of the property shall complete the blank in the plat note to indicate
the lots subject to this section.
(c) Final plat. For the purposes of this section the terms “developer” and “final plat” shall have the meanings
ascribed to them by the subdivision ordinance of the city.
Sec. 4.06.020 Appeals
(a) Failure to cure. If the operator does not cure the noncompliance within the time specified in this article, the
inspector, upon written notice to the operator, may suspend or revoke the surface permit.
(b) File appeal. Operator may, within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the decision of the inspector in
writing to suspend or revoke a surface permit, file an appeal through the city manager to the city council under
the provisions outlined in this section.
(c) Council appeal. The city council shall have and exercise the power to hear and determine appeals where it
is alleged there is error or abuse of discretion regarding the revocation or suspension of any surface permit
issued by the inspector of a surface well permit as provided by this article. Any person or entity whose permit is
suspended or revoked or whose well or equipment is deemed by the inspector to be abandoned may, within thirty
(30) calendar days of the date of the written decision of the inspector file an appeal to the city council in
accordance with the following procedure.
(1) Appeal in writing. An appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed in triplicate with the city
secretary. The grounds for appeal must be set forth specifically, and the error described, by the
appellant.
(2) City council agenda. Within forty-five (45) calendar days of receipt of the records, the city
secretary shall transmit all papers involved in the proceeding, place the matter on the city council
agenda for hearing and give notice by mail of the time, place and purpose thereof to appellant and
any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. No other notice need to be given.
(d) Fee. Appeal fees shall be required for every appeal and as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A to
this code.
(e) Decision final. The decision of the city council shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/508
Sec. 4.06.021 Takings determination
(a) Taking application. Any aggrieved person who believes that an action taken pursuant to this article by the
city council or any officer, employee or agent of the city would legally constitute a taking of property without
just compensation under the state or United States Constitution, must file an application with the city council to
request a takings determination.
(b) File with city secretary. The applicant seeking a takings determination from the city council shall file its
application with the office of the city secretary at least thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled city
council meeting. The city secretary shall then forward the takings determination application to the city council
for consideration. The application fee as set forth in the fee schedule in appendix A to this code and shall
accompany each filing.
(c) Evidence of takings. The application shall state the reasons the applicant believes would support a finding
that the city's application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property would legally constitute a
taking under the state or United States Constitution and shall include evidence substantiating the purported
diminution in value of the applicant's property.
(d) Burden of proof. At the takings determination hearing conducted by the city council, the applicant must
present detailed economic information and other evidence necessary to establish that the city's application of the
provisions of this article to the applicant's property would legally constitute a taking of the property without just
compensation. The applicant has the burden of proof in establishing that the city's application of the provisions
of this article to the applicant's property legally constitutes a taking of property without just compensation under
the state or United States Constitution.
(e) Council powers. The city council may administer oaths, compel the attendance of witnesses and require
the disclosure of financial information from the applicant that the city council determines is necessary to make a
determination regarding whether the city's application of the provisions of this article to the applicant's property
legally constitutes a taking of property without just compensation under the state or United States Constitution.
(f) Council finding.
(1) If the council finds in favor of the applicant it may:
(A) Grant the relief requested;
(B) Direct the city manager to rescind action taken by city staff or agent that formed the basis
of the takings determination application; or
(C) Direct the city manager to reconsider action taken by city staff or agent that formed the
basis of the takings determination application.
(2) If the council denies the application, or after a favorable determination the city council fails to
take action as specified above, the applicant may appeal the decision or inaction of the city council to
the county or district court of the county in which the affected real property is located within thirty
(30) calendar days of the date that the council issues its final decision.
Sec. 4.06.022 Penalty
(a) Unlawful. It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to do the following:
(1) Activities not permitted. Engage in any activity not permitted by the terms of a surface permit
issued under this article;
(2) Failure to comply. Failure to comply with any condition set forth in a surface permit issued
under this article; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/508
(3) Violate provision. Violate any provision or requirement set forth under this article.
(b) Punishment. Any violation of this article shall be punished by a fine of not more than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) per day, subject to applicable state law. Each day that a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. No notice of default required by this article shall be a precondition to immediate criminal enforcement
due to a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 2015-12-14(7A) adopted 12/14/15)
CHAPTER 5
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION
ARTICLE 5.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 5.01.001 Arson reward
The city hereby offers a reward of two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00) for the provision of information
leading to the arrest and conviction of any person or persons found guilty of committing the crime of arson
within the corporate limits of the city. The city council shall be the sole and exclusive judge in determining
eligibility for the reward established herein. This reward is a standing offer, and shall be paid out of the general
fund of the city. (1996 Code, art. 5.500)
State law reference–Arson, V.T.C.A., Penal Code, sec. 28.02.
Sec. 5.01.002 Reserved
Editor's note–Former section 5.01.002 pertaining to outdoor burning and deriving from the 1996 Code, art. 5.700, was superseded by
Ordinance 2016-04-11(8C) adopted 4/11/16. These provisions can now be found in article 5.06.
Sec. 5.01.003 Grass, weeds and other vegetation
(a) Prohibited conditions. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation owning or having control of
any lot or land in the city to permit grass, weeds and/or vegetation to grow and be on such lot or land in violation
of section 6.04.001 of this code. It shall be the duty of the owner and/or person in control of such lands and lots
to cut and have removed such grass, weeds, and vegetation. (1996 Code, sec. 5.402; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Inspection of lots. Upon instruction from the mayor or the city manager, it shall be the duty of the city
health officer and/or the fire marshal of the city to inspect the lots and lands in the city and determine what
vacant lots, if any, there may be on which the grass, weed and vegetation have grown to such an extent as to
endanger the health of those living in that vicinity or which create a fire hazard to buildings or adjacent lots in
that vicinity.
(c) Notice to abate. It shall be the duty of the chief of police or a member of his staff to serve or cause to be
served a notice upon the owner or occupant of any premises on which grass, weeds and/or vegetation are
permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this section and to demand the abatement of the nuisance
within ten (10) days.
(d) Failure to abate. If the person so served does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days, the city manager
may proceed to direct the abatement, and such expense shall be charged and paid by such owner or occupant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/508
(e) Lien for city's costs. Charges for such removal of said grass, weeds and/or vegetation shall be a lien upon
the premises. Whenever a bill for such charges remains unpaid for sixty (60) days after it has been rendered, the
city secretary may file with the county recorder a statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain a legal
description of the premises, the expense and cost incurred, and the date the weeds, grass or other vegetation was
cut, and the notice that the city claims a lien for said amount. Notice of such lien claim shall be mailed certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the premises if his address is known. Provided, however, that
failure of the clerk to record such lien claim or to mail such notice, or failure of the owner to receive such notice,
shall not affect the right to foreclose the lien for such charges as provided in the following subsection.
(f) Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid grass, weed or other vegetation cutting charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of such sale shall be applied to pay the charges after
deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in equity in the
name of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.402)
State law references–Authority of municipality to regulate weeds, grass, etc., V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.004 et seq.
Sec. 5.01.004 Hazardous buildings or conditions
(a) Dangerous buildings or structures. Any building or structure or premises in need of repair, or which by
reason of age is in a dilapidated condition, or for any cause is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as
to endanger buildings or property of others, is hereby declared a fire hazard and public nuisance.
(b) Hazardous equipment or conditions. Any owner or occupant of any building or other structure, or
premises, who shall keep or maintain the same with an improper arrangement of a stove, range, furnace, or other
heating appliance of any kind whatever, including chimneys, flues, and pipes with which the same may be
connected, so as to be dangerous in the matter of fire, or health or safety of persons or property of others, or who
shall keep or maintain any building, other structure or premises with an improper arrangement of a lighting
device or system, or with a storage of explosives, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, chemicals, vegetable products,
ashes, combustibles, inflammable materials, or refuse, or with any other condition which shall be dangerous in
character to the persons, health, or property of others, or which shall be dangerous in the matter of promoting,
augmenting or causing fires, or which shall create conditions dangerous to firemen or occupants of such
building, structure, or premises other than the maintainer thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c) Order required prior to prosecution. No prosecution shall be brought under subsections (a) and (b) of this
section until the party is notified by the fire chief, fire prevention bureau, fire marshal and their duly authorized
representatives of such violations and shall fail or refuse to comply with the order or orders regarding the same.
(1996 Code, secs. 5.403–5.405)
ARTICLE 5.02 FIRE DEPARTMENT*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 5.02.001 Power of arrest at scene of fire
The mayor of the city, or any officer of any fire department, or any officer of the city, is fully authorized and
empowered to keep away from the vicinity of any fire all disorderly, idle or suspicious persons, and to arrest,
restrain and imprison any such persons who shall fail or refuse to obey, in any manner interfere with, or put
themselves in the way of the firemen, or in any manner interfere with or handle any goods, and all such persons
so arrested, restrained or imprisoned shall be deemed and held guilty of a misdemeanor. (1996 Code, sec. 5.201)
Sec. 5.02.002 Using or damaging equipment; driving over fire hose
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/508
It shall not be lawful for any person, under any pretext whatever, other than the purpose for which they were
intended in the fire department, to take or use any engine, truck, ladder, bucket, axe, or other apparatus
belonging to or in the possession of the fire department, or any member of the company thereof, or to deface,
break or injure same, or to pass on or over the hose of any fire company with a vehicle, and any persons
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1996 Code, sec. 5.202)
State law reference–Crossing fire hose, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.408.
Secs. 5.02.003–5.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Fire Marshal
Sec. 5.02.031 General duties
(a) The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within this
city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether
such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within twenty-four (24)
hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of such fire. The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of
all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the amount or
the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this section.
(b) In addition to his other duties, the fire marshal shall be the head of the fire prevention bureau and
responsible for its accomplishment of all of the tasks delegated to it by the fire chief, including, but not limited
to, the running of a fire prevention program within the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.203)
Sec. 5.02.032 Taking of testimony; duty when evidence indicates crime
The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the
testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in
relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause the same to be reduced to writing; and if he shall be of
the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or the attempt to
commit the crime of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud or criminal conduct in connection with such fire, he shall
cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with such offense or either of them, and shall furnish to
the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case. (1996
Code, sec. 5.204)
Sec. 5.02.033 Power to summon witnesses, administer oaths and require production of evidence
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which
is by the provisions of this division a subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any
book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto. The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to
administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witnesses before him. (1996 Code, sec. 5.205)
Sec. 5.02.034 Misconduct of witness
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of
the fire marshal, or who disobeys, fails or refuses to produce any book, paper or document touching any matter
under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings of the fire
marshal in the matter of said investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any
matter under investigation as aforesaid, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the
fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted. Provided, however, that any person so convicted shall
have the right of appeal. (1996 Code, sec. 5.206)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/508
Sec. 5.02.035 Investigations may be private
All investigations held by or under the direction of the fire marshal may, in his discretion, be private, and
persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is held,
and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other
until they have been examined. (1996 Code, sec. 5.207)
Sec. 5.02.036 Right to enter premises where fire has occurred
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary, in the performance of the
duties imposed upon him by the provisions of this division, to enter upon and examine any building or premises
where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the same, which authority shall
be exercised only with reason and good discretion. Should entry be denied, the fire marshal shall have the
authority to apply for a search warrant to obtain entry. (1996 Code, sec. 5.208)
Sec. 5.02.037 Inspections for hazardous conditions
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent, and
without any complaint, shall have a right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into
and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty, monthly or more often, to enter upon
and make, or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report
to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each fire in the city
during the month. (1996 Code, sec. 5.209)
Secs. 5.02.038–5.02.060 Reserved
Division 3. Fireman's Pension Fund*
Sec. 5.02.061 Deposits
At the beginning of each fiscal year of the city, there shall be deposited in the city's fireman's pension fund the
amount of four thousand dollars ($4000.00) from the general fund of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 8.401)
Sec. 5.02.062 Management of funds
It shall be the duty of the members of the fireman's pension board, established by the city pursuant to article
6243e V.T.C.S, to manage, invest and control the fireman's pension fund and all moneys pertaining thereto and
to pay beneficiaries [as] provided by law. (1996 Code, sec. 8.402)
ARTICLE 5.03 FIRE CODE
Sec. 5.03.001 Adopted
That certain document, one copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and
designated as the International Fire Code, 2012 edition, published by the International Code Council, is hereby
adopted as the fire code of the city for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire
and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices,
and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises in the city and
providing for the issuance of permits for hazardous uses and operations, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, conditions and terms of such International Fire Code, 2012 edition, published by the International
Code Council, on file in the office of the city secretary, are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part of this
section as if fully set out in this article. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9B) adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 5.03.002 Amendments
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/508
The International Fire Code is amended as follows:
Each reference to “jurisdiction” or location for insertion of name of jurisdiction shall mean the City of Rockdale,
Texas.
Section 109.3 Violations penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply
with any of the requirements thereof or who shall erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work [sic] in violation
of the approved construction documents or directives of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued
under the provisions of this code, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than
$2,000.00 per day. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
Section 111.4. Any person who shall continue any work on the system after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be
liable for a fine of not less than $200.00 or more than $2,000.00.
(Ordinance 28-1201-(1), ex. A (3.210(b)), adopted 12/28/01)
Sec. 5.03.003 Enforcement
The code hereby adopted shall be enforced by the chief of the fire department. (1996 Code, sec. 5.102)
Sec. 5.03.004 Limits of districts
The limits referred to the International Fire Code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside above-ground
tanks is prohibited, the limits referred to in the International Fire Code in which bulk storage of liquefied
petroleum gas is restricted, and the limits referred to in the International Fire Code in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited are hereby established as the fire limits of the city. (1996 Code, sec.
5.103; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.03.005 Modifications
The chief of the fire department shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the fire prevention code
hereby adopted upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are
practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the fire prevention code, provided that the spirit
of the fire prevention code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars
of such modification, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the chief of the fire department thereon shall
be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. (1996 Code,
sec. 5.104)
Sec. 5.03.006 Appeals
Whenever the chief of the fire department shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a permit applied for,
or when it is claimed that the provisions of the fire prevention code do not apply or that the true intent and
meaning of the fire prevention code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal
from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the local governing body within thirty (30) days from the
date of the decision appealed. (1996 Code, sec. 5.105)
ARTICLE 5.04 FIRE LIMITS*
Sec. 5.04.001 Defined
The following shall be and are hereby declared to be the fire limits:
Beginning at the intersection of the center of Bell and Green Streets, thence south along the
center of Green Street to the intersection of Milam Street to the intersection of San Gabriel
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/508
Street and Milam Street. Thence south along the center of San Gabriel Street on across the
Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks and right-of-way. Thence west along the south line of the
Missouri Pacific Railroad right-of-way to a point even with the center of Scarbrough Street.
Thence north on across the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks and right-of-way to the intersection
of the center of Scarbrough Street and Milam Street. Thence east along the center of Milam
Street to the intersection of Burleson and said Milam Street. Thence north along the center of
Burleson Street to the intersection of Cameron and said Burleson Street. Thence west along the
center of Cameron Street to a point even with the west line of Lot 5, Block 5, of the city on
along the center of the alley which runs on the west side of Lots 17, 16, 15 and 14 of Block 5 of
the city, on along to the center of Bell Street. Thence east along the center of Bell Street to a
point even with the center of the alley in the middle of Block 11 of the city. Thence north along
the center of the alley which runs in the middle of Block [11] of the city on along to the center
of Davilla Street. Thence east along the center of Davilla Street to a point even with the alley
which runs north and south in the middle of Block 10, thence south along the center of the alley
which runs in the middle of Block 10 of Rockdale on to the center of Bell Street. Thence east
along the center of Bell Street to the intersection of Green and Bell Streets, which is the point of
beginning.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.301)
Sec. 5.04.002 Permits and inspections
(a) No wall, structure, building, or part thereof shall hereafter be built, enlarged, or altered until a plan of the
proposed work, together with a statement of materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the building
inspector, who shall, if in accordance with the provisions herein contained, issue a written permit in triplicate for
the proposed work. Permits are to be kept on file with the city secretary.
(b) Structures hereafter erected without a permit, or not in conformity with this article, shall be removed.
(c) No building shall be moved from without to within the fire limits, nor from one location to another within
the fire limits, until a permit shall have been issued therefor. No permit shall be issued unless such construction
is in accordance with this article.
(d) The designated building inspector shall inspect, as often as practical, construction in progress to see that
all provisions of this article are being complied with.
(e) All plans and specifications submitted to the designated official shall comply with all city codes, and with
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, ch. 1001 (Texas Engineering Practice Act).
(1996 Code, sec. 5.302)
Sec. 5.04.003 General construction requirements
All construction within the fire limits of the city shall be in accordance with the provisions for fire limits
construction as set forth in the International Building Code currently in effect. (1996 Code, sec. 5.303;
Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 5.04.004 Frame structures
The following frame structures are permissible in the fire limits:
(1) Temporary one-story frame buildings for the use of builders.
(2) Wooden fences not over eight (8) feet high without roof or cover.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.304)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/508
Sec. 5.04.005 Roofs
(a) All buildings or structures hereafter constructed in the fire limits shall have incombustible roof coverings.
(b) No roofing on an existing roof shall be renewed or repaired to a greater extent than ten percent (10%) of
the roof surface except in conformity with this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.305)
Sec. 5.04.006 Repairs and additions
(a) Any existing building within the fire limits which may hereafter be damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise to
an amount greater than fifty percent (50%) of its present value, exclusive of the foundation, shall not be repaired
or rebuilt, but shall be removed.
(b) Extensions, remodeling, or additions to existing buildings shall not be considered as repairs, and shall not
be permitted except when conforming with section 5.04.003 of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.306)
Sec. 5.04.007 Arbitration
Whenever an application for a permit to repair any existing building already located within the fire limits is
made by any person or firm, and the city council and the applicant disagree on the extent of repairs to be made,
and a permit is denied by the designated building inspector, then the city council or commission shall appoint a
competent and disinterested person, and the applicant shall appoint a competent and disinterested person, which
said two (2) persons so appointed shall select a third member, and these said three persons shall appraise the
building, examine the plan of the proposed work and the statement of materials and labor to be used in the
repairing or rebuilding of said building, and make a signed written report of their findings to the city council. If
such report reflects clearly that said rebuilding or repairing would be a violation of this article, then such
application for permit shall be denied by the city council; if such report reflects that the person seeking said
permit has complied with this article, and the requested rebuilding or repairing is not in violation of this article,
then the city council shall issue a permit for the proposed rebuilding or repairing. (1996 Code, sec. 5.307)
ARTICLE 5.05 FIREWORKS*
Sec. 5.05.001 Storage, sale or use prohibited in city limits
(a) Storage, sale and use prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, offer for sale, expose for sale,
sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks within the city limits. Fireworks shall mean and include any
combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances or article prepared for the
purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and it
shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, the
type of balloons which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedos, skyrockets, roman
candles, daygo bombs, sparklers, or other devices of like construction and any devices containing any explosive
substance, except that the term “fireworks” shall not include auto flares, paper caps containing not in excess of
an average of 0.25 of a grain of explosive content per cap manufactured in accordance with the interstate
commerce regulations for packing and shipping as provided therein, and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other
devices for use of such caps, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times. (1996 Code, sec. 5.401;
Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Seizure of illegal fireworks. The fire marshal shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the
expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of this
section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/508
(c) Exception for commercial fireworks displays. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
explosion and display of a commercial public fireworks display conducted under the direction and control of the
city fire marshal or his delegates.
(1996 Code, sec. 5.401)
Sec. 5.05.002 Sale prohibited
No person, firm, company, association or corporation shall exhibit or have in his possession, with intent to give
away or sell, or offer for sale, or sell, any squib, rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, or any other kind of fireworks
within the corporate limits of the city. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the sale of any such
article or articles by wholesalers to each other. (1996 Code, sec. 5.601)
Sec. 5.05.003 Possession prohibited
No person, firm, company, association or corporation shall exhibit or have in his possession any squib, rocket,
cracker, torpedo, grenade, or any other kind of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. The provisions
of this section shall not apply to any wholesaler possessing such articles with the sole intent to sell or transfer
such articles to another wholesaler. (1996 Code, sec. 5.602)
Sec. 5.05.004 Discharge prohibited
No person, firm, company, association or corporation shall fire, discharge, cast, throw or set off any squib,
rocket, cracker, torpedo, grenade, or any other kind of fireworks within the corporate limits of the city. (1996
Code, sec. 5.603)
ARTICLE 5.06 OUTDOOR BURNING*
Sec. 5.06.001 Definitions
Extinguished. The absence of any visible flames, glowing coals, or smoke.
Structure containing sensitive receptor(s). A manmade structure utilized for human residence or business, the
containment of livestock, or the housing of sensitive live vegetation. The term “manmade structure” does not
include such things as range fences, road, bridges, hunting blinds, or facilities used solely for the storage of hay
or other livestock feeds. The term “sensitive live vegetation” is defined as vegetation that has potential to be
damaged by smoke and heat, examples of which include, but are not limited to, nursery production, mushroom
cultivation, pharmaceutical plant production, or laboratory experiments involving plants.
Sunrise/sunset. Official sunrise/sunset as set forth in the United States Naval Observatory tables available from
National Weather Service offices.
Sec. 5.06.002 Exemptions
No person may cause, suffer, allow, or permit any outdoor burning within the city limits, except as provided in
this article. The following exceptions to the prohibition against outdoor burning apply:
(1) Outdoor burning is authorized for fires used solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes, in
the noncommercial preparation of food, or exclusively as a means of supplying warmth in cold
weather. Such burning for the purpose of outdoor cooking shall be in a device designated and
constructed for such purpose in compliance with this article. No burning of waste or garbage shall be
permitted in cooking devices.
(A) Fires covered under this section shall be no larger than 18 cubic feet (two feet in height x
three feet in width x three feet in length) and shall be contained in a noncombustible chimenea,
outdoor fireplace, fire pit, or other method approved by the fire code official.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/508
(B) All openings in the container or fire pit must be covered with wire mesh or other
screening materials that will prevent the passage of sparks and ember.
(C) Fires must be kept at least 10 feet from any structure or combustible exterior wall.
(D) Fires must be constantly attended.
(E) The burning of domestic waste, yard waste, leaves, brush, vines, evergreen needles,
branches smaller than 3 inches in diameter, untreated lumber, garbage, paper products is
prohibited.
(F) The fire code official, police officer, or code enforcement office may order any open fire,
or use of a chimenea, outdoor fireplace, or fire pit which creates a nuisance to be extinguished.
(G) All chimeneas must be extinguished by 1:00 a.m.
(H) Electric insulation, treated lumber, plastics, nonwood construction/demolition materials,
heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, and items
containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material which may produce an unreasonable
amount of smoke must not be burned.
(2) Outdoor burning shall be authorized for training firefighting personnel when requested and
conducted in accordance with title 30, Texas Administrative Code, section 111.205 and any
amendments thereto.
(3) If not otherwise authorized by this article, outdoor burning may be authorized by written
permission from the executive director of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality
(T.C.E.Q.) if there is no practical alternative and if the burning will not cause or contribute to a
nuisance, traffic hazard or to a violation of any federal or state primary or secondary ambient air
standard. The requirements imposed for outdoor burning under this section are as follows:
(A) A copy of the written permission from T.C.E.Q. to conduct the outdoor burn must be
presented to the fire code official or his designee.
(B) The fire code official or his designee shall inspect the location of a controlled burn and
shall determine if the burn can be safely conducted before any actual burning occurs.
(C) The fire code official may require the following, depending on conditions found during
the controlled burn site inspection:
(i) A specified number of individuals be present with fire extinguishing devices and
appliances;
(ii) Fire breaks to be cut around the area to be burned;
(iii) A trench to be dug and any burning be conducted in the trench; or
(iv) Any other requirements that the fire code official may be deem necessary to safely
conduct the controlled burn.
(D) Burning shall be commenced and conducted only when wind direction and other
meteorological conditions are such that smoke and other pollutants will not cause adverse
effects to any public road, landing strip, navigable water, or off-site structure containing
sensitive receptor(s). Burning shall not be commenced or conducted when a shift in wind
direction is predicted which could produce adverse effects to persons, animals, or property
during the burning period. If at any time the burning causes or may tend to cause smoke to blow
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/508
onto or across a road or highway, it is the responsibility of the person initiating the burn to post
flag-persons on affected roads in accordance with the requirements of the Texas Department of
Public Safety.
(E) Burning must be conducted downwind of or at least 300 feet (90 meters) from any
structure located on adjacent properties unless prior written approval is obtained from the
adjacent occupant with possessory control.
(F) Burning shall be conducted in compliance with the following meteorological and timing
considerations:
(i) The initiation of burning shall commence no earlier than one hour after sunrise.
Burning shall be completed on the same day not later than one hour before sunset, and
shall be attended by a responsible party at all times during the active burn phase when the
fire is progressing. In cases where residual fires and/or smoldering objects continue to
emit smoke after this time, such areas shall be extinguished if the smoke from these areas
has the potential to create a nuisance or traffic hazard condition. In no case shall the extent
of the burn area be allowed to increase after this time.
(ii) Burning shall not be commenced when surface wind speed is predicted to be less
than six miles per hour (mph) or greater than 23 mph during the burn period.
(iii) Burning shall not be conducted during periods of actual or predicted persistent lowlevel
atmospheric temperature inversions.
(G) Electric insulation, treated lumber, plastics, nonwood construction/demolition materials,
heavy oils, asphaltic materials, potentially explosive materials, chemical wastes, and items
containing natural or synthetic rubber, or any material which may produce an unreasonable
amount of smoke must not be burned.
(H) Authorization to burn may be revoked by the fire code official or his designee at any time
if the burning causes nuisance conditions, is not conducted in accordance with the specified
conditions, violates any provision of any applicable permit, or causes a violation of any air
quality standard. In such case, the fire code official is authorized to order the extinguishment by
the permit holder, another person responsible or the fire department of open burning.
Sec. 5.06.003 Burning of garbage, petroleum products and motor vehicles prohibited
The burning of domestic waste, garbage, petroleum products, automobiles, or other motor vehicles or any part
thereof for wrecking or salvage purposes in or on any lot or other premises within the city limits is hereby
prohibited.
Sec. 5.06.004 Fire prohibited in streets, alleys and on or in public property
It shall be unlawful for any person to light or have lighted any fire or conduct any outdoor burn in or on any
street, alley, thoroughfare, or public property.
Sec. 5.06.005 Responsibility for consequences of outdoor burning
The authority to conduct outdoor burning under this regulation does not exempt or excuse any persons
responsible from the consequences, damages, or injuries resulting from the burning and does not exempt or
excuse anyone from complying with all other applicable laws or ordinances, regulations, and orders of
governmental entities having jurisdiction, even though the burning is otherwise conducted in compliance with
this article.
Sec. 5.06.006 Burn ban
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/508
During periods of time in which the county institutes a total burn ban for the entire county, the city prohibits any
outdoor burning, except in the noncommercial preparation of food in compliance with section 5.06.002(1) as set
forth hereinabove.
Sec. 5.06.007 Penalty
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions or terms of this article, or shall fail to
comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subjected to a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each offense, except where a different penalty has been established by state law for such offense in
which event the penalty shall be fixed by state law and if deemed a violation of any provision which governs fire
safety, zoning or public health or sanitation shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand
dollars ($2,000.00) for each offense. Each day the violation exists shall be deemed to constitute a separate
offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein.
(Ordinance 2016-04-11(8C) adopted 4/11/16)
CHAPTER 6
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 6.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 6.02 HOSPITAL AUTHORITY†
Sec. 6.02.001 Created
By virtue of the power conferred upon the city by the Hospital Authority Act, a hospital authority comprising the
territory included within the boundaries of the city is hereby created as a body politic and corporate, and
“Rockdale Hospital Authority” is hereby designated as the name by which said authority shall be known. (1996
Code, sec. 1.1101)
Sec. 6.02.002 Board of directors
(a) The Rockdale Hospital Authority shall be governed by a board of directors consisting of eleven (11)
members.
(b) Each of said directors shall, unless other provision is made in the bond resolution or trust indenture in
connection with the issuance of bonds as provided in the Hospital Authority Act, serve for a term of two (2)
years from the date hereof and until their successors have been appointed by the governing body of the city, and
have duly qualified.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.1102)
ARTICLE 6.03 AMBULANCE SERVICE**
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/508
Sec. 6.03.001 Definitions
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning
ascribed to them in this section; provided that, unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this
article shall be interpreted so as to give them the same meaning as they have in common usage, and so as to give
this article its most reasonable application.
Ambulance. Any motor vehicle used, designed or redesigned, and equipped for the primary purpose of the
transportation of sick or injured persons.
Ambulance operator or operator. The person holding an operator's permit.
Ambulance service. A trip made by an ambulance or a transfer vehicle to transport a sick or injured person from
place to place under other than emergency circumstances.
Department. The department of state health services.
Direct call. A request for ambulance service made by telephone or other means directly to an ambulance
operator.
Emergency ambulance. Any motor vehicle used, designed or redesigned and equipped for the primary purpose
of transporting sick or injured persons under emergency circumstances, and the rendering of first aid or the
performance of rescue work, or both, under such circumstances.
Emergency ambulance service. A trip made by an emergency ambulance under emergency circumstances to the
place of emergency, performance of any necessary rescue operations, rendering of any necessary first aid
assistance and the trip to the hospital or other place for medical attention. An ambulance is being operated in
emergency ambulance service if all or any part of the above-described trip to the place of emergency and any
subsequent trip to the hospital is made on or through the streets within the jurisdiction of the city or a street in
the county through the city. An emergency ambulance shall be considered to be rendering emergency ambulance
service when it is responding to a call for emergency assistance even though, upon arrival at the place of
emergency, it is found that the call was falsely made or that no further emergency ambulance assistance is
required, or when it is responding to a call for routine ambulance service and during such trip emergency
circumstances develop.
Emergency circumstances. The existence of circumstances in which the element of time in expeditiously
transporting a sick or injured person for medical or surgical treatment is essential to the health or life of such
person, and in which rescue operations or competent first aid or both at the place of emergency or during
transport may be essential to the health or life of such person.
Exclusive provider. A third party with whom the city has contracted to provide emergency ambulance services
and other ambulance services to the city and county through an interlocal agreement for service. An exclusive
provider does not include an ambulance operator.
Operator's permit. A permit to operate an ambulance or transfer vehicle issued pursuant to this article.
Person. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, and the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the
context.
Transfer service. A trip, originating or terminating in the city, made by a transfer vehicle for the purpose of
transporting a person under the direction, supervision, care or control of a physician between medical facilities,
including hospitals, clinics, and nursing homes, or between a medical facility and a private residence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/508
Transfer vehicle. A motor vehicle used to provide transfer service.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 3, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.002 Penalty; injunction
(a) Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with
any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable for
a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars
($500.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to
all the other remedies provided herein.
(b) The city attorney may file suit in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin any person from violating
or causing to be violated any provision of this article.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 26, adopted 1/10/05)
Secs. 6.03.003–6.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Emergency Ambulance Service
Sec. 6.03.031 Generally
It is hereby declared that the city, through its interlocal agreement and contract emergency ambulance service
provider, shall be the sole, exclusive emergency ambulance service provider in the city. (Ordinance 2004-12-13
(4), sec. 2, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.032 Ambulance authority established; to be exclusive provider
By adopting this article and approval of an interlocal agreement for provision of emergency ambulance services
by an exclusive provider (the “interlocal agreement”), there is hereby established an area metropolitan
ambulance authority (the “ambulance authority”), the members of such ambulance authority being the parties to
the interlocal agreement pursuant to a third party contract, and in regard to that ambulance authority the
following shall apply:
(1) The ambulance authority is hereby designated as the sole, exclusive provider of all emergency
ambulance service within the jurisdiction of the ambulance authority pursuant to the terms,
conditions and provisions of the interlocal agreement, except for those services exempted by section
6.03.036 and section 6.03.040. The jurisdiction of the ambulance authority shall be the territorial
limits of the cities within the county and the designated boundaries of the county that are parties to
the interlocal agreement.
(2) The ambulance authority shall comply with all terms of the interlocal agreement, and have all
of the duties, powers and responsibilities enumerated therein.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 4, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.033 Central dispatch
The ambulance authority shall designate a central dispatcher to receive and dispatch calls for emergency
ambulance services within the jurisdiction of the ambulance authority (the “dispatcher”). All calls for emergency
ambulance service shall be routed through the dispatcher. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 5, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.034 Ambulance advisory committee
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/508
An ambulance advisory committee (the “committee”) is hereby created, to consist of the mayor of each party to
the interlocal agreement, or in his absence a representative appointed by him; the city manager of each party to
the interlocal agreement, or in his absence a representative appointed by him; and the county judge, or in his
absence a representative appointed by him. It shall be the duty of such committee to consider permit applications
and issue permits pursuant to division 3 of this article, and recommend to the ambulance authority specifications
for ambulances, equipment, and personnel. The committee shall submit to the ambulance authority, from time to
time, its recommendations as to specifications for ambulances and its recommendations as to revisions of this
article. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 6, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.035 Operation by unauthorized persons prohibited
The operation of emergency ambulances within the jurisdiction of the ambulance authority for the furnishing of
emergency ambulance service is hereby declared to be a governmental function of the ambulance authority to be
performed by the ambulance authority in accordance with the terms of this article. It shall be unlawful for any
person, other than an employee or contractor of the ambulance authority, an employee of the department
officially on duty, or an agency of the United States, to furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise for, or
otherwise be engaged in the operation of any ambulance for the purpose of emergency ambulance service or the
providing of emergency ambulance service in the jurisdiction of the ambulance authority. (Ordinance 2004-12-
13 (4), sec. 7, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.036 Defenses
(a) It is an affirmative defense to prosecution under section 6.03.035 that:
(1) The operator operating an ambulance upon responding to a direct call for ambulance service
determined that an emergency existed requiring the sick or injured person to be transported with all
practical speed for medical treatment and attention and obtained permission to operate such
ambulance in emergency ambulance service from the dispatcher.
(2) The operator operating an ambulance within the jurisdiction of the ambulance authority was
performing a service under contract of maintaining an ambulance at a particular location or event for
the purpose of transporting sick or injured persons for medical or hospital treatment, and determined
that a sick or injured person at such location or event required immediate hospital or medical
attention and obtained permission to operate such ambulance in emergency service from the
dispatcher.
(3) The emergency ambulance service was provided at the request of the dispatcher due to
unavailability of an ambulance authority ambulance.
(b) In each instance set out in subsection (a) above, the driver or operator of such ambulance shall, prior to
commencement of each emergency ambulance run, notify the dispatcher of the conditions requiring the
operation of his vehicle in emergency ambulance service, the location from which he is proceeding, and the
location to which he is proceeding under emergency ambulance service, and obtain permission for such trip from
the dispatcher. Each ambulance being operated under subsection (a) above shall comply with all requirements of
this article regarding ambulances of every nature. Upon arriving at his destination, the ambulance driver or
ambulance operator will again notify the dispatcher that he has arrived and is no longer in emergency ambulance
service. When the driver or operator of an ambulance is responding to a direct call for ambulance service, either
under emergency conditions or otherwise, he shall inform the dispatcher of the location of such call and such
information as he may have concerning the circumstances surrounding the request for service, and if the
dispatcher reports that an ambulance authority ambulance is either en route to the same location or has arrived
there and instructs such ambulance driver or operator not to respond to such call, it shall be unlawful for such
driver or operator to so respond when instructed not to do so by the dispatcher.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 8, adopted 1/10/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/508
Sec. 6.03.037 Non-emergency or transfer service not prohibited
Nothing herein shall prohibit any person owning an ambulance duly licensed and operated in accordance with
chapter 773, Texas Health and Safety Code, as amended, or a transfer vehicle, from operating such ambulance or
transfer vehicle on the public streets for the purpose of furnishing ambulance services or transfer services only;
provided, however, such person shall secure an operator's permit in compliance with division 3 of this article and
shall cause his ambulance or transfer vehicle to have been inspected and to display a license issued in
compliance with division 3. The driver of any such ambulance or transfer vehicle shall comply with all of the
traffic laws of the state and ordinances of the ambulance authority, including this article, in furnishing such
ambulance or transfer service. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 9, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.038 Patient requiring emergency care during transfer
If, during transfer in an ambulance or a transfer vehicle, a passenger's condition worsens or the passenger suffers
an acute condition, the attendant or driver of the ambulance or transfer vehicle shall immediately contact the
dispatcher and coordinate a rendezvous point with an ambulance authority ambulance. However, if the
ambulance or transfer vehicle is less than five minutes away from a hospital with a 24-hour-a-day emergency
room, the ambulance or transfer vehicle shall proceed to the hospital and notify the emergency room as to the
vehicle's estimated time of arrival and the patient's condition. A patient with a worsened or acute condition shall
include, but is not necessarily limited to:
(1) A person who has difficulty breathing;
(2) A person who has stopped breathing;
(3) A person in cardiac arrest;
(4) A person who is seizuring; or
(5) A person who will experience serious impairment to bodily functions or serious dysfunction of
any bodily organ or part in the absence of immediate medical attention.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 10, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.039 Unauthorized response to emergency call
An operator's permit shall be subject to revocation if the ambulance operator or any company, service or
corporation that the ambulance operator is affiliated or in partnership with is providing emergency ambulance
service in the city when not requested or approved by the dispatcher. If an ambulance operator receives an
emergency call from any source to respond in the city, it shall immediately notify the dispatcher and shall not
respond unless requested to do so by the dispatcher. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 11, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.040 Public calamity
An ambulance operator shall place its equipment and personnel at the disposal of the ambulance authority in the
event of a public calamity or major disaster. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 12, adopted 1/10/05)
Secs. 6.03.041–6.03.070 Reserved
Division 3. Operator's Permit
Sec. 6.03.071 Required
No person shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise operate an ambulance or transfer
vehicle within the city without having first obtained an operator's permit in accordance with the terms and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/508
provisions of this article. Ambulance and transfer services provided and operated by a medical facility with no
separate charge are not precluded by this article. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 13, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.072 Application requirements
Applications for an operator's permit shall be filed with the committee on the form provided by the committee.
The applicant shall furnish the following proof and information, which shall be subscribed and sworn to before a
notary public. The applicant shall provide the following as part of the application:
(1) A sworn statement that the applicant, its ambulance or transfer vehicle drivers, or its emergency
medical technicians have not been convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude within the last ten years.
(2) A sworn statement that the applicant complies with the equipment, vehicle, and personnel
requirements of division 4 of this article.
(3) Current certificates of insurance required by section 6.03.103 of this article.
(4) The full name, date of birth, telephone number, permanent residence and mailing address of the
applicant. If the person submitting the application represents a partnership, then such information
shall be given on all partners and persons having an interest in the business. If a corporation, the
name and location of its principal place of business, and the name, date of birth, telephone number
and address of all the officers, directors and all stockholders of the organization. If the applicant's
business is a corporation or association, a copy of the documents establishing the business, and the
name, address, and citizenship of each person with a direct interest in the business. Corporate
applicants must provide a certified copy of the corporate charter and articles of incorporation and a
statement from the secretary of state certifying that the corporation is in good standing.
(5) A certificate of assumed name, if such is required by state law to be filed.
(6) Documentary evidence from the city and county tax assessor-collector that ad valorem taxes on
the property to be used in connection with the operation of the proposed medical transfer service
have been paid.
(7) The number, make, model, and style of ambulances and/or transfer vehicles proposed to be
utilized.
(8) Description of any past business experience of the applicant, particularly in providing
ambulance or transfer services; identification and description of any franchise or permit held by the
applicant or business before the date of filing the application and whether said franchise or permit has
ever been suspended or revoked.
(9) A list of references.
(10) An application fee as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 14, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.073 Review of application; issuance of permit and vehicle licenses
(a) Copies of each application for an operator's permit shall be forwarded to each member of the committee
for review.
(b) In determining whether to issue an operator's permit, the committee shall consider the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/508
(1) The distance from the permanent address at which the applicant proposes to operate the transfer
service or ambulance to hospitals and other medical facilities providing service to the public.
(2) In the event the applicant has previously participated in or is currently participating as an
ambulance or transfer service, evidence as to whether the applicant performed or is performing in a
satisfactory manner.
(3) Whether the proposed operation of the transfer service will be in compliance with this article
and all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations.
(4) Proof of adequate equipment and vehicles and certification for the types of services to be
offered.
(5) Other information as deemed relevant by the committee.
(c) Upon approving an application, the committee shall issue an operator's permit to the applicant and a
license for each vehicle identified in the application. The applicant shall post the permit in a conspicuous
location in the operator's place of business and shall place a license on the front windshield of each vehicle
identified in the application.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 15, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.074 Term of permit and vehicle licenses; fees
All operator's permits and licenses issued under this article shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance.
The operator's permit may be renewed after the termination date of the initial permit and during that same year
by paying a permit fee as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code and updating application
information as necessary. The charge for the licenses shall be as provided for in the fee schedule in appendix A
of this code for each license issued, renewed, or replaced. Licenses expire concurrently with the operator's
permit under which the license was issued. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 16, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.075 Inspection of vehicles
Upon the delegation of vehicle inspection to a member of the ambulance authority by the department, the
ambulance authority shall cause all ambulances, including those operated by the ambulance authority, to be
inspected before being placed in service and shall thereafter inspect such ambulances not less than once each six
months, and at least six times per year on a spot inspection basis. In the event an ambulance fails to pass
inspection, the ambulance authority shall notify the ambulance operator to correct the defects noted in the
inspection and, after such notification, the ambulance authority shall cause such ambulance to be reinspected
within 48 hours for compliance. If, upon such reinspection, the defects noted in the original inspection have not
been corrected, the operator's permit shall be removed from the ambulance by the ambulance authority and shall
only be replaced upon such ambulance after the defects have been corrected. No ambulance services shall be
provided until the defect is corrected and the vehicles pass the reinspection. Inspections provided for herein may
also be made by any peace officer employed by a member of the ambulance authority. (Ordinance 2004-12-13
(4), sec. 17, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.076 Transfer
The control or ownership of an operator's permit shall not be transferable unless it is approved by the ambulance
authority. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 18, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.077 Suspension or revocation
An operator's permit or license may be revoked or suspended by the committee for violation of any provision of
this article or state or federal law, with ten days' written notice and opportunity to appeal to the ambulance
authority. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 19, adopted 1/10/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/508
Sec. 6.03.078 Immediate suspension
The committee may immediately suspend the operations, in whole or in part, of an ambulance operator if the
committee determines that continued operation by the operator would endanger the health, safety, or welfare of
the public. The committee shall present a written determination to the operator, detailing the deficiencies or
violations forming the basis of his/her determination and setting therein a reasonable period for compliance. A
failure to achieve compliance shall convert the suspension to a revocation. An operator may appeal a revocation
to the ambulance authority by filing a request with the ambulance authority within 10 days of the revocation.
The ambulance authority may uphold, vacate, or modify the committee's determination. (Ordinance 2004-12-13
(4), sec. 20, adopted 1/10/05)
Secs. 6.03.079–6.03.100 Reserved
Division 4. Personnel, Vehicles and Equipment
Sec. 6.03.101 General standards
An ambulance operator shall furnish at its own expense all vehicles and necessary equipment which meet the
minimum standards set by all city, county, state, and federal regulations covering automotive equipment,
ambulances, and transfer vehicle equipment. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 21, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.102 Vehicles
(a) Each vehicle to be used as an ambulance or transfer vehicle shall comply with the following requirements
and such other requirements or modifications as may be established by the ambulance authority:
(1) Ambulances and transfer vehicles shall comply with the federal General Services
Administration specifications KKK-A-1822 minimum requirements.
(2) Ambulances and transfer vehicles shall be utilized no more than 120,000 miles if powered by a
diesel engine nor more than 80,000 miles if powered by a gasoline engine. The vehicle chassis shall
not be utilized more than four years from the year of manufacture.
(3) Ambulances and transfer vehicles shall be equipped with tires in sound condition which have
been specially designed for heavy duty service with at least 30 percent of the original tread
remaining.
(4) Ambulances and transfer vehicles shall comply at all times with the Texas Transportation Code.
(5) Each transfer vehicle shall be marked distinctly with the name of the company providing
transfer service. Transfer vehicles may not display the words “ambulance,” “emergency medical
services,” “EMS,” or the EMS “Star of Life” logo.
(6) Each ambulance shall be equipped as required by 25 Texas Administrative Code, section
157.11, as amended.
(7) An ambulance operator shall have a preventive maintenance program and records for each
ambulance and transfer vehicle, which records shall be made available to the ambulance advisory
committee upon request. The maintenance program and records shall list all maintenance intervals
between 2,000 and 4,000 miles for engine oil and filter changes. The following systems and/or
components shall be inspected a minimum of every 4,000 miles: brake systems, electrical systems,
chassis components and alignment, climate control systems, engine performance and compression
readings, exhaust system, engine hoses and belts.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/508
(8) An ambulance operator shall also maintain vehicle service records specifying all unscheduled
repairs and breakdowns and shall provide the ambulance advisory committee a quarterly report of all
ambulance and transfer vehicle breakdowns and unscheduled repairs. The report shall indicate the
vehicle unit number, license plate number, odometer reading, vehicle system and/or component in
need of repair/adjustment, and whether or not a patient was on board when the breakdown occurred.
(b) An ambulance operator may not use sirens or emergency lights on an ambulance or transfer vehicle
without first obtaining the approval of either a representative of the ambulance authority at the scene of a
transfer or the dispatcher.
(c) No ambulance, emergency ambulance, or transfer vehicle shall be operated within the jurisdiction of the
ambulance authority unless it is free of structural defects and unless it has no serious impairment of any safety
feature resulting from an accident or otherwise. No emergency ambulance shall be operated upon the streets of
the city for the purpose of furnishing emergency ambulance service unless and until such ambulance has been
duly licensed in accordance with chapter 773, Texas Health & Safety Code, as amended, and has authority to
provide service.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 22, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.103 Liability insurance
No ambulance or medical transfer vehicle shall be operated by an ambulance provider within the city unless the
operator submits evidence to the committee that it has in full force and effect a public liability insurance policy
on that ambulance or transfer vehicle, such insurance policy having been issued by a solvent insurance company
licensed to do business in the state. The insurance policy shall provide liability insurance in the amount of not
less than $1,000,000.00 for personal injury in any one accident, and not less than $500,000.00 for property
damage for each ambulance or transfer vehicle. An insurance policy shall not contain a passenger liability
exclusion. Each liability insurance policy shall contain a provision obligating the insurer to give the committee
written notice of cancellation not less than ten days prior to the date of any cancellation. Each policy shall name
the members of the ambulance authority as additional insureds. (Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 23, adopted
1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.104 Personnel
(a) Each ambulance shall be attended by at least two currently state-certified emergency medical technicians
(EMTs). Each transfer vehicle shall be attended by at least one currently state-certified EMT. Each EMT shall
hold a valid class A Texas driver's license.
(b) An ambulance operator shall maintain a current personnel file at the local administrative office on each
employee. Each EMT employed by the provider shall be state certified.
(c) Any member of the committee may ride on an ambulance or transfer vehicle at any time for the purposes
of evaluating the medical and/or driving performance of the EMTs. A copy of an evaluation shall be provided to
the operator within 72 hours. The information shall indicate performance areas which exceed, meet or do not
currently meet expectations. Areas not meeting expectations will have information indicating what action must
be taken to ensure compliance with performance standards.
(d) EMTs disciplined or failing, as determined by the department of state health services, to meet medical
performance standards shall not continue to render ambulance or transfer services as EMTs.
(Ordinance 2004-12-13 (4), sec. 24, adopted 1/10/05)
Sec. 6.03.105 Solicitation of business prohibited
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/508
It shall be unlawful for any person, while operating or accompanying an emergency ambulance on the public
streets or easements of the city, to solicit the business of transporting the sick or injured. (Ordinance 2004-12-13
(4), sec. 25, adopted 1/10/05)
ARTICLE 6.04 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE*
Sec. 6.04.001 Tall grass and weeds
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, occupied
or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to suffer or permit grass, weeds or any plant that is not
cultivated to grow to a greater height than ten (10) inches on an average or to grow in rank profusion upon said
premises, including along the sidewalk or street adjacent to the same between the property line and the curb, or
if there is no curb then within ten (10) feet outside the property line.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, within the corporate city, to remove or cause to be cut and removed all such grass, weeds or plants
as often as may be necessary to comply with subsection (a) of this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.101)
Sec. 6.04.002 Storage of trash or debris
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, occupied
or unoccupied, within the corporate limits of the city, to suffer or permit trash or debris to be stored on said
premises outside an enclosed building so as to, in the opinion of the code enforcement officer, create a hazard to
the health, safety, and welfare of members of the public.
(b) It shall be deemed a hazard when such trash or debris is of a nature to increase the risk of fire, or to be
susceptible to the accumulation of rodents, insects, vermin, or reptiles. It shall also be deemed a hazard when
trash or debris has been permitted to traverse to another's property.
(c) It shall be the duty of any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association of persons, owner, agent,
occupant or anyone having supervision or control of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or portion thereof, occupied or
unoccupied, within the corporate city, to remove or cause to be removed all such trash or debris as often as may
be necessary to comply with this section.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.102)
Sec. 6.04.003 Notice of violation; abatement by city
(a) In the event that the owner of any lot, tract, parcel of land, or a portion thereof, situated within the
corporate limits of the city, shall fail to comply with section 6.04.001(a) or section 6.04.002 of this article, then
the building official or his designated representative shall give notice to such person setting forth the
noncompliance with this article. Such notice shall be in writing and may be served upon such person in any one
or more of the following ways:
(1) Personally given to the owner;
(2) Addressed to the owner by letter to the owner's post office address; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or if the owner's post office address, [is unknown,
notice] may be given by publication at least twice within ten (10) consecutive days in the city's
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/508
official newspaper or by posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property
to which the violation relates or by posting the notice on a placard attached to a stake driven into the
ground on the property to which the violation relates, if the property contains no buildings.
(b) In the notice herein provided for, the city shall have the right to inform the property owner that, if he or
she commits another violation of the same kind or nature on or before the first anniversary of the date of the
notice, the city may, without further notice, correct the violation at the owner's expense and assess the expense
against the property.
(c) Following the expiration of not less than ten (10) days from the date of the notice, the city may enter upon
such premises and may do such work as necessary or cause the same to be done in order that the premises
comply with the requirements set forth in section 6.04.001(a) or section 6.04.002 of this article. The city may
enter onto such premises and may do such work as necessary, or cause the same to be done, as often as
violations exist, without further notification to the property owner during the growing season.
(d) A bill for the actual cost incurred and a reasonable administrative charge incurred by the city, as provided
for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code, resulting from the abatement of the above-described
conditions shall be mailed to the owner of said premises and must be satisfied within thirty (30) days of the date
of mailing of said bill. In the event that said bill has not been satisfied within the specified period, the mayor of
the city may file a statement with the county clerk of the expenses incurred in the abatement of the abovedescribed
condition on said premises and the city shall have a privileged lien on any lot or lots upon which such
expense is incurred second only to tax liens and liens for street improvements and ten percent (10%) on the
amount from the date such payment is due. For any such expenditure and interest as aforesaid, suit may be
instituted and recovery and foreclosure had in the name of the city, and the statement so made as aforesaid, or a
copy thereof, shall be prima facie proof of the amount expended in any such work performed by the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 6.103)
Sec. 6.04.004 Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds
(a) The city may abate, without notice, weeds that have grown higher than forty-eight (48) inches and are an
immediate danger to the health, life, or safety of any person.
(b) Not later than the 10th day after the date the city abates weeds under this section, the city shall give notice
to the property owner in the manner required by section 342.006 of the Health and Safety Code.
(c) The notice shall contain:
(1) Identification, which is not required to be a legal description, of the property;
(2) A description of the violations of this article that occurred on the property;
(3) A statement that the city abated the weeds; and
(4) An explanation of the property owner's right to request an administrative hearing related to the
city's abatement of the weeds.
(d) The city shall conduct an administrative hearing on the abatement of weeds under this section if the
property owner files with the city a written request for a hearing within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice
required under this section.
(e) An administrative hearing conducted under this section shall be conducted not later than the 20th day after
the date a request for a hearing is filed. The owner may testify or present any witnesses or written information
relating to the city's abatement of the weeds.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/508
(f) The city may assess expenses and create liens under this section as it assesses expenses and creates liens
under section 342.007 of the Health and Safety Code. A lien created under this section is subject to the same
conditions as a lien created under section 342.007 of the Health and Safety Code.
(g) The authority granted a city by this section is in addition to the authority granted by Health and Safety
Code, section 342.006.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Additional authority to abate dangerous weeds without notice, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code, sec. 342.008.
Sec. 6.04.005 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided for in the
general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day any such violation of this article
[shall exist] shall constitute a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 6.104)
ARTICLE 6.05 WATER WELLS AND WELLHEAD PROTECTION*
Sec. 6.05.001 Findings of fact
(a) It has been determined that potential sources of contamination exist which may threaten the integrity of the
city's public water supply, and consequentially the health, safety, commerce, public services, property and the
general welfare of the public.
(b) These potential sources of contamination are created by a cumulative effect of anthropogenic and/or
natural activities taking place with sufficient proximity to the city's public water supply or source of said supply
as to pose a threat of contamination.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.201)
Sec. 6.05.002 Purpose
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public
and private losses due to contamination of the public water supply, to maximize groundwater protection
pollution abatement control procedures, and minimize land use restrictions that:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly pollution remediation projects;
(3) Minimize regulations on land use;
(4) Minimize business interruptions;
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water mains, sewer lines and
treatment facilities;
(6) Insure that the public is provided with a safe potable water supply now and for future
generations;
(7) Protect the natural resources of the state.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.202)
Sec. 6.05.003 Methods of reducing potential contamination
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/508
In order to accomplish its purpose, this article shall employ the following methods:
(1) Establish a wellhead protection area (WHPA) based on a five-year period.
(2) Restrict or prohibit uses within the WHPA that pose risks of contamination to the public water
supply.
(3) Control anthropogenic activities within the WHPA that may increase the threat of potential
contamination of the public water supply.
(4) Frequent monitoring of existing and future anthropogenic activities within the WHPA that have
been identified as potential sources of contamination.
(5) Enforcement of all applicable laws governing pollution abatement and control, storage and
transport of hazardous or toxic materials, and collection, storage, and transport and treatment of
municipal and industrial sewage.
(6) Develop contingency plans for alternative drinking water supplies to help mitigate
contamination of the current public water supply.
(7) Inventory all potential sources of contamination within designated WHPA(s) every (3) three
years.
(8) Enforcement of state and local laws regulating on-site sewage systems.
(9) Prohibition of storage of hazardous or toxic materials within the WHPA that is an upgrade of
the public water supply (PWS) well.
(10) Enclosure of the PWS well within a roofed structure located inside a fenced enclosure
accessible only via a locked gate. The well number shall be posted on the fence and a raised
impermeable barrier or berm shall be constructed around the wellhead to prevent infiltration of the
well bore by surface runoff.
(11) Posting of signs that state “Wellhead Protection Area - City of Rockdale” around the
perimeter of the WHPA(s), and governing ordinances.
(12) Regulation of the construction, operation, correction and abandonment of water wells within
both the city limits and the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
(13) Develop and implement an emergency response plan to deal with potential contamination
events.
(14) Public education.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.203)
Sec. 6.05.004 Powers and duties of city council
The city council, through the office of the city manager or its designated agent or representative, shall have the
following powers:
(1) To make or have made examinations of all wells within the city and all wells outside the city
limits which by law are under the jurisdiction of the city, privately owned or otherwise;
(2) To make or have made at any time the necessary analyses for tests of water therefrom;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/508
(3) To go upon the land and property of the owner of a well for that purpose;
(4) To require the owner to furnish all information requested concerning a well, including, in the
case of new wells, complete logs of the well showing depth to the aquifer through all geologic
formations encountered;
(5) To supervise the construction, repair, abandonment and plugging of wells with and the
operation of such wells [sic]. The council shall keep a register of all wells within the area defined in
subsection (1) above, which shall show the name of the owner, the location and date of construction
of each well, its depth and diameter, the purpose for which the well was constructed, and, if
abandoned, the date of abandonment.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.204)
Sec. 6.05.005 Compliance
It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any order of the city
council made in conformity with and under the authority of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 4.205)
Sec. 6.05.006 Standards for private wells
No person shall drill a well within the city limits. Drilling for minerals shall strictly be prohibited. On the
effective date of this section, all private water wells that are inoperative, abandoned or operating without a valid
permit shall be capped in accordance with state statutes, rules, regulations and directives or apply for a permit as
provided in this article. All private water wells existing, operational and having a valid permit issued by the city
on the effective date of this section shall be subject to the requirements of this article as well as the following
requirements:
(1) Termination of current use.
(A) No later than six months from the effective date of this section, all private water wells
within the city limits must be registered or capped. For good cause shown, a property owner
failing to register a water well or cap such may be registered on an adequate demonstration to
the city council that a well was not registered through no fault of the property owner and the
well has been operating in compliance with the federal and state laws, statutes, rules, directives
and regulations consecutively since the passage of this section.
(B) Any well lawfully operating on the effective date of this section that fails or ceases to
operate for sixty consecutive days shall be deemed abandoned and capped according to the state
rules and regulations governing capping of wells.
(Ordinance 12-2801-(2) adopted 12/28/01)
(C) Any well lawfully operating on the effective date of this section may continue to be
utilized in compliance with this article. (Ordinance 01-1802 adopted 1/18/02)
(2) Permit. Prior to reworking any well, the owner of the property and/or the person to rework the
well must submit an application for a permit. Properties upon which potable water is not available
from the city water system and the owner has made a written request for services which has been
denied may request a permit to drill a water well and be permitted to continue to operate the well in
compliance with the state, federal and local laws, rules, directives and regulations. A permit fee shall
be paid at the time the application is filed, including any fees for review by an engineer. The
application for such permit shall be in the form required under section 6.05.008.
(3) Location. Water well sites that are operating pursuant to a permit issued under this article must
be in compliance with state, federal and local laws, rules, directives and regulations and located so
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/508
that there will be no danger of pollution from flooding or contamination or from unsanitary
surroundings, such as privies, sewage, sewage treatment plants, livestock and animal pens, solid
waste disposal sites or underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and liquid transmission
pipelines, or abandoned and improperly sealed wells.
(A) Water wells shall be a minimum horizontal distance of 50 feet from any watertight
sewage and liquid waste collection facility.
(B) Water wells shall be a minimum horizontal distance of 150 feet from any concentrated
sources of contamination, such as existing or proposed livestock or poultry yards, privies, septic
system absorption fields, evapotranspiration beds, improperly constructed water wells, or
underground petroleum and chemical storage tanks and drainfields.
(C) No well site shall be within 500 feet of a sewage treatment plant or within 300 feet of a
sewage wet well, a sewage pumping station or a drainage ditch which contains industrial waste
discharges or the wastes from sewage treatment systems.
(D) No water wells shall be within 500 feet of animal feedlots, solid waste disposal sites,
lands on which sewage plant or septic tank sludge is applied, or lands irrigated by sewage plant
effluent.
(E) Livestock shall not be allowed within 50 feet of a well site.
(F) Sanitary or storm sewers constructed of ductile iron or PVC pipe meeting state water well
standards for such materials, having a minimum working pressure of 150 psi or greater, and
equipped with pressure type joints, may be located at distances of less than 50 feet from a well
site, but in no case shall the distance be less than ten feet.
(G) Water wells shall be operated at a site not generally subject to flooding; provided,
however, that if a well is in a floodprone area, it shall be protected with a watertight sanitary
well seal, so as to maintain a junction between the casing and pump column, and a steel casing
sleeve extending a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches above the ground level and twenty-four
(24) inches below the ground surface.
(4) Interconnection.
(A) No cross-connection shall be made between private wells and the city public waterworks
system or any other potable water supply system.
(B) All properties within the city limits for which the property has access to city water must
be connected to the city water system and shall use the water drawn from existing private water
wells for irrigating or garden use only.
(C) Water may not be transmitted, shared or otherwise transferred from one platted property
to another. Any property owner within the city limits not having a private well located upon the
platted lot may not receive water from any source other than the city.
(D) If a private well is utilized for potable water, the water must meet the department of state
health services standards for drinking water.
(E) All private wells inside and within the city's jurisdiction as provided in section
6.05.004(1) must have a backflow prevention valve approved for use by the director of public
works.
(Ordinance 12-2801-(2) adopted 12/28/01)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/508
Sec. 6.05.007 Permit required for drilling, repair or abandonment of well
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or otherwise construct, repair, correct, abandon or plug a well, or to
engage upon such work, with the limits of the area defined in section 6.05.004(1), or to employ anyone else to
engage in such work, without first applying for and securing a permit from the city council or duly authorized
agent thereof. Such permit may be granted with the approval of the city council to any person who files with the
council the application hereinafter provided for and pays the fee hereinafter required, and complies with all other
provisions of this article applicable to the person applying. All fees in connection with a permit application are
due at the time the application for permit is approved by the city council and are nonrefundable.
Sec. 6.05.008 Application for permit
Every application for a permit for the drilling, construction, repair and correction, abandonment or plugging of a
well shall state the name and address of the owner thereof, the purpose for which the permit is desired, which
shall be one or more of the acts above mentioned; the definite location of the well or proposed well; its
approximate depth; and if for a permit for the drilling or construction or repair and correction of a water well, the
estimated amount of water to be or which is pumped daily, monthly or annually, and the use or uses for which
the water will be or is required; if for a permit for the drilling or construction or for the repair and correction of a
well, the proposed method of drilling or construction, or the proposed method of repair and correction, and the
kind of equipment to be used; and, in all cases, the name of the contractor(s), and the license number issued by
the state department of licensing and regulation, if done through a contractor whom the owner desires to drill or
construct, repair and correct, or do the work pursuant to an abandonment of a well in compliance with this
article. If the homeowner drills his/her own well, it must be drilled to state standards and the installation and
required inspections and drawings must be performed and certified by a P.E. The owner will be responsible for
all costs incurred with the P.E. If the city incurs the cost of a P.E. to advise the city about a well during drilling,
construction, abandonment or inspection, the property owner will pay the city for the incurred cost within 30
days of incurred cost regardless of whether permitted and regardless of depth. (Ordinance adopted 12/–/01)
Sec. 6.05.009 Inspection before issuance of permit
It shall be the duty of the city council or its designated agent or representative to inspect the property when any
well is to be drilled, sunk, dug, or bored and to refuse the issuance of a permit to drill, sink, or bore a well in a
place which does not meet with its approval as to drainage and other sanitary conditions. (1996 Code, sec.
4.209)
Sec. 6.05.010 Copies of permit
All permits shall be executed in triplicate, one copy to be delivered to the applicant and two copies to be retained
in the office of the city manager through her/his agent or representative. (1996 Code, sec. 4.210)
Sec. 6.05.011 Electrical and plumbing permits; RPZ valve
(a) It shall be unlawful for any applicant who obtains a permit to drill or construct a well of any depth without
first obtaining the necessary electrical and plumbing permits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any applicant who obtains a permit to drill or construct a well of any depth without
first installing an RPZ valve, which shall be inspected annually. Refer to the fee schedule in appendix A of this
code for fees.
(Ordinance adopted 12/–/01)
Sec. 6.05.012 Permit fees
The fees to be paid to the city for the permits required by this article shall be as provided for in the fee schedule
found in appendix A of this code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.212)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/508
Sec. 6.05.013 Casing required
(a) Every well constructed, whether drilled, dug, or excavated, which encounters salt water or water
containing mineral or other substance injurious to health or vegetation, shall be securely plugged and sealed or
cased in such manner that the waters be confined to the stratum or strata in which found, and all wells shall be so
constructed and cased in such manner that the waters be confined to the stratum or strata in which found, and all
wells shall be so constructed and cased so that no water from one stratum can by reason of the construction of
the well come in contact with waters from another stratum. The casing shall be set in the top of the stratum from
which water is to be taken and shall be cemented in place by a suitable method to be approved by the city
council to the end that cement shall be forced up around the outside of the casing from the bottom of the casing
to the surface of the ground so that all water found in the strata, except that from which water is to be used, shall
be sealed off one from the other by the cement, or, if a better method than cementing shall be scientifically
developed to accomplish the purpose mentioned, such better method may be prescribed by the council in lieu of
cementing. The casing used shall be of weight per foot not less than the following:
Size of Casing Minimum Weight per Foot
4 inch 10 pounds
5 inch 14 pounds
6 inch 18 pounds
8 inch 28 pounds
10 inch 40 pounds
12 inch 49 pounds
15 inch 60 pounds
18 inch 80 pounds
20 inch 89 pounds
(b) The casing shall be mechanically continuous from the point of setting the bottom of the well to a point not
less than twelve inches above ground level and shall be so installed as to make impossible any leakage as against
any pressures which may be encountered.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/508
(c) If casing is of two or more diameter sizes, the different sizes shall be connected with threaded nipples or
be sealed with rubber, cement, or by some other manner satisfactory to the city council.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.213)
Sec. 6.05.014 Well contaminating city water supply
Any well or other opening located inside the area defined in section 6.05.004(1) which penetrates the
underground water supply and which pollutes or contaminates any other wells of the city's water supply is
declared a nuisance, and on notice to the owner of such well, or the operator thereof, or the agent in charge of
property on which the well is situated, issued by the officers or agents of the city, such nuisance shall be abated
by the owner within ten days from the date of such notice by filling and plugging the well or opening in the
manner provided for in this article for abandoned wells, and if he shall fail to abate such nuisance within such
time, officers or agents of the city, through the authority of the city council, shall have the right to go on the land
or property upon which the well is situated and abate such nuisance in the manner provided, and the owner
thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of such work and shall pay such cost upon demand. (1996 Code,
sec. 4.214)
Sec. 6.05.015 Defective wells
Every well, whether dug or drilled, which for any reason does not completely prevent the mixing of water or
other liquid from above and below the source of the city's water supply, or which for any reason would tend to
pollute or contaminate any other well or the water in the source of the city's water supply, shall be considered a
defective well, and the city on its own initiative or upon information or complaint from any source may make
such an examination of any well suspected of being defective, and if such examination indicates in the opinion
of the city manager that the well is a probable source of contamination of the city water supply or any other well,
or that the water from such well is unsafe for human consumption, the city council may instruct the city manager
to issue written instructions to the owner or his agent in charge of such well or the property with the provisions
of this article, and prescribe a time which in its judgment under all circumstances is reasonable within which
such instructions shall be complied with. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of such defective well to
fail to comply with such instructions within the time directed or prescribed by the city council. (1996 Code, sec.
4.215)
Sec. 6.05.016 Abandoned wells
(a) An abandoned well is:
(1) A defective well which, in the judgment of the city, cannot be corrected to comply with the
requirements of this article; or
(2) Any well which has been continuously out of use for a period of six (6) months or longer.
(b) Whenever any wells have not been in active use for more than two years, the owner or operator of such
well shall report the fact to the city. Every abandoned well shall be filled and plugged with such materials and in
a manner approved by the state commission of licensing and regulation that will, in their and the city's judgment,
prevent the pollution and contamination of the city's water supply or the contamination of any other well within
the limits of the city, and such filling and plugging shall be done under the supervision of the council and at the
expense of the owner of such well.
(c) Whenever the city shall receive notice from any source of the existence of an abandoned well which has
not been plugged and filled in accordance with the provisions of this article and/or the state commission of
licensing and regulation, it shall notify all [the] owner or agent in charge or such well or of the property upon
which it is situated that such well is abandoned and shall instruct him to fill and plug such well in accordance
with this article, and the owner or operator of such well shall comply with such order within sixty days. Should
he fail to comply within such period or if, after using reasonable diligence, should the officers or agents of the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/508
city fail to locate the owner or the agent in charge of such well or of the property upon which the well is situated,
the officers or agents of the city, with instructions, may go on the land or property upon which the well is
situated and fill and plug such well in the manner required by this article. Whenever it becomes necessary for the
city to fill and plug any abandoned well, the owner thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of doing such
work and shall pay such cost upon demand.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.216)
Sec. 6.05.017 Wells outside city
The owner or lessee of property on which any well heretofore drilled or that may be hereafter drilled outside the
city which is found to be a contaminating or polluting influence to the underground water-bearing strata from
which the municipal water supply of the city is taken or drawn or may hereafter be taken or drawn, as well as the
owner or lessee of all wells drilled inside the area defined in section 6.05.004(1), shall be subject to all the
provisions of sections 6.05.014 and 6.05.015 and all other provisions of this article relating to the protection of
the water supply of the city, and any such contaminating well may be abated as provided therein. Any person
desiring to drill a well outside of the city at any location within the radius of one mile outside the city, prior to
drilling such well, shall fully comply with all provisions of this article relating to the protection of the water
supply of the city, and upon failure to do so shall be punished as provided herein. (1996 Code, sec. 4.217)
Sec. 6.05.018 Wells presenting immediate threat
Any well or other opening located inside the area defined in section 6.05.004(1) which, in the sole opinion of the
city officers or its agents, presents an immediate threat and menace to the health, morals, safety or general
welfare of the public, is declared to be a nuisance. The city council or its agents shall have the right to go on
property upon which such well is situated and abate the nuisance in a temporary manner. Such well shall
thereafter be filled and plugged by the owner after the giving required notice and in such manner set out in
section 6.05.016 hereof. The owner thereof shall be liable to the city for the cost of doing such temporary work
under this section and shall pay such cost upon demand. (1996 Code, sec. 4.218)
Sec. 6.05.019 Penalty
A person who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction is
punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. Each
day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec. 4.219)
Sec. 6.05.020 Effective date
This article shall become effective upon the expiration of ten (10) days after its passage. (1996 Code, sec. 4.220)
Sec. 6.05.021 Area of applicability
Sections 6.05.021 through 6.05.027 shall apply to all areas located within the designated WHPA(s) as adopted
by the city council. Sections 6.05.001 through 6.05.020 shall apply to all areas within the city limits and the
areas outside the city limits which fall under the city's jurisdiction. (1996 Code, sec. 4.221)
Sec. 6.05.022 Basis for establishing wellhead protection areas
The wellhead protection area(s) shall be designated by the state commission on environmental quality using a
site-specific method stipulated in the state wellhead protection program description and will be based on a five
(5) day time of travel. Information required for this delineation will include the maximum anticipated pumpage
of each well in gallons per minute (gpm), the screened interval for each well, depth of each well, and additional
information that is as spelled out in the state wellhead protection program description. The respective wells shall
be plotted on a city map and submitted to the state for delineation and compilation of a wellhead protection
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/508
report. An inventory of the WHPA(s) will be conducted by the city, the results of which will be submitted to the
state for inclusion in the report, which will be presented to the city upon completion. (1996 Code, sec. 4.222)
Sec. 6.05.023 Existing permit requirements not affected
A permit governing construction, operation, correction, and abandonment of wells shall not impinge on existing
permitting requirements currently in effect, nor is it the intent of this article to invalidate their purpose. (1996
Code, sec. 4.223)
Sec. 6.05.024 Compliance
It shall be deemed a violation of this article for any person to fail or refuse to comply with any order of the city
council, the city, its officers or agents that is made in conformity with and under the authority of this article.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.224)
Sec. 6.05.025 Abrogation and greater restrictions
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
However, where this article and another ordinance conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail. (1996 Code, sec. 4.225)
Sec. 6.05.026 Interpretation
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be:
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.226)
Sec. 6.05.027 Warning and disclaimer of liability
The degree of protection of the city's public water supply wells and public water supply is considered reasonable
for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations along with best professional
judgment. It is recognized that not all potential sources of contamination are unavoidable and that a
contamination event may occur due either to man-made or natural causes. This article does not imply that the
WHPA(s) will totally preclude a contamination event from taking place. This article shall not create liability on
the part of the city or any official or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on this article or
any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (1996 Code, sec. 4.227)
Sec. 6.05.028 Designation of wellhead protection area administrator
The city's water and sewer superintendent is hereby appointed the wellhead protection area administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of section 26.177 of the
Texas Water Code. (1996 Code, sec. 4.228)
Sec. 6.05.029 Duties and responsibilities of wellhead protection administrator
Duties and responsibilities of the wellhead protection area administrator shall include but are not limited to the
following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this
article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/508
(2) Review water well permit applications and other permit applications, where applicable, to
determine whether the proposed activity in the WHPA will pose a threat to the integrity of the public
water supply.
(3) Review, approve, or deny (or recommend denial where authority for denial is not granted) all
applications for permits required by the adoption of this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development within the WHPA(s) to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from federal, state, or local government agencies from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the WHPA(s) (for
example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field
conditions), the wellhead protection administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
(6) When WHPA delineation has not been provided by the state (for example, upon completion of
a new PWS well), the administrator shall delineate the one-quarter mile radius around the well and
administer it in accordance with this article until such time as a site-specific determination can be
made.
(7) The WHPA administrator shall coordinate the city's emergency response activities in the event
a potential contamination event occurs.
(8) The WHPA administrator shall also maintain an active list of potential sources of
contamination which shows the physical location, street address, contact, and telephone number. This
list shall be kept open for public inspection.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.229)
Sec. 6.05.030 Violations
Persons and/or entities found to be in violation of this article shall be notified by the city council through the city
manager's office in writing. A person who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a
misdemeanor and on conviction is punishable by a fine as provided for in the general penalty provision found in
section 1.01.009 of this code. Each day that a violation occurs constitutes a separate offense. (1996 Code, sec.
4.230)
Sec. 6.05.031 Variances
(a) The appeal board as established by the city council shall hear and render judgment on request for variances
from the requirements of this article.
(b) The appeal board shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in
any requirement, decision, or determination made by the wellhead protection area administrator in the
enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the
courts of competent jurisdiction.
(d) No variance may be requested nor granted as a means to circumvent the intentions of this article or as a
remedy for a violation of this article (i.e., a variance cannot be issued after the fact).
(e) The wellhead protection area administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal.
(f) Upon a consideration of the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the
granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/508
(g) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the potential threat of contamination of the PWS well and aquifer, to afford
relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(A) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(B) A determination that failure to grant a variance would result in exceptional hardship to
the applicant; and
(C) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in additional threats to the
public safety or extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the activity
receiving this variance will decrease the travel time for potential contaminants to reach the PWS well
and that any and all liability of a contamination event as a result of this activity receiving the variance
is on the variance holder. Furthermore, the city, its officers and services, as well as its employees, are
released from any responsibility and liability for any damages and/or contamination events due to
activity receiving the variance.
(1996 Code, sec. 4.231)
CHAPTER 7
MUNICIPAL COURT
ARTICLE 7.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 7.01.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Access device. A card, plate, code, account number, personal identification number, electronic serial number,
mobile identification number, or other telecommunications service, equipment, or instrument identifier or means
of account access that alone or in conjunction with other access devices may be used to:
(1) Obtain money, goods, services, or another thing of value; or
(2) Initiate a transfer of funds other than a transfer originated solely by paper instrument.
Conviction or convicted. Any person shall be deemed to have been convicted for whom the municipal court
imposes any judgment, penalty or sentence, the person receives community service, community supervision,
deferred disposition, or deferred adjudication, or the court defers final disposition of the case or imposition of
the penalty.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/508
Rules of the road. Offenses committed under subtitle C, title 7 of the Transportation Code, being chapters 541
through 600 of the Transportation Code.
School crossing zone. A reduced-speed zone designated on a street by a local authority to facilitate safe crossing
of the street by children going to or leaving a public or private elementary or secondary school during the time
the reduced speed limit applies.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.101), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.002 Established
The municipal court is hereby created and established and shall have the full powers as set forth in V.T.C.A.,
Government Code chapter 29, as amended from time to time. The city council may prescribe such additional
rules as are not inconsistent with the law creating the municipal court or in conflict with the general laws of the
state. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.102), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.003 Clerk of court
The city secretary, or other person appointed by the council, shall be ex-officio clerk of the court and is hereby
authorized to appoint a deputy with the same powers as the secretary. The ex-officio clerk shall hold office
during his/her term as city secretary, or as otherwise prescribed by the city council. The clerk shall keep minutes
of the proceedings of the municipal court, issue all process and generally perform the duties of the clerk of a
county court, as prescribed by law for a county clerk insofar as the same may be applicable. It shall be the
further duty of the clerk to make a monthly report of all fines and collections and the disposition of all cases, and
file the same with the council. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.103), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Municipal court clerk generally, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.010.
Sec. 7.01.004 Clerk may tax costs
The clerk of the municipal court may tax costs in each case the same as is allowed in the justices' courts of this
state to the justice of the peace and county attorney and the constable for like services. Such costs and fines may
be collected by the clerk and turned into the city treasury, taking the receipt of the treasurer for the same.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.104), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.005 Prosecutions by city attorney
The city attorney, either in person or by deputy, shall, as required by the city council from time to time, represent
the city in the prosecution of each and every complaint, and for such representation there may be taxed and
collected as costs by the clerk of the municipal court the same fees as are allowed in a like case to the county
attorney by the statutes of the state. Such fees when collected are to be paid to the clerk of the city by the clerk
of the municipal court. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.105), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Municipal prosecutions by city attorney or deputy city attorney, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 45.201.
Sec. 7.01.006 Jurisdiction and rules of procedure
The municipal court shall have concurrent jurisdiction within the limits of the city, in criminal matters, with the
courts of the justices of the peace, as is provided by statutes of the state. The rules of procedure for justice courts
and the rules of evidence, as provided by the statutes of the state for the county court, shall be the rules of
procedure and laws governing the different subjects tried in the municipal court. See V.T.C.A., Government
Code section 29.003 and Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 4.14; evidence, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 4.15; court
procedures, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 45.01 et seq. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.106), adopted 4/12/04)
State law references–Municipal court jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.003, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 4.14;
procedures for processing cases within criminal jurisdiction of municipal court, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. ch. 45.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/508
Sec. 7.01.007 Municipal judge
(a) Appointment; qualifications. The office of judge of the municipal court shall be filled by appointment by
the council. The judge shall be at least 18 years of age, shall be a qualified voter of the city, and shall not have
been convicted of a felony nor a crime involving moral turpitude.
(b) Duties. The judge of the municipal court shall perform the duties as prescribed by the laws of the state.
The judge shall be responsible for setting the time for the trial of cases.
(c) Term; compensation. The judge shall be appointed for a term of office running concurrently with that of
the mayor. He shall receive such compensation as the council shall fix by ordinance or resolution, and shall
furnish such surety bond as may be required by the council, the premium to be paid by the city.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.107), adopted 4/12/04)
State law references–Municipal court judges, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 29.004; term of municipal court judge, V.T.C.A.,
Government Code, sec. 29.005.
Sec. 7.01.008 Establishment of fines and punishment
The court is authorized to establish policies and procedures for setting and assessing fines that are consistent
with the appropriate policies and procedures set forth by the state in the Code of Criminal Procedure and
applicable to the particular offense alleged. Punishment and fines may be assessed and include all remedies
available under the state law for the particular offense alleged. Fines and punishment under any ordinance of the
city shall be set forth in the ordinance and include any additional remedies that would be available under state
law. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.108), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.009 Cases to be tried in open court
All cases coming before the municipal court shall be tried and disposed of in open court. (Ordinance 2004-04-12
(9), ex. A (13.109), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.010 City employee not to represent defendant
It shall be unlawful for any person who receives a salary from the city to be in any way, directly or indirectly,
interested in the defense of any person charged with the violation of any ordinance of the city or any of the
criminal laws of the state, except so far as may be necessary to give evidence on behalf of persons so charged
with violating any of such ordinances or criminal laws. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.110), adopted
4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.011 Local rules
The judge may from time to time adopt local rules and procedures for administration of the court which are not
inconsistent with the procedural requirements of the state. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.111), adopted
4/12/04)
Sec. 7.01.012 Jury duty pay
The city shall pay each person appearing in response to a duly noticed jury summons according to the fee
schedule set forth in appendix A of this code for service in municipal court for each day or fraction of each day
they serve as a juror. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.211), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Jury pay and expenses for jurors, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 104.001.
Sec. 7.01.013 Confidential payment and communication records
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/508
The municipal court clerk shall separately file from the records of any case in the municipal court any
documents collected, assembled or otherwise maintained containing a credit card, debit card, charge card, or
other access device number. The municipal court clerk shall redact the e-mail address from any communications
received via e-mail or shall maintain such documents separately of the documents of the case. The e-mail
address of any individual communicating with the court shall not be disclosed to a member of the public without
express consent of the individual. Any requests for documents containing this information shall be immediately
referred to the city attorney's office. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.212), adopted 4/12/04)
State law references–Confidentiality of credit card, debit card, charge card and access device numbers, V.T.C.A., Government Code,
sec. 552.136; confidentiality of certain e-mail addresses, V.T.C.A., Government Code, sec. 552.137.
ARTICLE 7.02 FINES, FEES AND COSTS*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 7.02.001 Fine schedule
The fines imposed in the municipal court may be the same as are prescribed for like offenses by the penal
statutes of the state, but shall never be greater. The city municipal court fine schedule is hereby adopted set out
in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code. Where any offense is covered solely and alone by ordinances of
the city, such ordinance shall control. All fines assessed by the municipal court shall be paid to the clerk of the
municipal court or some officer designated by her to receive the same. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A
(13.201), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.002 State court costs
(a) The municipal court clerk shall collect each and every court cost statutorily mandated to be collected for
the state. The municipal court clerk shall keep a record of each court cost collected for the benefit of the state
and remit the collection to the city treasurer, including forwarding the monies to be deposited with the city
treasurer as required by internal policy.
(b) The city treasurer may deposit the money in an interest-bearing account. The city treasurer shall keep
records of the money collected and on deposit in the treasury.
State law reference–Interest-bearing account, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 133.053; records, V.T.C.A., Local Government
Code, sec. 133.054.
(c) The city treasurer shall report the fees collected for a calendar quarter categorized according to the class of
offense and shall report the court costs collected for the benefit of the state to the comptroller of public accounts
not later than the last day of the month following the calendar quarter in which the court costs were collected.
State law reference–Quarterly remittance of fees to comptroller, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 133.055; quarterly report for
criminal fees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 133.056.
(d) The municipal court clerk shall forward a completed quarterly report form to be reviewed and confirmed
by the city treasurer.
(e) The city treasurer shall ensure the accuracy of the report and for all fees collected for the CCC fund
(consolidated court cost fund) to be forwarded to the state. The city treasurer shall retain 10% of all court costs
collected, except for court costs collected pursuant to section 542.4031, Transportation Code, as a service fee
and deposit the retained sums to the general fund to offset administrative expenses, save and except the 10%
shall not be retained on sums not timely forwarded to the comptroller of public accounts.
(f) The city treasurer shall retain 5% of court costs collected pursuant to section 542.4031, Transportation
Code, as a service fee and deposit the retained sums in the general fund to offset administrative expenses, save
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/508
and except the 5% shall not be retained on sums not timely forwarded to the comptroller of public accounts.
State law reference–State traffic fine, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.4031.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.202), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.003 Warrant of arrest fees
The municipal court clerk shall collect a warrant fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this code from any
defendant upon whom a peace officer executed a warrant issued by the municipal court at the time of conviction.
For arrests made by a state trooper, the municipal court clerk shall report $10.00 as payable to the comptroller.
Law enforcement agencies other than state troopers and city police officers executing a warrant must submit a
request for payment within 15 days of the conviction in order to be paid the warrant fee. If demand is not made
within 15 days or a city police officer executed the warrant, the municipal court clerk shall report the warrant
fees collected as payable to the city police department. The city shall refund the fees in cases where the
defendant pleas and demonstrates within thirty (30) days of payment of such fee that the court failed to give the
person proper notice. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.203), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Fees for services of peace officers, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 102.011.
Sec. 7.02.004 Failure to appear fee
(a) Established. The municipal court clerk shall collect a special expense according to the fee schedule set
forth in appendix A of this code for the issuance and service of a warrant of arrest from each defendant served
with a warrant for failure to appear or violation of a promise to appear. The municipal court clerk shall report
each special expense collected to the city treasurer for deposit into the general funds of the city.
(b) Contract with state department of public safety. At all times that the city has a contract with the state
department of public safety to deny renewal of licenses for individuals failing to appear at court as directed, the
municipal court clerk shall collect an additional administrative fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this
code at the time of the following: (i) the court enters judgment on the offense for which the failure to appear was
submitted, (ii) the case is dismissed, (iii) a bond or other security is posted to reinstate the charge for which the
warrant was issued, or (iv) the defendant fails to pay or satisfy a judgment in the manner ordered by the court.
Distribution of the funds shall be as provided by agreement with the state department of public safety. The
municipal court clerk shall maintain a copy of the agreement and report each failure to appear fee collected as
well as the distribution of the fee to the city treasurer. Should a defendant fail to pay the administrative fee as
required, the municipal court clerk shall report such failure to the state department of public safety and request
the department deny renewal of the defendant's license.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.204), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Denial of renewal of license for failure to appear, payment of administrative fee, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 706.006.
Sec. 7.02.005 Time payment fee
(a) Each defendant being permitted to make payments on any part of a fine, court cost or restitution on or after
the 31st day after the date on which a judgment is entered, including deferred adjudication and deferred
disposition, shall pay a time payment fee according to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code on or
before the 31st day after the judgment is entered.
(b) The municipal court clerk shall keep separate records of the time payment fees collected. Each month 50%
of the time payment fees collected shall be forwarded to the comptroller, 40% shall be deposited in the general
revenue account of the city, and 10% shall be deposited in the general fund of the city to be allocated to
improving the efficiency of the administration of justice in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/508
(c) No defendant shall be permitted more than 180 days to pay fines, fees, costs, restitution or any other fees
ordered to be paid in the judgment of the court.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.205), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Criminal fees, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 133.103.
Sec. 7.02.006 Arrest fee
The municipal court clerk shall collect an arrest fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this code with each
conviction. The arrest fee shall be reported quarterly to the comptroller of public accounts. For each citation
submitted to the municipal court by a state trooper for which a conviction occurs, the municipal court clerk shall
report $1.00 of the arrest fee as payable to the comptroller with the remaining $4.00 being reported as
distributable to the city police department. Any law enforcement agency other than a state trooper or a city
police officer submitting a citation to the municipal court for which a conviction occurs, the municipal court
shall hold the arrest fee for fifteen working days. Should the law enforcement agency fail to claim the arrest fee
in fifteen working days after the conviction, the municipal court clerk shall report the arrest fee as payable to the
city police department. For each citation that the city police department issues a citation and a conviction occurs,
the full arrest fee shall be reported as payable to the city police department. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A
(13.206), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.007 Costs for peace officer's time
For any trial at which a peace officer is required to testify while off duty, the municipal court clerk shall
calculate the officer's overtime for time spent testifying at trial and time spent traveling to or from home if the
officer was not at work that day or scheduled to be at work and add such costs as court costs to be paid by the
defendant. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.207), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Fees for services of peace officers, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 102.011.
Sec. 7.02.008 Jury fee
The municipal court clerk shall collect a jury fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this code from each
defendant requesting a jury and being convicted thereby or requesting a postponement or accepting a conviction
less than 24 hours before the time of trial. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.208), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Jury fee, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 102.004.
Sec. 7.02.009 Rules of the road fee
The municipal court clerk shall collect an additional fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this code as
court costs for each defendant convicted of violating the rules of the road. The municipal court clerk shall
deposit the fee collected with the city treasurer. Fines and fees collected for violations of the rules of the road
shall be deposited to the general fund of the city and utilized to construct and maintain roads, bridges and
culverts in the city and to enhance the enforcement of laws regulating the use of highways. (Ordinance 2004-04-
12 (9), ex. A (13.209), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Disposition of fines, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 542.402; court costs, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,
sec. 542.403.
Sec. 7.02.010 Administrative fees when certain charges are dismissed
(a) Vehicle inspection certificate. On the finding of the municipal court judge, having been presented credible
evidence, that a defendant remedied the failure to have a valid vehicle inspection certificate within 10 working
days of the issuance of a citation for an expired inspection certificate which has not been expired more than 60
days, the municipal court clerk shall collect an administrative fee according to the fee schedule set forth in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/508
appendix A of this code from the defendant at the time of dismissal. Inspection certificates expired more than 60
days on the date of the citation shall not be dismissible on proof of correction.
State law reference–Dismissal of charge, administrative fee, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 548.605.
(b) Vehicle registration. On the finding of the municipal court judge, having been presented credible evidence,
that a defendant remedied the failure to register the motor vehicle alleged in the offense not more than 10
working days from the date of the offense and within the discretion of the judge the court grants the request to
dismiss, the municipal court clerk shall collect an administrative fee according to the fee schedule set forth in
appendix A of this code from the defendant at the time of dismissal. Vehicle registration corrected more than 10
working days after the date of the citation shall not be dismissible on proof of correction.
State law reference–Operation of vehicle with expired license plate, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 502.407.
(c) Driver's license proof. On the finding of the municipal court judge, having been presented credible
evidence, that a defendant remedied the expired driver's license within 10 working days and within the discretion
of the judge the court grants the request to dismiss, the municipal court clerk shall collect an administrative fee
according to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code from the defendant at the time of dismissal.
State law reference–Dismissal of expired license charge, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 521.026.
(d) Deferred disposition. [Upon a] Defendant's pleading no contest or guilty and requesting defensive driving
on or before the date mandated for the first appearance date for an offense involving operation of a motor
vehicle, other than a commercial vehicle or speeding more than 25 miles per hour over the posted speed, who
has a valid Texas driver's license or permit and adequate financial responsibility, and provides a sufficient
affidavit and records from the state department of public safety demonstrating that the individual has not had
defensive driving in the proceeding 12 months from the date of the offense, upon granting of such request, the
municipal court clerk shall collect, in addition to the other court costs, an administrative fee according to the fee
schedule set forth in appendix A of this code to be distributed to the city treasurer for deposit in the general fund
of the city.
State law reference–Driving safety course dismissal procedures, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.0511.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.210), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.011 Waiver of fines, fees and costs for indigent persons
The municipal court judge may hold a hearing to determine the economic capabilities of any defendant filing a
written motion seeking a finding of the court that the defendant is per se indigent and each alternative method of
discharging the fine or costs of court under CCP article 43.09 would impose an undue hardship on the defendant.
The municipal court judge shall review the motion of the defendant, including any another evidence deemed
necessary, and on a finding that the defendant is indigent as a matter of law and that the alternative methods of
discharge would work an undue hardship on the defendant the municipal court judge may waive payment of any
fines or costs for which the defendant has defaulted. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.213), adopted
4/12/04)
State law reference–Waiver of payment of fines and costs for indigent defendants, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.091.
Secs. 7.02.012–7.02.040 Reserved
Division 2. Special Funds
Sec. 7.02.041 Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/508
In addition to the court costs mandated to be collected under state statute for the state and remitted to the
comptroller as court costs, the following court costs shall be collected for each conviction as provided in this
division. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.301), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.042 Child safety fund
(a) School crossing fee. Each defendant convicted of violating any provisions of the rules of the road,
Transportation Code subtitle C, title 7, within a school crossing zone, or convicted for passing a school bus, in
violation of Transportation Code section 545.066, shall pay an additional fee according to the fee schedule set
forth in appendix A of this code, which shall be taxable as court costs.
(b) Failure to attend school fee. Each defendant convicted of violating Education Code section 25.093
(thwarting compulsory attendance) or section 25.094 (failure to attend school) shall pay an additional fee
according to the fee schedule set forth in appendix A of this code, which shall be taxable as court costs.
(c) Collection and deposit of fees.
(1) The municipal court clerk shall collect such court costs, including the school crossing fee and
failure to attend school fee, and pay such court costs to the city treasurer for all offenses governed by
this section. For all fines collected pursuant to section 25.093 (thwarting compulsory attendance), the
municipal court clerk shall report 50% of the fine to be deposited to the credit of the operating fund
of the school district in which the child attends or to the juvenile justice alternative education
program, if the child has been ordered to attend such a program. The remaining 50% of the fine
collected under section 25.093 shall be reported as payable to the general fund of the city.
(2) The city treasurer shall deposit the school crossing fee and the failure to attend school fee
portion of such court costs into the child safety fund. The city treasurer shall quarterly forward 50%
of the fine collected under section 25.093 payable to the school district which the convicted children
attend or, if the children were sentenced to a juvenile justice alternative education program, the city
treasurer shall forward the 50% to the program. The remaining 50% shall be deposited to the general
fund of the city.
(d) Creation of fund. There is hereby created a child safety fund (the “CS fund”) which shall be maintained
and reported as a separate fund of the city. The CS fund may be maintained in an interest-bearing account and
may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(e) Designated use; administration. All school crossing fees and failure to attend school fees collected shall be
deposited in the CS fund, which shall be administered by the city council. No expenditures or withdrawals shall
be made from the fund except to finance eligible items listed in article 102.014(g), Code of Criminal Procedure,
and as authorized by a majority vote of the city council. On the finding of the city council that an expenditure is
authorized, CS funds may be removed from the fund solely to be used to improve child safety, including:
(1) A school crossing guard program; if one is established all money must first fund this program;
(2) Programs designed to enhance child safety, health, or nutrition, including child abuse
prevention and intervention and drug and alcohol abuse prevention.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.302), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Court costs for child safety fund in municipalities, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 102.014.
Sec. 7.02.043 Building security fund
(a) Fee established. The municipal court clerk shall collect such court costs, including the security fee in the
amount set forth in appendix A of this code, and pay such court costs to the city treasurer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/508
(b) Disposition of fee. The city treasurer shall deposit the security fee portion of such court costs into the
municipal court building security fund.
(c) Creation of fund. There is hereby created a municipal court building security fund (the “security fund”),
which shall be maintained and reported as a separate fund of the city.
(d) Designated use; administration. The fund will be used for those items which are specified in V.C.T.A Code
of Criminal Procedure, article 102.017, as amended from time to time.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.303), adopted 4/12/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority to establish municipal court building security fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.017.
Sec. 7.02.044 Technology fund
(a) Fee established. A technology fee in the amount set forth in appendix A of this code is hereby established
and imposed as a court cost to be paid by every person convicted of a misdemeanor in the municipal court,
pursuant to article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The technology fee shall be charged for each
separate case, matter or charge upon which any person is convicted in the municipal court.
(b) Collection and deposit. The municipal court clerk shall collect such court costs, including the technology
fee, and pay such court costs to the city treasurer for all offenses governed by this section. The city treasurer
shall deposit the technology fee portion of such court costs into the municipal technology fund.
(c) Creation of fund. There is hereby created a “municipal technology fund” (the “technology fund”), which
shall be maintained and reported as a separate fund of the city. The fund may be maintained in an interestbearing
account and may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(d) Designated use of fund; administration. The fund shall be used for those items as specified in V.T.C.A,
Code of Criminal Procedure, article 102.0172, as amended from time to time.
(Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.304), adopted 4/12/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Authority of municipality to establish municipal court technology fund, Tex. Code Crim. Proc. art. 102.0172.
Sec. 7.02.045 Seat belt fund
The municipal court clerk shall report each fine collected for violations of the requirements to wear a seat belt
contrary to section 545.412, Transportation Code, committed after September 1, 2001. The report shall designate
50% of each fine as funds to be remitted to the comptroller annually. The city treasurer shall maintain the seat
belt funds in a separate interest-bearing account and annually remit 50% of all fines collected from defendants
for violations of the requirement to wear a seat belt. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.305), adopted
4/12/04)
State law reference–Child passenger safety belt systems, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.412.
Secs. 7.02.046–7.02.070 Reserved
Division 3. Post-Judgment Collection
Sec. 7.02.071 Generally
As provided in the ordinances of the city and state statutes, the municipal court judge shall assess fines and court
costs against each defendant entering a plea of guilty or no contest or based on the verdict of the court or jury
finding a defendant guilty. Defendants having not timely appealed the judgment of the court and who fail to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/508
timely pay fines, fees, costs or restitution as ordered shall be subject to permitted post-judgment collection
procedures. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.401), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.02.072 Capias pro fine
The municipal court judge may order a capias pro fine be issued for any defendant failing to satisfy a judgment
of the court according to the terms of the judgment. The municipal court clerk shall ensure that each capias
states the amount of the judgment and sentence and commands a peace officer to bring the defendant before the
court or place the defendant in jail until the defendant can be brought before the court. (Ordinance 2004-04-12
(9), ex. A (13.402), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Capias pro fine, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.045.
Sec. 7.02.073 Commitment to jail
Defendants failing to satisfy any judgment may be committed as provided in the Code of Criminal Procedure to
satisfy the judgment. Any defendant committed to jail serving less than 8 consecutive hours in jail shall not be
given credit for time served. The court may specify a period of time that is not less than eight hours or more than
24 hours as the period for which a defendant who fails to pay the fines and costs in the case must remain in jail
to satisfy $50.00 of the fine and costs. Defendants committing offenses prior to January 1, 2004, shall receive
$100.00 credit each time period served. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.403), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Discharge from jail, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.048.
Sec. 7.02.074 Private collection contracts
At all times that the city council has authorized a private collection contract with a private attorney or a public or
private vendor for collection services relating to fines, fees, restitution or other debts or costs, other than
forfeited bonds, the municipal court is authorized to collect an additional 30% on each such debt or account
receivable that is more than 60 days past due and has been collected as a result of the action of a duly authorized
contractor. The municipal court clerk shall report the 30% as payable to the contractor. Should the contractor
collect less than the full sum due from the defendant, the municipal court clerk shall ensure that the payment is
distributed first in an amount sufficient to fully compensate the contractor and then in equal shares to the
comptroller and the city until the comptroller is paid in full. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.404), adopted
4/12/04)
State law reference–Collection contracts, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 103.0031.
Sec. 7.02.075 Civil assessment against property
The municipal court judge may review judgments in which the defendant has defaulted in payment, either in
whole or part, after sentencing, and may order the fine and costs be collected by execution against the defaulting
defendant's property in the same manner as a judgment in a civil suit. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A
(13.405), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Civil collection of fines after judgment, V.T.C.A., Code of Criminal Procedure, art. 45.047.
ARTICLE 7.03 PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE
Sec. 7.03.001 Violations involving parking, stopping or standing of vehicle
In any prosecution charging a violation of an ordinance governing the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle,
proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of such ordinance, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of
such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/508
was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such
violation occurred. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.501), adopted 4/12/04)
State law reference–Presumption that owner of vehicle is responsible for offense, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.308.
Sec. 7.03.002 Violations involving nuisances, building or property
In any prosecution charging a violation regarding nuisances upon a property, [or] the failure to comply with any
notice or order regarding a nuisance on a property or building in violation of an ordinance of the city, including
but not limited to failure to apply for a building permit or other permit or license required herein, proof that the
particular property described in the complaint was in violation of an ordinance regulating the property, together
with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such notice, violation or order, or at the
time when work was performed without a permit, the registered owner of such property, shall constitute in
evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such property was the person who failed to
comply with the notice or order or failed to apply for a permit for the time during which such violation occurred
in violation of the charged ordinance of the city. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.502), adopted 4/12/04)
Sec. 7.03.003 Violations involving animals
In any prosecution charging a violation of an ordinance or statute regulating or governing the abuse, neglect or
ownership of an animal or failure to license an animal as required, proof that the particular property described in
the complaint was the premises upon which the animal resided, was harbored or was maintained and a violation
of an ordinance or statute regulating or governing the animal alleged in the complaint, together with proof that
the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such complaint or at the time when the animal was in
violation of said ordinance or statute, the registered owner of such animal or the person with legal rights to
reside on said property, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such
property or the person with legal rights to reside on said property was the owner of the animal and the person
who failed to comply with or violated the ordinance or statute. (Ordinance 2004-04-12 (9), ex. A (13.503),
adopted 4/12/04)
CHAPTER 8
OFFENSES AND NUISANCES
ARTICLE 8.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 8.02 MINORS
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.02.001 Sale, distribution or display of obscene material to minor
(a) Prohibited acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to willfully or knowingly engage in
the business of selling, lending, giving away, showing, advertising for sale or distributing to any person under
the age of seventeen (17) or to have in his possession with the intent to engage in said business, or to otherwise
offer for sale or commercial distribution to any individual under the age of seventeen (17) years, or who shall
display at newsstands or any other business establishment frequented by minors under the age of seventeen (17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/508
years or where said minors are or may be invited as a part of the general public, any pornographic motion
picture, or any still picture or photograph or any book, pocket book, pamphlet or magazine, the cover or content
of which exploits, is devoted to, or is principally made up of description or depictions of illicit sex or sexual
immorality or which is obscene, lewd, lascivious or indecent or which consists of pictures of nude or partially
denuded figures posed or presented in a manner to provoke or arouse lust or passion or to exploit sex, lust or
perversion for commercial gain or any article or instrument of indecent or immoral use.
(b) Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
Description or depiction of illicit sex or sexual immorality. Sexual intercourse or erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breasts.
Knowingly. Having knowledge of the character and content of the publication or failure on notice to exercise
reasonable inspection which would disclose the content and character of the same.
Nude or partially denuded figures. Less than completely and opaquely covered:
(1) Human genitals;
(2) Pubic regions;
(3) Buttocks; or
(4) Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the papilla.
(1996 Code, secs. 7.201, 7.202)
Secs. 8.02.002–8.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Curfew*
Sec. 8.02.031 Definitions
For the purposes of this division, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the
plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.
Emergency. An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action.
The term shall include but not be limited to a fire, a natural disaster, a vehicular accident, or a serious medical
condition of sudden onset.
Establishment. Any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited,
including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.
Guardian. The person who, under a court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or the public or private
agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Operator. Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any
establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a
corporation.
Minor. Any person under seventeen (17) years of age.
Parent. A person who is:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/508
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent or stepparent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian in writing to have the care and
custody of a minor.
Public place. Any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access, and includes, but is
not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartments, houses, office
buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain. To:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or
other person in control of the premises.
(Ordinance 2007-06-11 (6A), sec. 2 (7.401), adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 8.02.032 Offenses
(a) It shall be unlawful for any minor to knowingly remain, walk, run, stand, drive or ride about in or upon
any public place in the city between the hours of:
(1) 11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the
following day;
(2) 2:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Saturday or Sunday; and
(3) 8:00 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. on days when the Rockdale Independent School District is in session.
(Ordinance 2017-07-10(9C) adopted 7/10/17)
(b) It shall be unlawful for the parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to knowingly allow or
permit the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in subsection (a) of this section.
(c) It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or any employee of an establishment to knowingly allow a
minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.
(d) Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in section 8.02.035 of this code.
(Ordinance 2007-06-11 (6A), sec. 2 (7.402), adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 8.02.033 Defenses
It is a defense to prosecution under section 8.02.032 of this code that:
(1) The minor was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian;
(2) The minor was accompanied by an adult designated by his or her parent or guardian;
(3) The minor was on an errand made necessary by an emergency;
(4) The minor was attending official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by
adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/508
official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city,
a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;
(5) The minor was engaged in a lawful employment activity or was going directly to or coming
from lawful employment;
(6) The minor was on the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a
next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's
presence;
(7) The minor was on an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian;
(8) The minor was in a motor vehicle involved in intrastate or interstate transportation;
(9) The minor was engaged in, participating in, or traveling to or from any event, function or
activity for which the application of section 8.02.032 of this code would contravene his or her rights
protected by the Texas or United States Constitution;
(10) The minor was married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in
accordance with chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code; or
(11) The owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department
that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to
leave.
(Ordinance 2007-06-11 (6A), sec. 2 (7.403), adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 8.02.034 Enforcement
Before taking any enforcement action under this division, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age
and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this code
unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other
circumstances, no defense as set forth in section 8.02.033 exists. (Ordinance 2007-06-11 (6A), sec. 2 (7.404),
adopted 6/11/07)
Sec. 8.02.035 Penalties
(a) A person who violates a provision of this division is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a
day during which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is
punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b) A third arrest of a minor within a period of twelve (12) months for violating any of the provisions of this
division shall be deemed prima facie evidence that a parent or guardian having legal custody of said minor
knowingly allowed or permitted the minor to be in violation of the curfew imposed in section 8.02.032(a) of this
code.
(Ordinance 2007-06-11 (6A), sec. 2 (7.405), adopted 6/11/07)
ARTICLE 8.03 NOISE*
Sec. 8.03.001 Excessive noise prohibited
(a) Any unreasonably loud or disturbing noise which causes material distress, discomfort or injury to persons
of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living in the immediate vicinity
thereof is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereafter prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/508
(b) Any noise of such character, intensity and continued duration which substantially interferes with the
comfortable enjoyment of private homes by persons of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes,
habits, and modes of living is hereby declared to be a nuisance and is hereafter prohibited.
(1996 Code, art. 7.300(a), (b))
Sec. 8.03.002 Specific noises prohibited
The following acts, among others, are declared to be nuisances in violation of this article, but said enumeration
shall not be deemed to be exclusive, to wit:
(1) The playing of any radio, phonograph or other musical instrument in such manner or with such
volume, particularly during the hours between 7 p.m. and 7 a.m., as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of persons of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes
of living in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence.
(2) The use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier of such intensity that annoys and disturbs
persons of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes, habits, and modes of living in the
immediate vicinity thereof, or the use of any stationary loudspeaker or amplifier operated on any day
between the hours of 7 p.m. and 7 a.m.
(3) The keeping of any animal or fowl which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall
disturb the comfort and repose of any person of normal nervous sensibilities and of ordinary tastes,
habits and modes of living in the immediate vicinity.
(4) The continued or frequent sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, streetcar or other vehicle except as a danger or warning signal, or the creation by
means of any such signal device of any unreasonably loud or harsh devise [noise] for any
unnecessary and unreasonable period of time.
(5) The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal
combustion engine, motor vehicle or boat engine except through a muffler or other device which will
effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
(6) The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air, unless the noise to be created is
effectively muffled and reduced.
(7) The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair work, on any building
between the hours of 7 p.m. and 6 a.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest
of the public safety and convenience, and then only by permit from the city council, which permit
may be renewed by the council during the time the emergency exists.
(8) The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school or institution of
learning while the same is in session, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with
the workings of such institutions, providing conspicuous signs are displayed in such manner
indicating that [such street is a school or hospital street].
(9) The use of any drum, loudspeaker or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting
attention by the creation of noise to any performance, show or sale of merchandise.
(1996 Code, art. 7.300(c))
Sec. 8.03.003 Definition
The word “person” as used in this article shall be construed to impart the singular and plural as the case
demands, and shall include corporations, companies, societies, associations and churches. (1996 Code, art.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/508
7.300(d))
Sec. 8.03.004 Exception for city-sponsored activities
Should the noise in question be the result of a necessary part of a city-sponsored activity, it shall be excepted
from the foregoing regulations. (1996 Code, art. 7.300(e))
ARTICLE 8.04 ILLEGAL SMOKING PRODUCTS
Sec. 8.04.001 Purpose
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the use, purchase, possession, sale, ingestion or smoking of illegal
smoking products and ingestion devices hereinafter defined within the city limits.
Sec. 8.04.002 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Illegal smoking product. Any substance, whether described as tobacco, herbs, incense, spice or any blend
thereof, regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which includes any
one or more of the following chemicals:
(1) Salvia divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as
Salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant,
and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(2) 2-[(1R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylocatan-2-y1) phenol (also known as CP47, 497)
and homologues;
(3) (6aS, 10aS)-9-(hydroxmethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10atetrahydrobenzo
[c] chromen-1-ol) (also known as HU-211 or Dexanabinol);
(4) 1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-018); or
(5) Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole (also known as JWH-073).
Ingestion device. Equipment, product or material that is used or intended for use in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing an illegal smoking product into the human body, including:
(1) A metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipe with or without a screen,
permanent screen, hashish head, or punctured metal bowl;
(2) A water pipe;
(3) A carburetion tube or device;
(4) A smoking or carburetion mask;
(5) A chamber pipe;
(6) A carburetor pipe;
(7) An electric pipe;
(8) An air-driven pipe;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/508
(9) A chillum;
(10) A bong; or
(11) An ice pipe or chiller.
Person. An individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business.
Sec. 8.04.003 Use, possession or sale prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, ingest, purchase, possess, barter, give, publicly display, sell or offer
for sale any illegal smoking product.
Sec. 8.04.004 Use or possession of ingestion device prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or possess an ingestion device used or intended to be used to inject,
ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce an illegal smoking product into the human body.
Sec. 8.04.005 Defenses
It shall be a defense to a violation of this article that any act described in this article is under and pursuant to the
direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act.
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6C) adopted 9/13/10)
ARTICLE 8.05 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY*
Sec. 8.05.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
Child or children. A person younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child care facility. A facility licensed, certified, or registered by the state health and human services commission
to provide assessment, care, training, education, custody, treatment, or supervision for a child who is not related
by blood, marriage, or adoption to the owner or operator of the facility, for all or part of the 24-hour day,
whether or not the facility is operated for profit or charges for the services.
Database. The state department of public safety's sex offender database.
Permanent residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive
days.
Playground. Any outdoor facility that is not on the premises of a school and that:
(1) Is intended for recreation;
(2) Is open to the public; and
(3) Contains three or more play stations intended for the recreation of children, such as slides,
swing sets, and teeterboards.
Public swimming pool. An artificial body of water, including a spa, maintained expressly for public recreational
purposes, swimming and similar aquatic sports, or therapeutic purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/508
School. A private or public elementary or secondary school.
Sex offender. An individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense
involving a child for which the individual is required to register as a sex offender under chapter 62 of the Texas
Code of Criminal Procedure.
Temporary residence. A place where a person abides, lodges, or resides for fourteen (14) or more days in the
aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place where a person
routinely abides, resides, or lodges for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any
month and which is not the person's permanent residence.
Video arcade facility. Any facility that:
(1) Is open to the public, including persons who are 17 years of age or younger;
(2) Is intended primarily for the use of pinball or video machines; and
(3) Contains at least three pinball or video machines.
Youth center. Any recreational facility or gymnasium that is intended primarily for use by persons who are 17
years of age or younger, and regularly provides athletic, civic, or cultural activities.
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 2, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.002 Prohibitions
(a) It is unlawful for a sex offender to establish a permanent residence or temporary residence within 2,000
feet of any premises where children commonly gather, including, but not limited to, a school, child care facility,
park, playground, youth center, public swimming pool, or video arcade facility.
(b) It is unlawful to lease, rent or otherwise provide any residence, dwelling, place, structure or part thereof, or
manufactured home, trailer, or other conveyance, with the knowledge that it will be used as a permanent
residence or temporary residence by any person prohibited from establishing such permanent residence or
temporary residence pursuant to the terms of this section, if such place, structure or part thereof, or
manufactured home, trailer or other conveyance, is located within 2,000 feet of any premises where children
commonly gather, as defined in this article.
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 3, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.003 Evidentiary matters; measurements
(a) It shall be prima facie evidence that this article applies to such a person if that person's record appears on
the database and the database indicates that the victim was less than seventeen (17) years of age.
(b) For the purposes of determining the minimum distance separation, the requirement shall be measured by
following a straight line from the outer property line of a permanent or temporary residence to the nearest
property line of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein, or, in the case of multiple
residences on one property, measuring from the nearest property line of the premises to the nearest property line
of the premises where children commonly gather, as described herein.
(c) A map depicting the prohibited areas shall be created and maintained by the city. The city shall review the
map at least annually for changes and make such map available to the public at the city police department.
(d) In cases of a dispute over measured distances, it shall be incumbent upon the person(s) challenging the
measurement to prove otherwise.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/508
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 4, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.004 Culpable mental state not required
Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this
article. (Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 5, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.005 Exceptions
A person described herein, residing within 2,000 feet of those places where children commonly gather, as
specified herein, does not commit a violation of this article if any of the following apply:
(1) The person required to register on the database established the permanent or temporary
residence and has complied with all of the sex offender registration laws of the state prior to the date
of the adoption of this article;
(2) The person required to register on the database was a minor when he or she committed the
offense requiring such registration and was not convicted as an adult;
(3) The person required to register on the database is a minor;
(4) The premises where children commonly gather, as specified herein, within 2,000 feet of the
permanent or temporary residence of the person required to register on the database was opened after
the person established the permanent or temporary residence and complied with all sex offender
registration laws of the state; or
(5) The information on the database is incorrect, and, if corrected, this article would not apply to
the person who was erroneously listed on the database.
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 6, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.006 Penalty
A violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, such
violation shall be punishable by a fine in an amount not to exceed $500.00. Each day of violation shall constitute
a separate offense. (Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 7, adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 8.05.007 Injunctive relief
Any violation of this article may be enjoined by a suit filed in the name of the city in a court of competent
jurisdiction, and this remedy shall be in addition to any penal provision in this article or in the Code of
Ordinances of the city. (Ordinance 2010-09-13 (6A), sec. 8, adopted 9/13/10)
ARTICLE 8.06 ABANDONED OR JUNKED VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 8.06.001 State law adopted
The Texas Transportation Code chapter 683, and as hereafter amended, is adopted by reference, and the
provisions of said chapter shall control and take precedence over any conflicting provisions of this article.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.101), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.002 Definitions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/508
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated below:
Abandoned motor vehicle. A vehicle that:
(1) Is inoperative and over five years old and is left unattended on public property for more than 48
hours;
(2) Has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than 48 hours;
(3) Has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the
property for more than 48 hours; or
(4) Has been left unattended on the right-of-way of a designated county, state, or federal highway
for more than 48 hours.
Antique auto. A passenger car or truck that is at least 25 years old.
Collector. The owner of one or more antique or special interest vehicles who collects, purchases, acquires,
trades, or disposes of special interest or antique vehicles or parts of them for personal use in order to restore,
preserve, and maintain an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Demolisher. A person whose business is to convert a motor vehicle into processed scrap or scrap metal or to
otherwise wreck or dismantle a motor vehicle.
Garagekeeper. An owner or operator of a parking place or establishment, motor vehicle storage facility, or
establishment for the servicing, repair, or maintenance of a motor vehicle.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.102), adopted 11/12/07)
Junked motor vehicle. A vehicle that is self propelled and:
(1) Displays an expired license plate or invalid motor vehicle inspection certificate or does not
display a license plate or motor vehicle inspection certificate; and
(2) Is:
(A) Wrecked, dismantled or partially dismantled, or discarded; or
(B) Inoperable and has remained inoperable for more than:
(i) Seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, if the vehicle is on public property; or
(ii) Thirty (30) consecutive days, if the vehicle is on private property.
(Ordinance adopting Code)
Motor vehicle. Any motor vehicle subject to registration pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, chapter 501,
Tex. Trans. Code.
Motor vehicle collector. A person owning one or more antique or special interest vehicles and [who] acquires,
collects, or disposes of any antique or special interest vehicle or part of any antique or special interest vehicle for
personal use to restore and preserve an antique or special interest vehicle for historic interest.
Outboard motor. An outboard motor subject to registration under chapter 31, Parks & Wildlife Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/508
Police department. The city police department and any other law enforcement agency as defined in section
683.001, Tex. Trans. Code.
Special interest vehicle. A motor vehicle of any age that has not been altered or modified from original
manufacturer's specifications and, because of its historic interest, is being preserved by hobbyists.
Storage facility. A garage, parking lot, or any type of facility or establishment for the servicing, repairing,
storing, or parking of motor vehicles.
Watercraft. A vessel subject to registration under chapter 31, Tex. Parks and Wildlife Code.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.102), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.003 Enforcement
The administration of this article shall be the responsibility of the police department or such department, officer
or employee of the city designated by the city council; provided that the chief of police, or such other salaried,
full-time employee of the city as designated by the city administrator, is authorized to administer and supervise
the procedures, sections and provisions of this article applying to abandoned and junk vehicles. Whoever is so
authorized may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this article to examine motor vehicles
or parts thereof, to obtain information as to the identity of motor vehicles and to remove or cause the removal of
a motor vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. Upon request by the officer
designated pursuant to this section, the municipal court may issue orders necessary to the enforcement of this
article. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.103), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.004 Immediate removal of certain vehicles
Nothing in this article shall affect statutes that permit immediate removal of vehicles left on public property that
obstruct traffic or otherwise create a imminent threat to health and safety. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3
(7.104), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.005 Storage fees for removed vehicles
The police department shall be entitled to charge and collect reasonable storage fees for abandoned and junked
vehicles removed and stored pursuant to this article. Such fees shall be established by the city council and,
absent the city council having established such fees, the police department. Such fees may be charged beginning
the day the vehicle is taken into custody as follows: (i) for a period of up to ten (10) days prior to the date of the
mailing of written notice pursuant to this article, and (ii) beginning on the day after written notice is mailed until
the vehicle is reclaimed or disposed of pursuant to this article. If any such vehicle is stored with a garagekeeper,
the police department shall not charge an additional fee for any day that the garagekeeper charges a fee.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.105), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.006 Penalty
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be
subject to a fine in an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), and each day of such violation shall
be a separate violation. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.106), adopted 11/12/07)
Secs. 8.06.007–8.06.030 Reserved
Division 2. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 8.06.031 Authority to take possession
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/508
The police department is authorized to take into custody any abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard
motor found on public or private property. The police department may use personnel, equipment and facilities of
the police department or other personnel, equipment, and facilities provided by contract with the city to remove,
preserve, and store an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor taken into custody of the police
department. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.110), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.032 Notice of impoundment
(a) When information exists sufficient to permit notice of impoundment of an abandoned motor vehicle,
watercraft, or outboard motor to the owner and lienholder, notice shall be given by mail to the registered owner
and lienholder as follows:
(1) The police department shall send notice of abandonment to each registered owner and
lienholder showing of record pursuant to the Certificate of Title Act, chapter 501, Tex. Trans. Code,
or, as applicable, chapter 31, Parks & Wildlife Code.
(2) Such notice shall be given within ten (10) days after the date the motor vehicle, watercraft or
outboard motor is taken into custody, or the date the police department receives a report of
abandonment.
(3) The notice shall be by certified mail, return receipt requested, specifying the year, make, model
and identification number of the item, set forth the location of the facility where the item is being
held, and inform the owner and any lienholders of the right to reclaim the item not later than the 20th
day after the date of the notice, on payment of all towing, preservation, storage and/or garagekeeper
charges.
(4) The notice shall state that the failure of the owner or lienholder(s) to exercise the right to
reclaim the item within the time provided shall be deemed a waiver of all right, title, and interest in
the item and their consent to the sale of the item at a public auction.
(b) If the identity of the last registered owner cannot be determined, if the registration contains no address for
the owner, or if it is impossible to determine with reasonable certainty the identity and addresses of all
lienholders, notice by one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city shall be made within ten
(10) days from the date the item was taken into custody, or from the date the report of abandonment was
received. The published notice shall be sufficient if it contains the information otherwise required to be included
in the notice by mail. A list of motor vehicles, watercraft or outboard motors may be included in the same
publication.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.111), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.033 Use of impounded vehicles by police department
(a) Provided that a garagekeeper's lien has not attached to the vehicle, if an abandoned motor vehicle has not
been reclaimed as provided in section 8.06.032 hereof, the police department may use such abandoned motor
vehicle for police department purposes if such use is cost-effective.
(b) If the police department discontinues use of the abandoned motor vehicle, the police department shall
auction such abandoned motor vehicle as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.112), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.034 Sale at auction; disposition of proceeds of sale
(a) If an abandoned motor vehicle, watercraft or outboard motor has not been reclaimed within twenty (20)
days after the date of notice and payment of all towing, preservation and storage charges resulting from its
impoundment, the police department shall sell the item at a public auction. Proper notice of the public auction
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/508
shall be given and, in the event a vehicle is to be sold in satisfaction of a garagekeeper's lien, the garagekeeper
shall be notified of the time and place of such auction.
(b) The police department shall furnish a sales receipt for each vehicle to the purchaser thereof at the public
auction.
(c) The proceeds shall be applied first to reimburse the police department for the expenses of the auction,
costs of towing, preserving and storing the vehicle, and all notice and publication costs, and any remainder from
the proceeds of the sale shall be held for the owner of the vehicle or entitled lienholder for ninety (90) days, and
then shall be deposited in a special fund with the city treasurer which shall remain available for the payment of
auction, towing, preserving, storage and all notice and publication costs which result from placing other
abandoned vehicles in custody, whenever the proceeds from a sale of such other abandoned motor vehicles are
insufficient to meet these expenses and costs. In the event the special fund on deposit with the city treasurer
accumulates to in excess of $1,000.00, the city council may transfer the balance of such fund, that exceeds
$1,000.00, to the general fund for use by the police department as budgeted.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.113), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.035 Vehicles abandoned at storage facility
(a) The police department, upon receipt of a report from a garagekeeper that a motor vehicle has been deemed
abandoned pursuant to section 683.031, Tex. Trans. Code, shall follow the notification procedures set forth in
section 8.06.032 herein for the giving of notice to owners and lienholders of abandoned vehicles, except that
custody of the vehicle shall remain with the garagekeeper until after the notification requirements have been
satisfied.
(b) A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall accompany the report of the garagekeeper, and such fee shall be retained
by the police department receiving the report and used to defray the cost of notification or other costs incurred in
the disposition of such vehicles, and such fee shall be deposited in the general fund of the city.
(c) Abandoned vehicles left in storage facilities which are not reclaimed after notice is given in accordance
with this division shall be taken into custody by the police department and sold at auction, as in the case of other
abandoned motor vehicles. The proceeds of the sale shall first be applied to the garagekeeper's charges for
servicing, repair, and storage, provided the garagekeeper properly notified the police department within seven
days of the abandonment; however, the police department shall retain an amount of two percent (2%) of the
gross proceeds of the sale for each vehicle auctioned, but in no event shall it retain less than ten dollars ($10.00),
to be used to defray expenses of custody, auction, and storage fees accrued according to section 8.06.005.
(d) The police department shall not take custody of a motor vehicle, watercraft, or outboard motor more than
thirty-one days after the notices are sent according to section 8.06.032. After the thirty-first day, the storage
facility having custody of the abandoned vehicle shall dispose of the vehicle pursuant to the requirements of
chapter 70, Property Code.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.114), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.036 Disposal to demolisher
The police department is authorized to apply to the state department of transportation for authority to sell, give
away or dispose of any abandoned motor vehicle in its possession to a demolisher in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 683, Tex. Trans. Code. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.115), adopted 11/12/07)
Secs. 8.06.037–8.06.060 Reserved
Division 3. Junked Vehicles
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/508
Sec. 8.06.061 Declaration of nuisance
Section 683.072, Tex. Trans. Code, declares that junked vehicles that are located in any place where they are
readily visible from a public place or public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and welfare of the general
public, reduce the value of private property, invite vandalism, create fire hazards, constitute an attractive
nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and produce urban blight adverse to the
maintenance and continuing development of the city, and are a public nuisance. The city council hereby adopts
such findings and declarations, and declares that junked vehicles are a public nuisance. (Ordinance 2007-11-12
(6C), sec. 3 (7.120), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.062 Maintaining nuisance
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain a public nuisance, as defined in section 8.06.061, within the city.
Any person found guilty of maintaining a public nuisance as defined in section 8.06.061 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and be subject to a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each offense and, upon the
municipal court finding any person guilty of maintaining a public nuisance as defined in section 8.06.061, the
court shall order removal and abatement of the nuisance. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.121), adopted
11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.063 Abatement procedures
The police department or the code enforcement officer, when desiring to remove and dispose of junked vehicles
from private property, public property or public rights-of-way, shall comply with the following procedures:
(1) A written notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property and that it must be
removed and abated within ten (10) days of the date the letter was mailed, and further stating that any
request for a hearing must be made not later than the date by which the nuisance must be abated and
removed, shall be personally delivered, sent by certified mail with a five (5) day return receipt
requested or delivered by the United States Postal Service with signature confirmation service, to the
last known registered owner of the public nuisance, each lienholder of record and the owner or the
occupant of the private premises whereupon such public nuisance exists. If the notice is returned
undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate such nuisance shall be continued
to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of such return.
(2) The requirements of subsection (1) above shall also apply to the case of a public nuisance on
public property and similar notice shall be sent to the owner or the occupant of the public premises
and to the owner or the occupant of the premises adjacent to the public property whereupon such
public nuisance exists.
(3) If sufficient information is not available to determine the registered owner of the nuisance, after
reasonable effort to locate the owner, notice may be placed on the nuisance.
(4) Once a vehicle has been removed under the provisions of this division, it shall not be
reconstructed or made operable.
(5) If the vehicle is not removed or otherwise brought into compliance, a public hearing will be
held only if requested by the owner before the date by which the nuisance must be abated and
removed. A hearing, if requested, will be held prior to the removal of the vehicle or part thereof as a
public nuisance before the chief of police. Should the chief of police find that such vehicle is a public
nuisance as defined herein, he/she shall enter an order requiring the removal of the vehicle or part
thereof from the public or private property or public right-of-way where it is situated, and such order
shall include a description of the vehicle, the identification number, and the license number of the
vehicle, if available. Any aggrieved city officer, owner or lienholder may appeal any such decision of
the chief of police to the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/508
(6) The police department shall give notice to the state department of transportation within five (5)
days after the date of the removal of a junked vehicle by the department, identifying the vehicle or
part thereof.
(7) The administration of the procedures of this section shall be carried out by regularly salaried,
full-time employees of the city, except that the removal of vehicles or parts thereof from property
may be accomplished by any other duly authorized person, including authorized wrecker service
operators acting at the direction of the city.
(8) If the nuisance is not removed and abated and a hearing is not requested within the ten (10) day
period provided, in addition to any other procedure authorized by this article, a complaint may also
be filed in municipal court for the violation of maintaining a public nuisance; provided that such
notice shall not be a requirement for any such complaint being filed in municipal court.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.122), adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.064 Exceptions
The procedures set out in this division shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed
within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, a
vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the
business of a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard, or an antique and special interest vehicle stored by a
collector on his property, provided that the vehicle and outdoor storage areas are maintained in such a manner
that they do not constitute a health hazard and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence,
rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.123),
adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 8.06.065 Disposal
Junked vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or demolisher or to any suitable
site operated by a city or county for processing as scrap or salvage. Relocation of a junked vehicle, for which a
notice has been issued under or the procedures provided in this article have been otherwise initiated, to another
location shall have no effect on the proceeding if the junked vehicle constitutes a public nuisance at the new
location. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6C), sec. 3 (7.124), adopted 11/12/07)
CHAPTER 9
PERSONNEL
ARTICLE 9.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 9.01.001 Personnel policies and procedures
(a) Generally. The city shall adopt and, from time to time as necessary and advisable, amend, modify, review
and revise comprehensive personnel policies and procedures that shall be applicable to the officers and
employees of the city. The city manager shall cause such policies and procedures, and any proposed
modifications or amendments, to be drafted, prepared and recommended to the city council for review and
action as necessary to serve the best interests of the city and its employees and citizens.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/508
(b) City council approval. All personnel policies and procedures of the city, and all revisions, modifications
and amendments thereto, shall be approved by the city council, in its discretion, by resolution, and no such
policies, procedures, revisions, modifications or amendments shall be in effect except as approved by the city
council acting by resolution. Such policies, procedures, rules and regulations as are approved by resolution of
the city council shall be and remain in effect until thereafter repealed, modified or amended by resolution, and
all or any part of such policies, procedures, rules, regulations, revisions, modifications and amendments may be
repealed, deleted, modified or amended at any time by the city council acting in its discretion.
(c) Employment contracts. The personnel policies and procedures, rules and regulations of the city shall never
be construed or interpreted to create or result in any contract for employment, or to create, establish or result in
any officer or employee of the city having or obtaining a property interest in any job, position, employment or
future benefit with the city. The city is a just-cause employer and it is the policy of the city that all officers and
employees of the city shall be just-cause employees. Save and except for a written contract executed by and
between the city and an individual officer or employee, if any, which written contract is approved by majority
vote of the city council, acting at a duly noticed public meeting, with the advice and counsel of the city attorney,
no officer or employee of the city shall have and obtain, by implication or otherwise, any employment contract
with the city.
(d) Interpretation and construction. The personnel policies and procedures, rules and regulations of the city, as
approved by resolution from time to time, shall be interpreted and construed consistent with this section and in a
manner consistent with the city being and remaining a just-cause employer. The general policies and procedures
of the city shall not be interpreted or construed as creating third party rights.
(e) Governmental immunity. Nothing in the personnel policies and procedures, rules and regulations of the
city shall be deemed to waive, modify or amend any legal defense available at law or in equity to either the city,
its officers, or its employees nor to create any legal rights or claims on behalf of any third party. Neither the city,
its officers, nor its employees waives, modifies or alters to any extent whatsoever the availability of the defense
of governmental immunity under the laws of the state.
(Ordinance 2005-06-13 (5A) adopted 6/13/05)
ARTICLE 9.02 TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM*
Sec. 9.02.001 Participation
The city shall participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System (V.T.C.A., Government Code, ch. 681 et.
seq.) and ordinances pertaining to the Texas Municipal Retirement System are hereby saved from repeal. The
rules and regulations of the Texas Municipal Retirement System shall be on file in the office of the city
secretary. (Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 9.03 POLICE†
Division 1. Generally
Secs. 9.03.001–9.03.030 Reserved
Division 2. Police Reserve Unit*
Sec. 9.03.031 Created; membership
There is hereby created a police reserve unit, the membership of which shall not exceed in number the total
number of regular police officers authorized. The police reserve unit shall be composed of persons who at the
time of their appointment are residents of the city, and who have been actual residents thereof for at least one (1)
year prior to their appointment. Each member shall be in good physical condition and of good character and not
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/508
less than twenty-one (21) years of age. Appointment to the police reserve unit shall be made by the mayor upon
recommendation of the chief of police, for a term of two (2) years, provided that any member may be discharged
at any time (without or with cause, and without a hearing) by the mayor upon recommendation of the chief of
police. Regular full term [full-time] members of the police department shall not be eligible for membership in
the police reserve unit. There shall be no prohibition against reappointment for additional terms of two (2) years.
(1996 Code, sec. 8.701)
Sec. 9.03.032 Supervision; call to service; police powers; carrying firearms
The police reserve unit or any member thereof shall be called into service only by the mayor. The police reserve
unit shall function under the immediate direction of the chief of police or, in his absence, the senior officer on
duty. Before entering upon his duties, each member shall take and subscribe to the same oath or affirmation as
provided by law to be taken and subscribed by all municipal officers. After subscribing his oath of office, each
member of the police reserve unit shall be issued an official commission card signed by the mayor. Said card
shall be retained in the personal possession of the member at all times. Except during any period of probation,
members of the police reserve unit shall have all the powers and authority and shall be subject to all the duties of
members of the regularly constituted police department and shall be subject to the rules and regulations
governing the police department; provided, however, that membership in the police reserve unit shall not
constitute membership in the regularly constituted police department nor shall any member of the police reserve
unit be entitled to any right or privilege of compensation, pension or any other similar right or privilege of
members of the regularly constituted police department nor to any other prerequisite or emolument attaching to
membership in said regularly constituted police department. All members of the police reserve unit are
absolutely prohibited from carrying firearms during all periods of service. (1996 Code, sec. 8.702)
Sec. 9.03.033 Probationary period
Each new member of the police reserve unit shall serve on probation a minimum of six (6) months following the
date of his appointment. During such period of probation he shall be a member on probation and have only such
powers, authority and duties as are assigned to him, from time to time, by the chief of police. Upon completion
of the probationary period, the chief of police may transfer any such member from probationary to active status.
If the chief fails or refuses to transfer such member to active status at the expiration of the six (6) month term,
such member shall be dropped automatically from membership in the police reserve unit. (1996 Code, sec.
8.703)
Sec. 9.03.034 Training standards
Members of the police reserve unit must comply with the minimum training standards established by the state
commission on law enforcement officer standards and education minimum standards established for all reserve
law enforcement officers identical to the standards so established which must be fulfilled before a person
appointed as a reserve unit member may [act] as a peace officer. The chief of police with the advice and consent
of the mayor shall establish qualifications and standards of training for members of the police reserve unit and
shall establish rules and regulations governing reserve police members. (1996 Code, sec. 8.704)
Sec. 9.03.035 Compensation
No member of the police reserve unit shall receive any compensation from the city for his services as a member
of the police reserve unit, except as may be provided from time to time by resolution of the mayor and city
council. (1996 Code, sec. 8.705)
Sec. 9.03.036 Release of liability
Each member of the police reserve unit shall, promptly after being appointed as a member of said unit, prior to
taking his oath of office, execute and deliver to the city manager an instrument in form to be approved by the
city, releasing the city from all liability for any injury or death of such member in the line of duty as a member
of the police reserve unit. (1996 Code, sec. 8.706)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/508
Sec. 9.03.037 Authority of mayor to summon special police force
This division is not intended and does not limit the power of the mayor to summon into service a special police
force as provided by the statutes of the state. (1996 Code, sec. 8.707)
Secs. 9.03.038–9.03.060 Reserved
Division 3. Racial Profiling Policy*
Sec. 9.03.061 Adopted
The city racial profiling policy, attached to Ordinance 12-10-01 (1) as exhibit A, is hereby approved and
adopted. The racial profiling policy shall be and remain in full force and effect until such time as repealed,
modified or amended by resolution or ordinance of the city council. Where the policy conflicts with the Code of
Criminal Procedure or a specific department policy, the more restrictive shall govern. (Ordinance 12-10-01 (1),
sec. 2, adopted 12/10/01)
Sec. 9.03.062 Orders and recommendations of chief of police
The chief of police is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the police department and must operate and
manage the police department in a manner consistent with the policies and procedures of the city, the laws of the
state and federal government, the Code of Criminal Procedure, and the public safety needs of the citizens. The
chief may from time to time issue orders or specific policy statements for the police department that are
consistent with the policy adopted herein for the police department, and that are consistent with the personnel
policies of the city, as needed to guide officers, and departmental practices not specifically addressed in the
policy or that vary the policies as needed to create policies that will comply with changes in the law. The chief of
police shall cause such policies and procedures, and any proposed modifications or amendments, to be drafted,
prepared and recommended to the city council for review and action as necessary to serve the best interests of
the city and the police department. (Ordinance 12-10-01 (1), sec. 3, adopted 12/10/01)
Sec. 9.03.063 Council approval required; modifications
The racial profiling policies and procedures of the police department of the city, and all revisions, modifications
and amendments thereto, shall be approved by the city council, in its discretion, by resolution, and no such
policies, procedures, revisions, modifications or amendments shall be in effect except as approved by the city
council acting by resolution. Such policies, procedures, rules and regulations as are approved by resolution of
the city council shall be and remain in effect until thereafter repealed, modified or amended by resolution, and
all, or any part of, such policies, procedures, rules, regulations, revisions, modifications and amendments may be
repealed, deleted, modified or amended, at any time, by the city council acting in its discretion. (Ordinance 12-
10-01 (1), sec. 4, adopted 12/10/01)
Sec. 9.03.064 Audio and video equipment
(a) The chief of police shall, immediately upon enactment of this policy, commence examination of the
feasibility of installing video camera equipment and transmitter-activated equipment in any city motor vehicle,
now owned or acquired after passage of this policy, regularly used to make traffic stops, and transmitteractivated
equipment in each city motorcycle, now owned or acquired after the passage of this policy, regularly
used to make traffic stops, and shall report to the city council any such vehicles which are not equipped with
adequate equipment. The report shall include funding options available to the city, including any funding
available through the department of public safety.
(b) In the event that the findings of such examination support the installation of additional equipment in any
motor vehicle required to be equipped but not already equipped, the chief of police is authorized and directed to
apply for funding to secure the additional equipment, and if funds are available shall take such actions as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/508
necessary to ensure installation of such additional equipment as expeditiously as feasible. The chief of police is
authorized and directed to certify to the department of public safety any need for additional equipment for which
funds are not available. On receipt of either sufficient funds or video and audio equipment, the chief of police
shall direct such actions as necessary to expeditiously install and begin the operation of video and transmitteractivated
equipment in each motor vehicle regularly used to make traffic stops, and shall direct such actions as
necessary to expeditiously install and begin the operation of transmitter-activated equipment on each motorcycle
regularly used to make traffic stops. The chief of police is authorized and directed to certify to the department of
public safety that such equipment has been installed and is being used to record each traffic and pedestrian stop
made by a peace officer employed by the city that is capable of being recorded by video and audio or audio
equipment, as appropriate.
(Ordinance 12-10-01 (1), sec. 5, adopted 12/10/01)
Sec. 9.03.065 Interpretation
The policies and procedures, rules and regulations of police department shall be interpreted and construed
consistent with the Code of Criminal Procedure. The general policies and procedures of the police department
shall not be interpreted or construed as creating third party rights. The policies and procedures, rules and
regulations of the police department shall be interpreted as a general guideline to be used by the police
department to promote professionalism and organizational development. Nothing in the policy, or its
amendments, shall be interpreted or construed as an obligation, mandate, requirement or agreement of the city or
the police department to function or operate in the manner or methods described therein. (Ordinance 12-10-01
(1), sec. 6, adopted 12/10/01)
Sec. 9.03.066 Governmental immunity
Nothing in this policy shall be deemed to waive, modify or amend any legal defense available at law or in equity
to either the city, the police department or its employees nor to create any legal rights or claims on behalf of any
third party. Neither the city, the police department nor its employees waives, modifies or alters to any extent
whatsoever the availability of the defense of governmental immunity under the laws of the state. (Ordinance 12-
10-01 (1), sec. 7, adopted 12/10/01)
CHAPTER 10
SUBDIVISION REGULATION
ARTICLE 10.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 10.02 SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 10.02.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present tense
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/508
include the future tense. Words used in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular include
the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory. The word “herein” means in this article. The word
“regulations” means the provisions of any applicable ordinance, rule, regulation or policy. The word “person”
means any human being or legal entity and includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated or
unincorporated association. The words “used or occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed
to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied.
Access. A way of approaching or entering a property.
Adjacent. Abutting and directly connected to or bordering.
Administratively complete. A plat tendered to the city secretary with all of the appropriate fees, documents, data
and information required in this article that has received an opinion from the city engineer that the plat complies
with the subdivision requirements. The city engineer shall consult with the city planner, public works director
and/or city manager to ensure completeness of the plat prior to issuing an opinion.
Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the
back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street, and which may be used for public utility purposes.
Applicant. A person applying for plan or plat approval under this article.
Approval. The final approval in a series of required actions. For instance, the approval date of a plat requiring
approval of the commission and then the council is the date of council approval.
Arterial street or thoroughfare. A principal trafficway more or less continuous across the city or areas adjacent
thereto, and shall act as a principal connecting street with state and interstate highways.
Block. A parcel of land, intended to be used for urban purposes, which is entirely surrounded by public streets,
highways, railroad right-of-way, public walks, parks or green strips, rural land, drainage channels, or a
combination thereof.
Bond. Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in
an amount and form satisfactory to the city council.
Building or setback line. A line or lines designating the interior limit of the area of a lot within which structures
may be erected. The building lines generally provide the boundaries of the buildable area of any given lot and no
structure or building may be erected between a building and the corresponding lot line.
Building permit. A permit issued by the City of Rockdale which is required prior to commencing construction or
reconstruction of any structure.
Buffer. A barrier constructed of wood, masonry, vegetation, and/or other landscape material in such a manner
that adjacent uses will be separated to such a degree that objectionable noise, heat, glare, visual clutter, dust, loss
of privacy, air circulation, and other negative externalities shall be abated.
Caliper. The trunk diameter of a tree at three (3) feet above natural grade.
Centerline. When referring to a waterway or drainage, means the centerline of the waterway and refers to
existing topographically defined channels. If not readily discernible, the centerline shall be determined by (first)
the low flow line, or (second) the center of the two (2) year floodplain.
City. The City of Rockdale, Texas.
City council or council. The Rockdale city council.
City engineer. The city engineer for the city or his/her designated representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/508
City limits. Within the incorporated boundaries of the city.
City manager. The chief administrative officer of the City of Rockdale, Texas or his/her designated
representative.
City staff. The officers, employees and agents of the city assigned and designated from time to time by the city
manager and/or council, including but not limited to the city engineer, to review and/or comment and report on
development plans.
City standard details and specifications. A library of city-approved drawings and technical data representing
typical drainage, transportation, erosion and sedimentation control, and utility appurtenances to be constructed
for city acceptance.
Collector street. A street that collects traffic from local streets and serves as the most direct route to a major or
minor arterial street and is intended as a connecting street between a residential district and thoroughfares,
highways or business district.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city, or the city manager if a planning and zoning
commission is not operational.
Comprehensive master plan or master plan. The overall development plan for the community which has been
officially adopted to provide long-range development policies including all specified individual elements thereof
among which are the plans for means [sic] land intensities; land subdivision; circulation; and community
facilities, utilities and services; and, if none, means professional urban planning and engineering practices.
Construction plans. The maps, drawings, plans and specifications indicating the proposed location and design of
improvements to be installed as part of a development.
Contiguous. Adjacent property whose property lines are shared or are separated by only a street, alley, easement
or right-of-way.
Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets.
County. Milam County, Texas.
County appraisal district. The Milam County Appraisal District.
Crossfall. The transverse slope as related to a given longitudinal slope and measured by the rise to run ratio.
Crosswalk. A strip of land dedicated for public use and which is reserved across a lot or block for the purpose of
providing pedestrian access to adjacent areas.
Cul-de-sac. A minor street having one (1) end open to vehicular traffic and having one (1) closed end terminated
by a permanent turnaround.
Dead-end street. A street, other than a cul-de-sac, with only one outlet.
Dedication. The grant of an interest in property for public use.
Design storm. A probable rainfall event the frequency of which is specified in periods of years and which is used
to design drainage facilities and determine flood elevations.
Developed area. That portion of a lot, easement, or parcel upon which a building, structure, pavement or other
improvements have been placed.
Developer. The legal owner of land to be improved and/or subdivided or his/her authorized representative.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/508
Development. A subdivision of land as defined herein or the construction or placement of any buildings, utilities,
access, roads or other structures, excavation, mining, dredging, grading, filling, clearing or removing vegetation,
and the deposit of refuse, waste or fill. Lawn and yard care, including mowing of tall weeds and grass,
gardening, tree care and maintenance, removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces, and
ranching and farming shall not constitute development. Utility, drainage, and street repair, and any construction
maintenance and installation which does not require land disturbance or result in additional impervious cover
shall also not constitute development.
Development plan. A scaled drawing representing an area of land to be improved/developed and indicating the
legal boundary of said property and the nature and extent of all existing and proposed improvements to said
project.
Double frontage lot. A lot which runs through a block from street to street and which abuts two (2) or more
streets.
Drainageway. See “Waterway.”
Drainfield. Private sewage facility, disposal area, trench or bed utilized for final wastewater disposal.
Drive approach. A paved surface connecting the street to a front lot line.
Driveway. The surface connecting a drive approach with a parking space, parking lot, loading dock or garage.
Dwelling unit. A residential unit designed to accommodate one (1) household.
Easement. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land for stated purposes.
Environment. The aggregate of social and physical conditions that influence the life of the individual and/or
community.
Escrow funds. A deposit of cash or other approved security with the local government or approved bank or other
financial institution in lieu of a performance or maintenance bond.
ETJ limits. The limits of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction as granted under chapter 42, Local Government
Code, being 1 mile from each furthest point of the city limits encircling the entire city limit, plus any contiguous
property voluntarily joining the city's ETJ.
Filing date. With respect to plats and plans, the date of their first public hearing before the commission
regarding such plat or plan; provided that, with respect to the required council approval of preliminary plans, the
filing date for such council approval shall be the date of the first public hearing by the council.
Final plat. A map of a land subdivision prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits,
dedications and acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lines defining lots and blocks,
streets, alleys, public areas and other dimensions of land.
Floodplain. Channel of a waterway and the adjacent land area subject to inundation during the design storm.
Floodway. Channel of a waterway and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
design storm without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
Front yard. A space extending the full width of the lot between any building setback line and the front lot line,
and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line.
Frontage. That side of a lot, parcel or tract of land abutting a street right-of-way and ordinarily regarded as the
frontal orientation of the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/508
Governing body. The city council of the City of Rockdale, Texas.
Grade. The slope of a road, street, other public way or utility line specified in terms of percent (%); the
topographic relief of a parcel of land; the average elevation at ground level of the buildable area of a lot or parcel
of land.
Grading. Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled
condition.
Improvements. Any street, alley, roadway, barricade, sidewalk, bikeway, pedestrian way, water line system,
wastewater system, storm drainage network, public park land, landscaping, or other facility or portion thereof for
which the local government may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may
affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Individual on-site wastewater system or septic system. All systems and methods used for the disposal of sewage,
other than organized sewage disposal systems. Private sewage facilities are usually composed of three (3) units:
the generating unit (the residence, institution, etc.), treatment unit, and the disposal unit (the drainfield that may
be an absorption trench or bed, or an evapotranspiration bed). A private sewage facility includes a septic tank,
seepage tile sewage disposal system or any other on-lot sewage treatment device approved and installed in
accordance with all local, state and federal laws and regulations.
Industrial. Nonresidential use of any site involved in manufacturing and/or external storage of goods; any site
generating significant negative externalities, such as noise, dust, glare, etc. and/or any site where hazardous
materials are stored and/or generated.
Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot and, bounded by a street on only one (1) side.
Landscape development. Trees, shrubs, ground cover, vines or grass installed in planting areas.
Legal lot. Either a lot recorded in the official county records pursuant to and in compliance with the subdivision
regulations in effect at the time of its creation, or a tract of land having existed in its present configuration prior
to October 1, 1927.
Legally platted lot. A lot which is part of a subdivision approved by the city and recorded in the official county
records.
Letter of credit. A letter from a bank or other reputable creditor acceptable to the city that guarantees to the city
that upon failure of the subdivider to fulfill any improvement requirements that at the city's request, funds will
be provided to the city to complete the specified improvements.
Living unit equivalent or LUE. A unit of measure which represents the quantity of water utilized and wastewater
generated on an average annual daily basis from single-family, detached residence of average size and
occupancy and which is the standardized measure used for service units.
Local health district. The Milam County health district.
Local street. A street designed for the sole purpose of providing access.
Lot. A subdivision of a block or other parcel intended as a unit for transfer of ownership, or for development, or
for occupancy and/or use.
Minor street. A local street designed primarily for access to abutting residential properties. A minor street does
not include a street designed or required to be designed for through traffic.
Multifamily residence. A single structure designed to accommodate four (4) or more households.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/508
Natural channel. The topography of a waterway prior to construction, installation of improvements or any
regrading.
Natural drainage. A stormwater runoff conveyance system not altered by development.
Neighborhood. The area of the city characterized by residential land uses which is bounded by physical (such as
river, major street, back [lack] of access) and/or political features (such as voting districts, subdivision
boundaries).
Neighborhood park. A privately owned parcel of land, within a subdivision, dedicated solely for recreational
uses and maintained by the residents of said subdivision.
Official county records. The official records of Milam County, Texas.
Off-site improvements. Any required improvement which lies outside of the property being developed.
One hundred (100) year floodplain. That flood which has a probability of occurring once in a one hundred (100)
year period or a one percent (1%) chance in any given year.
Overland drainage. Stormwater runoff which is not confined by any natural or man-made channel such as a
creek, drainage ditch, storm sewer, or the like.
Parent tract. Tract or lot as described by deed or plat, which includes one (1) or more lots that are being
subdivided.
Park fund. A special fund established by the city to retain monies paid by developers in accordance with the
payment in lieu of park land dedication provisions of these regulations and to be used for the purchase of park
land or improvements in the vicinity of the subdivided property for which funds have been collected.
Planning and zoning commission. The City of Rockdale planning and zoning commission.
Playscape. Any structure permanently anchored to the ground that is designed for recreational purposes. Sports
courts such as basketball or tennis courts are not considered playscapes.
Preliminary plan or preliminary plat. A generalized plan that meets the requirements of this article and that
indicates the boundaries of a tract or tracts under common ownership, identifies the purpose of the proposed
development and the proposed land use, general lot or parcel layout, community use or public areas, and street
alignments.
Primary structure. A structure in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. For example, for single-family
residential lots, the house is the primary structure.
Privacy fence. An opaque fence or screen at least six (6) feet in height. A fence shall be considered opaque if it
is made of opaque materials and constructed so that gaps in the fence do not exceed one-half (1/2) inch. Fences
using boards placed on alternating sides of fence runners shall be considered opaque if the boards overlap at
least one-half (1/2) inch.
Public. With respect to land and interests in land within the city limits, the city; and, with respect to land and
interests in land within the ETJ limits, the general public.
Public use. Places of noncommercial public assembly or administrative functions where the primary activity is
contained within a building(s), including but not limited to churches, schools and government buildings.
Rear yard. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line,
and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/508
Replacement trees. New landscape trees to be planted by the developer to replace significant trees removed
during the development of property. A replacement tree shall be one of the following species of tree or any other
ornamental trees approved by the city:
American Elm Bald Cypress Bur Oak
Lacebark Live Oak Chinquapin Oak
Montezuma Cypress Pecan Cedar Elm
Monterey Oak Afghan Pine Big Tooth Maple
Chinese Pistachio Western Soapberry Blanco Crabapple
Carolina Buckthorn Crape Myrtle Deciduous Holly
Desert Willow Flame Leaf Sumac Golden Rain Tree
Japanese Black Pine Mexican Buckeye Mexican Plum
Mountain Laurel Rough Leaf Dogwood Texas Persimmon
Texas Red Bud Yaupon Holly Chinese Flame tree
Chitalpa American Smoketree Elm
Required yard. The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure shall be
located except as provided for herein.
Reserve strip. A narrow strip of property usually separating a parcel of land from a roadway or utility line
easement, that is characterized by limited depth which will not support development and which is intended to
prevent access to the roadway or utility easement from adjacent property and which are prohibited by these
regulations unless their control is given to the city.
Residential or minor street. A street which is intended primarily to serve traffic with [within] a neighborhood or
limited residential district and which is used primarily for access to abutting properties.
Reverse frontage lot. A double frontage lot which is to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street
and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/508
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric
transmission line, or oil or gas pipe line, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for other similar purpose
or use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way
hereafter established and shown on the final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining
such right-of-way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended
for streets, crosswalks, water mains, wastewater lines, storm drains, or any other use involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to the public by the maker of the plat where such right-of-way is established.
Same ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations
in which a stockholder, partner, or associate or a member of his/her family owns an interest in each corporation,
firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association.
Secondary structure. Any structure that is subordinate and incidental to the primary structure; and is subordinate
in area, extent and purpose to the primary structure; and contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of
the occupants, business or industry in the primary structure, and is located on the same lot as the primary
structure.
Setback or building line. A line or lines designating the interior limit of the area of a lot between said line and
the corresponding line within which area structures may not be erected. The building lines generally provide the
boundaries of the buildable area of any given lot.
Side yard. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the setback line and the side lot line
measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the setback line.
Significant tree. A native, living tree including any Live Oak, Spanish Oak, Cedar Elm, Shin Oak, Bald Cypress,
Post Oak, Pecan, Bur Oak or other such hardwood tree indigenous to Central Texas. A list of significant trees
can be provided by city staff.
Slope. The vertical change in grade divided by the horizontal distance over which that vertical change occurred.
The slope is usually given as a percentage.
Standard specifications and codes of the city. Shall be applied to all improvements constructed within the city
and shall be in accordance with all revisions, as may be adopted by the City of Rockdale.
Street. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of vehicular access to abutting
property whether designated a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard,
land, place or however otherwise designated.
Street line. That line limiting the right-of-way of the street and being identical with the property line of persons
owning property fronting on the streets.
Street side yard. The side yard of a corner lot abutting the street right-of-way.
Street width. The shortest distance between the lines, which delineate the rights-of-way of a street.
Street yard. A space extending across the length and/or width of a lot between the street right-of-way and the
closest faces of the buildings on the lot.
Structural integrity. The ability of a structure to maintain stability against normal forces experienced by said
structure.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something located on the
ground. Structures include buildings, telecommunications towers, sheds, parking lots that are the primary use of
a parcel and permanent signs. Sidewalks and paving shall not be considered structures unless located within a
public utility or drainage easement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/508
Subdivider. Any person, developer, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity, acting as a unit subdividing or
proposing to subdivide land as herein defined.
Subdivision. The division or redivision of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose of
development, laying out any addition to the city, or for laying out any subdivision or building lots, or any lot,
street, alley, access easement, public utility easement, drainage facilities, park or other portion intended for use
by the public, or for the use of any owner, purchaser, renter, occupant, person or entity.
Traffic impact analysis (TIA). A study of the impacts of a development on the city's transportation system.
Urbanization. The process of constructing public improvements required to support suburban or urban land use.
Variances. A grant of relief to a person from the requirements of this article when specific enforcement would
result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner
otherwise prohibited by this article.
Watershed. Area from which stormwater drains into a given basin, river or creek.
Waterway. Any natural or man-made channel conducting stormwater from a two (2) year storm event at a depth
of eight (8) inches or more and at a rate of fifteen (15) cubic feet per second or more. Street pavement shall in no
instance be considered a waterway.
Working days. Monday through Friday exclusive of city-recognized holidays.
Yard. An open space that lies between the principal or accessory building or buildings and the nearest lot line.
Yard depth. The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line.
Yard line. A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.101), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.002 Purpose
(a) The purpose of this article is to provide for orderly, safe and healthful development to promote the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the community. From and after the passage of this article, all plats and
subdivisions of land within the corporate limits of the city, and all plats and subdivisions of land outside the
corporate limits of the city that the council may be petitioned to include within the corporate limits of the city by
an extension of said corporate limits, and all tracts within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, shall conform to
the following rules and regulations.
(b) The system of improvements for thoroughfares, water and wastewater services, other utilities, drainage,
public facilities and community amenities determine in large measure the quality of life enjoyed by the residents
of the community. Health, safety, economy, amenities, environmental sensitivity and convenience are all factors
which influence and determine a community's quality of life and character. A community's quality of life is of
public interest. Consequently, the development of land, as it affects a community's quality of life, is an activity
whose regulation is a valid function of municipal government.
(c) The provisions contained herein are designed and intended to encourage the development of a quality
urban environment by establishing standards for the provision of open space, stormwater drainage,
transportation, public utilities and facilities, and other needs necessary for insuring the creation and continuance
of a healthy, attractive, safe and efficient community that provides for the conservation, enhancement and
protection of its human and natural resources. Through the application of this article, the interests of the public
as well as those public and private parties, both present and future, having interest in property affected by these
regulations are protected by the granting of certain rights and privileges.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/508
(d) This article is designed and intended to achieve the following purposes, and shall be administered so as to:
(1) Assist orderly, efficient and coordinated development of land within the city's jurisdiction.
(2) Provide neighborhood conservation and prevent the development of slums and blight.
(3) Harmoniously relate the development of the various tracts of land to the existing community
and facilitate the future development of adjoining tracts.
(4) Provide that the cost of improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the tract
of land being developed be borne by the owner or developers of the tract, and that the cost of
improvements to minimum standards which primarily benefit the whole community be borne by the
whole community.
(5) Provide the most appropriate design for each tract being subdivided.
(6) Provide an attractive relationship between the land as developed and the circulation of traffic
throughout the municipality, having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the streets and
highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements appropriate to the proposed development, and to
provide for the proper location and width of streets and building lines.
(7) Prevent pollution of the air, streams, and ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities; to
safeguard both surface and groundwater supplies; and to encourage the wise use and management of
natural resources throughout the municipality in order to preserve the integrity, stability, and beauty
of the community and the value of the land.
(8) Preserve the natural beauty and topography of the municipality and ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
(9) As appropriate, reconcile any differences of interest among the developer, other property
owners and the city.
(10) Establish adequate and accurate records of land subdivision.
(11) Ensure that public or private facilities are available and will have a sufficient capacity to serve
proposed subdivisions and developments within the city's jurisdiction.
(12) Standardize the procedure and requirements for developing property and submitting plans for
review and approval.
(13) Protect and provide for the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the
community.
(14) Provide a healthy environment for the present and future citizens; an environment designed to
[be] reasonably secure safety from fire, flood and other dangers; and to provide that land be
subdivided in a manner to attain such goals and benefits for the community.
(15) Protect the character and the social and economic stability of all parts of the community and
encourage the orderly and beneficial development of all parts of the community.
(16) Protect and conserve the value of land throughout the community and the value of buildings
and improvements upon the land.
(17) Guide public and private policy and action in providing adequate and efficient transportation
systems, water and wastewater systems, public utilities, and other public amenities and facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/508
(18) Encourage the development of a stable, prospering economic environment.
(e) Certain minimum standards for land use, construction and development within the city limits are contained
in the city's zoning ordinance, applicable building and plumbing codes, city standard details and specifications,
and this article. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various ordinances regulating
land development, a standardization of development will occur. This will produce a monotonous urban setting.
Subdivision design within both the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction should be of a quality to carry out the
purpose and spirit of the policies expressed in the master plan and in this article, rather than be limited to the
minimum standards required herein.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.111), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.003 Authority
(a) This article is adopted pursuant to the police powers of general law cities, and under authority of the
constitution and general laws of the State of Texas, including, but not limited to, chapter 212 Tex. Loc. Gov't.
Code.
(b) In accordance with the city's police powers and authority, and as specifically authorized by chapter 212,
Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code, and other applicable laws, the planning and zoning commission, as a condition of
subdivision plat or replat approval, shall require the owners and developers of land who desire to subdivide, plat
or replat, or lay out any land for development within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction, for urban
development or other purpose, to provide for building setback lines, to dedicate streets, alleys, parks, easements
or other public places or facilities of adequate width and size and to coordinate street layouts and street planning
with the city's master plan, with other municipalities, and with county, state and federally designated highways,
as they may deem best in the interest of the general public, in order to provide for the orderly development of the
areas and to secure adequate provision for traffic, light, air, recreation, transportation, water, drainage, sewage
and other facilities.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.112), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.004 Jurisdiction
Except as specifically provided otherwise herein, this article shall apply to all subdivisions and all related land
development activities, as they are both defined herein, and all land, any part of which is located within the
jurisdiction of the city. The jurisdiction of the city shall be defined as follows:
(1) The corporate limits of the City of Rockdale, Texas; and
(2) The extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Rockdale, Texas; and
(3) Any additional area outside (1) and (2) above as permitted by law and which has been approved
by the council.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.113), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.005 Policy
In order to carry out the purposes hereinabove stated, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to consider
the subdivision and/or development of land as subject to the control of the municipality, pursuant to the master
plan, if any, as adopted or amended from time to time, for the orderly, planned, efficient and economical
development of the city and its jurisdiction. This section shall be administered such that:
(1) Land to be subdivided and/or developed shall be of such nature, shape and location that with
proper and careful design and development it can be safely used for building purposes without danger
to health or risk of fire, flood, erosion, landslide or other menace to the general welfare.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/508
(2) A final plat shall not be recorded until the necessary public utilities and facilities and other
required improvements exist or arrangements are made for their provision.
(3) Buildings, lots, blocks and streets shall be arranged so as to provide for an attractive and
healthful environment and to facilitate fire protection, and provide ample access to buildings for
emergency equipment.
(4) Land shall be subdivided and developed with due regard to topography and existing vegetation
with the object being that the natural beauty and natural resources of the land shall be preserved to
the maximum extent possible.
(5) Existing features which would add value to development or to the city as a whole, such as
scenic and special features, both natural and man-made, historic sites, and similar assets shall be
preserved in the design of the subdivision whenever possible.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.114), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.006 Application
(a) The provisions of this article, including design standards and improvement requirements, shall, except as
specifically provided otherwise in this article, apply to all subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of the city,
including but not limited to the following forms of land subdivision and development activity:
(1) The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels, any part of which shall
contain less than five (5) acres in area when subdivided, including multiple divisions to the same
property in which one or more subdivided lots are less than five (5) acres;
(2) The division of land into two (2) or more tracts, lots, sites or parcels, any part of which when
subdivided shall contain five (5) acres or more in area and will require the dedication or conveyance
of any access, public right-of-way, easement, or any public improvement;
(3) Land previously subdivided or platted into tracts, lots, sites or parcels, which subdivision was
subject to, but not in accordance with, city or county ordinances in effect at the time of such
subdividing or platting;
(4) The combining of two (2) or more contiguous tracts, lots, sites or parcels for the purpose of
creating one (1) or more legal lots in order to achieve a more developable site, except as otherwise
provided herein;
(5) Any planned unit development for which two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels are designed,
established or created for occupancy, use or a building site, or for which a building permit, plumbing
permit, electrical permit, floodplain permit, utility tap, or certificate of acceptance for required public
improvements is required by the city;
(6) The platting of any existing legal deed-divided unplatted lot, parcel, site or tract;
(7) The voluntary platting and recording of a subdivision plat dividing any land within the
jurisdiction of the city into lots, parcels, sites or tracts;
(8) Any plat having received approval from the commission or the council for which said approval
has expired; or
(9) The dedication of any street or alley through any tract of land, regardless of the area involved.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.115), adopted 8/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/508
(10) All subdivision or combination of tracts, regardless of size, shall be reviewed by the city for
compliance with city ordinances. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) There may be occasions when the city council deems it appropriate to allow a delay in the implementation
of certain elements of this article. On those occasions, a development agreement shall be used in accordance
with the city policy. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.115), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.007 Exemptions
(a) The provisions of this article shall not apply to:
(1) Sales of land by metes and bounds in tracts of five (5) acres or more in area and not requiring
the dedication of any easements, drainage facilities, land or roadways for use of any purchaser or
member of the public, except as otherwise specifically provided in this article;
(2) Cemeteries complying with all state and local laws and regulations;
(3) Divisions of land created by order of a court of competent jurisdiction;
(4) Any subdivision of land for which a preliminary plan or final plat has been filed with the city
on or before the effective date of this article, excluding any such plan or plat for which approval has
expired or hereafter expires, the ordinance in effect at the time of the adoption of this article shall
continue to be effective as to the pending plats provided no substantive change is made to the plat as
provided herein; or
(5) The combination of two (2) platted lots for the creation of a more developable site and the
planning and zoning commission finds that:
(A) The proposed use is the same as that for which the subdivision was platted by the
subdivider; and
(B) No increase is anticipated in the estimated traffic generation or utility demands; and
(C) Off-site stormwater runoff is neither increased nor concentrated.
(b) The provisions of this article shall not apply to the division of an existing legal lot, said division being
caused by the city's acquisition of a part of said legal lot, when the council finds that the acquisition by the city
is in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Rockdale and/or its extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Upon the council so finding, the resulting parcels shall be deemed to constitute legal lots for the
purposes of developing under the requirements of this article and other applicable city regulations. In creating
said division, the council is empowered to attach to the resulting parcels acquired by the city, and the remainder
parcels not acquired by the city upon agreement with the owner, such conditions as it finds reasonable and
necessary to offset any adverse effects resulting from the city's acquisition as a part of the original legal lot,
insofar as any such condition is not contrary to the spirit and intent of this article.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not be construed, interpreted or applied to land located within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city in a manner to regulate:
(1) The use of any building or property for any lawful purpose;
(2) The bulk, density or number of buildings on a tract or parcel of land;
(3) The floor to area ratio of any building to be constructed on any lot; or
(4) The number of residential units that can be built on an acre of land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/508
(d) Division of any property or portion of property into multiple smaller tracts with one or more of any of the
subdivided tracts being five (5) acres or less shall not qualify any of the tracts for an exemption herein.
(e) No property shall be considered exempt under subsection (a)(1) or (2) unless so certified by the city
engineer. All divisions of land within the city limits or ETJ that may be exempt from this article shall not be
recognized as legal lots until the proposed division is presented to the city engineer for determination as to
whether the division of property qualifies for an exemption as set forth above. Failure to receive a letter from the
city engineer for a division of any tract, parcel or lot shall be deemed a violation of this article.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.116), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.008 Enforcement of regulations
(a) No subdivision of land within the city or its extraterritorial jurisdiction may be recorded until a final plat,
accurately describing the property to be subdivided and platted, has been approved by the city in accordance
with this article and applicable laws, signed and dated by the chair of the planning and zoning commission
and/or other designated officers of the city, and filed in the official county records.
(b) No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, floodplain permit, utility
tap or certificate of acceptance for required public improvements shall be issued by the city for or with respect to
any land within the city limits; and no floodplain permit, utility tap or certificate of acceptance for required
public improvements shall be issued by the city for or with respect to land within the ETJ limits:
(1) For any parcel or plat of land which was developed after the effective date of, and not in
conformity with, the provisions of this article; and/or
(2) Until, (i) all improvements required by this article, have been constructed and accepted by the
city, or (ii) assurances for the completion of improvements have been provided in accordance with
this article.
(c) No excavation or clearing of land, or construction of any public or private improvements shall take place
or commence, within six (6) months preceding the date of application for the approval of any development or
subdivision; and no such excavation, clearing of land or construction shall begin within any proposed
subdivision until such time as the city engineer approves the plans and specifications for such subdivision.
(d) This article may be further enforced by injunction and other judicial proceedings, either at law or in
equity; and, in lieu of or in addition to any other authorized enforcement or action taken, any person who
violates any term or provision of this article, with respect to any land or development within the city, [may be
punished] by fine and penalties as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.117), adopted 8/9/04)
Secs. 10.02.009–10.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Platting
Sec. 10.02.051 General procedure
(a) Plans for the development of land within the scope of this article shall be drawn and submitted to the
commission and council for their approval or disapproval, as provided in herein.
(b) Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, a developer shall not commence construction
activities within the city's jurisdiction, including clearing and/or rough grading, before first obtaining all the city
approvals required by this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/508
(c) Generally, the subdivision process is comprised of four (4) individual steps, including the pre-conference
meeting, preliminary plat, construction plans, and the final plat. Each step of the development process has
established deadlines and expirations that must be met in order for the application and any approval(s) granted to
remain valid, in effect and eligible to continue to the next step of, or to complete, the development process.
Compliance with each such established deadline constitutes a separate required performance and approval.
(d) Plats shall not be considered filed until administratively complete. The city staff and city engineer shall
notify the applicant not later than 45 days after receipt of a plat of any deficiencies or the plat shall be deemed
administratively complete and placed on the next available planning and zoning agenda. Plat applications
containing deficiencies in required documentation, information, fees or other requirements provided herein shall
not be considered filed with the city until the deficiencies are corrected and the city engineer issues an opinion of
administrative completeness, which shall be determined within 45 days of receipt of the correction of
deficiencies. The plat shall be deemed filed when scheduled for the planning and zoning agenda for purposes of
this article.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.121), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.052 Pre-conference meeting
Prior to submitting any plats, any applicant shall schedule a pre-conference meeting through the city secretary.
The city secretary shall coordinate with the city manager the appropriate staff to attend the pre-conference
meeting. The pre-conference meeting shall be scheduled within 30 days of the request. No plats shall be
accepted until a pre-conference meeting has occurred. At the pre-conference meeting, the applicant shall outline
the proposed subdivision in sufficient detail through a concept drawing including the lots, lot dimensions,
location of streets, detention facilities and other improvements. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.122),
adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.053 Preliminary plat
(a) Purpose. The preliminary plat provides detailed graphic information and associated text indicating
property boundaries, easements, land use, streets, utilities, drainage, and other information required to evaluate
proposed subdivisions of land. A preliminary plat shall be required for any subdivision of land, except as
otherwise provided for in this article.
(b) Format. It is recommended that the preliminary plat be drawn on twenty-four by thirty-six inch (24" x 36")
sheet(s) at a scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred feet (1" =100') with all dimensions labeled accurately to
the nearest foot. When more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index sheet
showing the entire subdivision at a scale of one (1) inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400') shall be attached to
the plat. Twenty copies must be provided with each submittal.
(c) Content. The preliminary plat shall include all of the tracts intended to be developed at one (1) time, and
any off-site improvements required to accommodate the project. The preliminary plat shall contain or have
attached thereto:
(1) General information.
(A) Name, address and phone numbers of the developer, record owner, and authorized agents
(engineer, land planner, etc.).
(B) The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling or be
pronounced similarly to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, provided however that use of the same base names for
different sections or phases is required when the units are contiguous with their namesakes and
individually identified by a section or phase number.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/508
(C) The date, scale, and north indicator.
(D) A location map showing the relation of the subdivision to streets and other prominent
features in all directions for a radius of at least one (1) mile using a scale of one (1) inch equals
two thousand feet (1" = 2,000'). The latest edition of the USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map is
recommended.
(E) The owner's name, deed or plat reference and property lines of property within three
hundred (300) feet of the subdivision boundaries as determined by the most recent tax rolls.
(F) Certification and signature blocks as required by the city and the county.
(i) For the city the following notice shall be placed on the face of each preliminary plat
by the subdivider: “Preliminary Plat for Review Purposes Only.”
(ii) The following certificates shall be [placed] on the preliminary plat by the
subdivider:
Recommended for (Approval) (Denial)
Chairman, Planning and Zoning Commission Date
City of Rockdale, Texas
(Approved) (Denied) for Preparation of Final Plat
Mayor, City of Rockdale, Texas Date
(G) The total acreage of the property to be subdivided and the subtotals by land use.
(2) Existing conditions.
(A) The existing property lines, including bearings and distances, of the land being
subdivided. Property lines shall be drawn sufficiently wide to provide easy identification.
(B) The location of existing watercourses, dry creek beds, wells, sinkholes and other similar
topographic features.
(C) Significant trees, within the boundaries of the subdivision and of 12-inch caliper and
larger, shall be shown accurately to the nearest one (1) foot, critical root zones of these trees
shall also be shown.
(D) Centerline of watercourses, creeks, existing drainage structures and other pertinent data
shall be shown.
(E) Areas subject to flooding shall be shown, delineating the regulatory one hundred (100)
year floodplain, and any other floodplains identified in the city's master drainage plan.
(F) Topographic data indicating one (1) foot contour intervals for slopes less than 5%, two
(2) foot contour intervals for slopes between 5% and 10%, and five (5) foot contour intervals
for slopes exceeding 10%. The contoured area shall extend outward from the property boundary
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/508
for a distance equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of the distance across the tract, but not fewer
than fifty (50) feet nor more than two hundred (200) feet.
(G) The locations, sizes and descriptions of all existing utilities, including but not limited to
wastewater lines, lift stations, wastewater and storm sewer manholes, water lines, water storage
tanks, and wells within the subdivision, and/or adjacent thereto.
(H) The location, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded streets,
alleys, reservations, railroads, easements or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision,
intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries, as determined from
existing deed and plat records. The existing right-of-way width of any boundary street to the
proposed subdivision shall also be shown.
(I) The location of city limit lines and/or outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction,
as depicted on the city's most recent base map, if either traverses the subdivision or is
contiguous to the subdivision boundary.
(3) Improvements.
(A) The location, size and description of any proposed drainage appurtenances, including
storm sewers, detention ponds and other drainage structures proposed to be constructed on and
off the site, and designed in accordance with the requirements of this article.
(B) The developer shall include five copies of the complete application for floodplain map
amendment or revision, as required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
if applicable.
(C) The location, dimensions, names and descriptions of all proposed streets, alleys, parks,
open spaces, blocks, lots, reservations, easements and rights-of-way; and areas within the
subdivision indicating the connection to or continuation of other improvements in adjacent
subdivisions.
(D) The location of building setback lines indicated by dashed lines on the plat.
(E) Numbers to identify each lot and each block.
(F) The lengths of each proposed property line of all lots. The area of each non-rectangular
lot shall be provided.
(G) Significant trees to remain during construction showing the critical root zones as solid
circles, and significant trees designated to be removed showing the critical root zones as dashed
circles.
(H) Replacement trees shall be shown on the preliminary plat based on a replacement ratio
(inches removed to inches planted) of:
(i) 2:1 (50% replacement) for significant trees twelve (12) inches in caliper and larger;
and
(ii) Replacement trees shall not be required for the removal of trees smaller than twelve
(12) inches in caliper.
(I) Proposed major categories of land use by acreage showing compatibility of land use with,
or proposed variance from, the master plan.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/508
(J) Proposed number of residential and nonresidential lots, tracts or parcels of the subdivision
together with the estimated:
(i) Number of LUEs required for each category of lots; and
(ii) Traffic volume to be generated by all proposed development other than singlefamily
residential.
(K) Proposed and existing arterial and collector streets to serve the general area.
(L) Location of sites for parks, schools and other public uses, and all areas of common
ownership.
(M) Significant drainage features and structures including any regulatory one hundred (100)
year floodplains.
(N) Significant existing features on or within 200 feet of the property, such as railroads,
roads, buildings, utilities and drainage structures.
(O) Approximate boundaries and anticipated timing of proposed phases of development.
(P) Identification of known exceptional topographical, cultural, historical, archaeological,
hydrological and other physical conditions of the property to be developed, or existing within
two hundred (200) feet of the property, which will require the establishment of reasonable
design standards in excess of the established minimum standards or require a variance from
those established minimum standards as defined in this article.
(Q) Location of city limit lines and/or outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as
depicted on the city's most recent base map, if either such line traverses the development or is
contiguous to the development's boundary.
(R) A proposed phasing plan for the development of future sections.
(4) Support documents.
(A) A drainage study, consisting of a drainage area map with contours, location and
capacities of existing and proposed drainage features, and calculations in accordance with this
article and good engineering practices, shall be provided to ensure the property will be
developed in accordance with city drainage policies.
(B) Utility demand data, consistent with the proposed uses indicated on the preliminary plat,
to determine the adequacy and the consistency of proposed utility improvements.
(C) A letter of certification, when applicable, that the plat has been submitted to the county
health district for review (applicable to all projects proposing septic systems and/or containing
any portion of the regulatory one hundred (100) year floodplain outside of the city limits).
(5) Accuracy of data. The applicant shall be responsible for verifying the accuracy of all data
submitted, including that which might be obtained from the city, excepting that data which can only
be obtained from the city.
(d) Procedure. A preliminary plat for any proposed subdivision of land, that has been found to be
administratively complete, shall be submitted to the city for commission approval.
(1) Legible prints, as indicated on the application form, shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days
prior to the regular meeting of the commission at which the preliminary plat is to be heard, along
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/508
with the following:
(A) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(B) A summary letter stating briefly the type of street surfacing, drainage, water and
wastewater facilities proposed, and declaring the intent to either dedicate park land or pay fees
in lieu of said dedication if such dedication or fees apply.
(C) A petition requesting annexation, if applicable.
(D) A letter requesting any variances from the provisions of this article.
(E) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the
preliminary plat.
(2) For projects located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, one (1) extra copy of the
above-referenced items must be provided to the county for review and approval. The applicant shall
be responsible for any additional information required by the county for preliminary plan approval.
(3) City staff shall review all preliminary plat submittals for completeness at the time of
application. If, in the judgment of city staff, the preliminary plat submittal substantially fails to meet
the minimal informational requirements as outlined above, it will not be accepted for review.
(4) Prior to the commission meeting at which the preliminary plat is presented, city staff shall
review the plat for consistency with city ordinances, codes, policies and plans.
(5) City staff shall prepare a report analyzing the preliminary plat submittal and recommending
either the approval or disapproval of the preliminary plat. This report shall be available at least five
(5) working days prior to the commission meeting.
(6) If the developer chooses to withdraw the preliminary plat, in writing, by noon of the third
working day preceding the meeting commission, the submittal may appear on the next commission
agenda after repayment of the applicable fees.
(e) Notification. All owners of property (as determined by the most recent tax rolls from the county appraisal
district), any part of which is located within three hundred (300) feet of the perimeter of the land to be
developed, shall be notified by mail.
(1) The developer shall post signs along contiguous rights-of-way at each corner of the
development and at intervals that do not exceed three hundred (300) feet between said corners. Signs
must be in accordance with the city standard details and specifications.
(2) The city shall publish a public notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the
city not fewer than fifteen (15) nor more than thirty (30) days prior to said public hearing.
(3) The city shall mail public notification forms, postmarked no fewer than fifteen (15) days prior
to the appropriate commission hearing, to the owners of all property, any part of which is located
within three hundred (300) feet of the perimeter of the property included within the preliminary plan.
(f) Approval. The commission, after holding public hearings in accordance with city ordinances and codes,
shall act on the request for preliminary plat approval.
(1) The failure of the commission to act within thirty (30) days of the preliminary plat filing date
shall be deemed an approval of the plat, except as otherwise agreed to by the developer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/508
(2) Zoning of the tract, if applicable, that shall permit the uses proposed by the preliminary plat, or
any pending zoning amendment necessary to permit the proposed uses shall have been adopted by the
council prior to approval of the preliminary plat.
(3) Approval of the preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat, but shall
constitute a vesting of the right to develop under city ordinances, codes and policies in effect on the
date of the approval provided that neither the preliminary plat nor any subsequent plat or permit has
been, or is, allowed to expire.
(4) The developer should be aware that specific approvals from other agencies may be required.
(5) Upon approval of the preliminary plat, the developer shall furnish one (1) mylar reproducible
copy of the approved plat to be kept on file at the city as public record.
(g) Expiration.
(1) The approval of the preliminary plat shall expire twelve (12) months after the filing date,
unless:
(A) A corresponding final plat on all, or a portion of, the land approved on the preliminary
plat is filed; or
(B) An extension is granted by the commission in accordance with this article.
(2) If a preliminary plat expires, it may be reinstated only upon resubmittal of the unaltered,
approved plat to the commission and council and the approval by both bodies. All fees shall be repaid
as if the plat were initially being submitted.
(h) Extension. The developer may apply for an extension, in writing, prior to the end of the initial twelve (12)
month period, stating reasons for needing the extension and demonstrating pursuit of approvals for construction
plans and/or final plat in accordance with this article. Upon receipt of this written request, the commission may,
at its discretion, grant up to a two (2) year extension so long as the preliminary plat remains consistent with the
master plan and/or ordinances of the city.
(i) Revision. If a revision to a previously approved preliminary plat is required, then no application for final
plat shall be accepted until the revised preliminary plat has been submitted and approved by the commission.
This signed, approved document shall be kept on file as public record in the offices of the city.
(j) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any preliminary plat by the council, commission or the
city engineer, the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plats shall be and remain
responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve or
waive the responsibility of the developer or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.123), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.054 Construction plans
(a) Purpose. Construction plans, based upon the approved preliminary plat, and consisting of detailed
specifications and diagrams illustrating the location, design, and composition of all improvements identified in
the preliminary plat phase and required by this article and other applicable city ordinances, codes and policies,
shall be submitted to the city for approval. In addition, any project that necessitates the construction,
reconstruction or modification of existing city infrastructure shall also be submitted to the city for approval. The
plans shall be kept by the city as a permanent record of required improvements in order to:
(1) Provide better records that facilitate the operation and maintenance of, and any future
modifications to existing city infrastructure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/508
(2) Provide data for evaluation of materials, methods of construction and design.
(3) Provide documentation of approved public improvements to ensure that all such improvements
are built to city standards and specifications.
(4) No final plat shall be certified by the city, and no construction activities shall commence, until
such time as construction plans completely describing the on-site and off-site improvements required
by this article and other applicable city ordinances and codes, have been approved by the city
engineer.
(b) Format. Drawings shall be on twenty-four inch by thirty-six inch (24" x 36") sheets at generally accepted
horizontal and vertical engineering scales. Five complete copies shall be provided with each submittal.
(c) Content. Construction plans shall include all on- and off-site improvements required to serve the proposed
development as indicated on the approved preliminary plat and in compliance with applicable ordinances, codes,
standards and policies of the city, and other applicable governmental entities. All construction plans shall be
signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of Texas, and shall
contain or have attached thereto:
(1) Cover sheet.
(A) The appropriate project name, date, and the name, addresses and phone numbers of the
developer, engineer and surveyor, etc.
(B) A location map showing the relation of the subdivision to streets and other prominent
features in all directions for a radius of at least one (1) mile using a scale of one inch equals two
thousand feet (1" = 2,000'). The latest edition of the USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map is
recommended.
(2) Street and roadway systems.
(A) The horizontal layouts and alignments showing geometric data and other pertinent design
details. The horizontal layout shall also show the direction of stormwater flow and the location
of manholes, inlets and special structures;
(B) Vertical layouts and alignments showing existing and proposed centerline, right and left
right-of-way line elevations along each proposed roadway;
(C) Typical right-of-way cross-sections showing pertinent design details and elevations as
prescribed in the city standard details and specifications;
(D) Typical paving sections showing right-of-way width, lane widths, median widths,
shoulder widths, and pavement recommendations; and
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the
proposed roadway improvements, including geotechnical information.
(3) Drainage improvements.
(A) Detailed design of all drainage facilities as indicated in the preliminary plat phase,
including typical channel or paving section, storm sewers and other stormwater control
facilities.
(B) Typical channel cross-sections, plan and profile drawings of every conduit/ channel shall
be shown.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/508
(C) Existing and proposed topographic conditions indicating one (1) foot contour intervals
for slopes less than 5%, two (2) foot contour intervals for slopes between 5% and 10%, and five
(5) foot contour intervals for slopes exceeding 10%, and referenced to a United States
Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey benchmark or monument.
(D) Attendant documents containing design computations in accordance with this article, and
any additional information required to evaluate the proposed drainage improvements.
(E) Five copies of the complete application for floodplain map amendment or revision, as
required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), if applicable.
(4) Erosion and sedimentation controls.
(A) Proposed fill or other structure elevating techniques, levees, channel modifications and
detention facilities.
(B) Existing and proposed topographic conditions with vertical intervals not greater than one
(1) foot referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey
benchmark or monument.
(C) The location, size, and character of all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment
control facilities with specifications detailing all on-site erosion control measures which will be
established and maintained during all periods of development and construction.
(D) Contractor staging areas, vehicle access areas, temporary and permanent spoils storage
areas.
(E) A plan for restoration for the mitigation of erosion in all areas disturbed during
construction.
(5) Water distribution systems.
(A) The layout, size and specific location of the existing and proposed water mains, pump
stations, storage tanks and other related structures sufficient to serve the proposed land uses and
development as identified in the preliminary plat phase and in accordance with the city standard
details and specifications.
(B) The existing and proposed location of fire hydrants, valves, meters and other fittings.
(C) Design details showing the connection with the existing city water system.
(D) The specific location and size of all water service connections for each individual lot.
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the
proposed water distribution system.
(6) Wastewater collection systems.
(A) The layout, size and specific location of the existing and proposed wastewater lines,
manholes, lift stations, and other related structures sufficient to serve the land uses and
development as identified in the preliminary plat phase, in accordance with all current city
standards, specifications, and criteria for construction of wastewater systems.
(B) Plan and profile drawings for each line in public rights-of-way or public utility
easements, showing existing ground level elevation at centerline of pipe, pipe size and flow line
elevation at all bends, drops, turns, and station numbers at fifty (50) foot intervals.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/508
(C) Design details for manholes and special structures. Flow line elevations shall be shown at
every point where the line enters or leaves the manholes.
(D) Detailed design for lift stations, package plants or other special wastewater structures.
(E) Attendant documents containing any additional information required to evaluate the
proposed wastewater system, and complete an application for state commission on
environmental quality approval.
(7) Street lighting. The location, size, type and description of streetlights according to city standard
details and specifications.
(8) Street signs. The location, size, type and description of street signs according to city standard
details and specifications.
(9) Sidewalks. The location, size and type of sidewalks and pedestrian ramps according to city
standard details and specifications.
(10) Improvements for parks and other public and common areas - as identified and/or approved
on the preliminary plat.
(11) The location, size and description of all significant trees (to remain and to be removed), and
replacement trees to meet the requirements of this article.
(12) Landscaping and screening. The location, size and description of all landscaping and
screening materials as required by this article.
(13) Design criteria. Final design criteria, reports, calculations, and all other related computations,
if not previously submitted with the preliminary plat.
(14) Cost estimates. A cost estimate of each required improvement, prepared, signed and sealed by
a professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas.
(d) Procedure. After all necessary approvals of the preliminary plat have been granted, construction plans,
together with a completed application form and review fee, shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval.
(1) Construction plans may be submitted for review and approval simultaneously with a final plat,
provided however that the final plat shall not be approved until the construction plans have been
approved. If the construction plans and the final plat are to be reviewed simultaneously, a complete
application for construction plans and a complete application for final plat must be submitted to the
city simultaneously.
(2) City staff shall review all construction plan submittals for completeness at the time of
application. If in the judgment of the city, the construction plan submittal substantially fails to meet
the minimal informational requirements as outlined above, it will not be accepted for review.
(3) The city engineer shall review the construction plans to insure compliance with this article, and
other applicable city ordinances, codes, standards and specifications, and good engineering practices.
(4) For projects located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, the construction plans and
attendant documents shall be provided to the county for review and approval. The applicant shall be
responsible for any additional information required by the county for construction plan approval.
(e) Approval. Within thirty (30) days of the date on which all required information has been accepted for
review, the city engineer shall either approve or disapprove the construction plans.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/508
(1) If the construction plans are disapproved, the city engineer shall notify the applicant, in writing,
of disapproval and indicate the requirements for bringing the construction plans into compliance.
(2) If construction plans are approved, then the city engineer shall sign the cover sheet of the
construction plans, returning one (1) signed copy to the applicant and retaining the other signed copy
for city records.
(3) The developer should be aware that specific approvals from other agencies may be required.
(4) All improvements shown in the approved construction plans shall be constructed pursuant to
and in compliance with the approved plans, except as otherwise specifically approved.
(f) Revision. Where it becomes necessary, due to unforeseen circumstances, for corrections to be made to
construction plans for which approval has already been obtained, the city engineer shall have the authority to
approve such corrections when, in his/her opinion, such changes are warranted and also in conformance with
city requirements. Approval of such changes agreed to between the developer and city engineer shall be noted
by initialing and dating by both parties on the two (2) original signed copies of the construction plans.
(g) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any construction plans by the council, commission or the
city engineer, the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plans and specifications shall be
and remain responsible for the adequacy of the design of all such improvements; and nothing in this article shall
be deemed or construed to relieve or waive the responsibility of the developer or his/her engineer for or with
respect to any design, plans and specifications submitted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.124), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.055 Final plat
(a) Purpose. The final plat provides detailed graphic information and associated text indicating property
boundaries, easements, streets, utilities, drainage, and other information required for the maintenance of public
records of the subdivision of land.
(1) A final plat shall be required for all subdivisions of land.
(2) The final plat shall conform to the approved construction plans and approved preliminary plat.
(b) Format. The final plat shall be drawn on eighteen inch by twenty-four inch (18" x 24") mylar sheets at a
scale of one (1) inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100') with all dimensions labeled accurately to the nearest
one tenth (1/10) of a foot. When more than one (1) sheet is necessary to accommodate the entire area, an index
sheet showing the entire subdivision at a scale of one (1) inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400') shall be
attached to the plat. Twenty copies shall be submitted with each submittal.
(c) Content. The final plat shall include all of the tracts intended to be developed at one (1) time, and shall
contain or have attached thereto:
(1) General information.
(A) The proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not have the same spelling or be
pronounced similarly to the name of any other subdivision located within the city or within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, provided however, that use of the same base names for
different sections or phases is required when the units are contiguous with their namesakes and
individually identified by a section number.
(B) The date, scale, north point, addresses of the owner of record, developer, registered
public surveyor, and registered professional engineer if required, platting the tract. The engineer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/508
and surveyor shall affix their seals to the plat in conjunction with the signing of the certification
requirements.
(C) A location map showing the relation of the subdivision to streets and other prominent
features in all directions for a radius of at least one (1) mile using a scale of one (1) inch equals
two thousand feet (1" = 2,000'). The latest edition of the USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map is
recommended.
(D) Identification and location of proposed uses and reservations for all lots within the
subdivision.
(E) The owner's names and the property lines of property within three hundred (300) feet of
the subdivision boundary, together with the respective plat or deed references as determined by
the most recent tax rolls.
(F) Certification, signature and revision blocks as required by the city and county, including
but not limited to the following:
(i) Certification from a registered professional engineer and approval by the department
of state health services (if applicable) that water satisfactory for human consumption is
available in adequate supply at the time of submission, except that such certification is not
required if the property will be served by the city water system.
(ii) Certification from the county health district that a subdivision is located in an area
which cannot reasonably be served by an organized wastewater collection system and that
the use of septic tank or other means of disposal has been approved by the county health
district. Said certificate shall show the limitations, if any, of such approval.
(G) Lot area, width and depth, public utility and drainage easements, and setbacks shall
conform to the requirements as established for the designated land use as set forth in this article.
(2) Existing conditions.
(A) The existing property lines, including bearings and distances, of the land being
subdivided. Property lines shall be drawn sufficiently wide to provide easy identification.
(B) Areas delineating the regulatory one hundred (100) year floodplain, if applicable. This
information must be certified by a registered professional engineer.
(C) The location, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing and recorded streets,
alleys, reservations, railroads, easements or other public rights-of-way within the subdivision,
intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries, as determined from
current deed and plat records. The existing right-of-way width of any boundary street to the
proposed subdivision shall also be shown.
(D) Location of city limit lines and/or outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as
depicted on the city's most recent base map, if either such line traverses the subdivision or is
contiguous to the subdivision boundary.
(3) Survey control information.
(A) True bearings and distances to the nearest established street lines, official monuments, or
existing subdivision corner which shall be accurately described on the plat and rotated to the
state plane coordinate system. Using said system, X and Y coordinates shall be identified for
four (4) property corners.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/508
(B) The description and location of all permanent monuments or benchmarks, standard
monuments, survey control points and lot pins.
(C) Suitable primary control points to which all dimensions, bearings and similar data shall
be referenced. At least one (1) corner of the subdivision shall be located with respect to a corner
of the original survey of which it is a part.
(D) Sufficient data shall be shown on the plat for each lot to prove mathematical closure.
(4) Improvements.
(A) The location, bearings, distances, widths, purposes and approved names of proposed
streets, alleys, easements and rights-of-way to be dedicated to public use.
(B) Streets. Provide complete curve data (delta, arc length, radius, tangent, point of curve,
point of reverse curve, point of tangent, long chord with bearing) between all lot corner pins.
(C) Watercourses and easements. Provide distances to be provided along the side lot lines
from the right-of-way line or the high bank of a stream. Traverse line to be provided along the
edge of all major waterways in a convenient location, preferably along a utility easement if
paralleling the drainage easement or stream.
(D) The property lines and number designations of all proposed lots and blocks, with
complete bearings, distances and dimensions for front, rear and side lot lines. The surveyor
shall certify that all lots meet the city's minimum requirements set forth herein.
(E) The use, property dimensions, names and boundary lines of all special reservations to be
dedicated for public use, including sites for schools, churches, parks and open spaces; common
ownership; or subsequent development.
(F) The location of building setback lines, as required by the city's zoning ordinance and
indicated by dashed lines on the plat, and the location, dimensions, and descriptions of all
required easements within the subdivision, intersecting, or contiguous with its boundaries or
forming such boundaries.
(G) The proposed location of sidewalks for each street, to be shown as a dotted line inside the
proposed right-of-way lines.
(5) Support documents. The following supporting documents must accompany the final plat:
(A) Developer shall include five copies of the approved application for floodplain map
amendment or revision, as required by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA),
if applicable.
(B) If a subdivision is located in an area served by any utility other than the city, the
developer shall furnish a letter from such utility certifying their approval of the location of the
utility easements shown on the plat and indicating the utility's intent to serve the property,
except that said letters are not required if the easements conform to those approved on the
preliminary plat.
(C) If the construction of all improvements needed to serve the subdivision is not completed
prior to the filing of the plat for recordation then the developer must provide financial assurance
for the completion of the remainder of those improvements in accordance with this article.
(6) The applicant shall be responsible for verifying the accuracy of all data submitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/508
(d) Procedure. After approval of the preliminary plat and construction plans for a proposed subdivision, a final
plat for that subdivision shall be submitted to the city for commission approval before recordation.
(1) A final plat may be submitted for review and approval simultaneously with construction plans,
provided however that the final plat shall not be approved until the construction plans have been
approved. If the final plat and construction plans are to be reviewed simultaneously, a complete
application for final plat and a complete application for construction plans must be submitted to the
city simultaneously.
(2) Legible prints, as indicated on the application form, shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days
prior to the regular meeting of the commission at which the final plat is to be heard, along with the
following:
(A) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(B) Any materials or documents required by the commission and/or council as a condition of
preliminary plat approval.
(C) A letter requesting any variances from the provisions of this article, if not previously
approved as part of the preliminary plat, and posted pursuant to the requirements of this article.
(D) Twenty (20) copies of the deed restrictions or covenants, if such documents are to be
used. These shall be filed for record in conjunction with the filing of the final plat.
(E) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have
been paid.
(F) Performance and maintenance guarantees as required by the city.
(G) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the final
plat.
(3) For projects located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, one (1) extra copy of the
above-referenced items must be provided to the county for review and approval. The applicant shall
be responsible for any additional information required by the county for final plat approval.
(4) City staff shall review all final plat submittals for completeness at the time of application. It in
the judgment of city staff, the final plat submittal substantially fails to meet the minimal
informational requirements as outlined above, it will not be accepted for review.
(5) Prior to the commission meeting at which the final plat is presented, city staff shall review the
plat for consistency with city codes, policies and plans.
(6) City staff shall prepare a report analyzing the final plat submittal, as well as any comments
received concerning the preliminary plat, and recommending the either approval or disapproval of the
final plat. This report shall be available at least five (5) working days prior to the commission
meeting.
(7) If the developer chooses to withdraw the final plat, in writing, by noon of the third working day
preceding the meeting commission, the submittal may appear on the next commission agenda after
repayment of the applicable fees.
(e) Notification. Public notification of final plats filed as part of an approved preliminary plat shall not be
required.
(f) Approval. The commission, after holding a public hearing, shall act on the request for final plat approval.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/508
(1) The failure of the commission to act within thirty (30) days of the final plat filing date shall be
deemed an approval of the plat, except as otherwise agreed to by the developer.
(2) For final plats submitted simultaneously with construction plans, the failure of the commission
to act within thirty (30) days of the later of the filing date or the construction plan approval date shall
be deemed an approval of the final plat, except as otherwise agreed to by the developer.
(3) The developer shall begin construction of the required public improvements or file a financial
surety instrument for the improvements within six (6) months after final plat approval by the
commission, or such approval of the final plat shall be void.
(4) Unless the final plat is recorded in the official county records within twelve (12) months after
approval by the commission, such approval of the final plat shall be void, except that the developer
may apply in writing to allow extension of approval prior to the end of such twelve (12) month
period, stating just cause therefor, and the commission may grant an extension not to exceed one (1)
year.
(5) Zoning of the tract, if applicable, that shall permit the proposed use, or any pending zoning
amendment necessary to permit the proposed use shall, have been adopted by the council prior to
approval of the final plat.
(6) The developer should be aware that specific approvals from other agencies may be required.
(7) The city engineer and developer's engineer must certify that the design standards of division 3
of this article have been complied with and that the development and improvements meet sound
engineering practices.
(g) Revision. If revision of the final plat is required by the commission, then the final plat shall not be
recorded until the revised final plat has been resubmitted and approved by city staff for compliance with the
commission's requirements, and the council's requirements, if any, established by the council during its
consideration of the preliminary plan.
(h) Recordation.
(1) Prior to the recordation of the final plat, one (1) original copy of the final plat shall be
submitted to the city for signatures; and
(A) The final plat shall have been approved by the commission pursuant to the provisions of
this article.
(B) All conditions of final plat approval established by the commission shall have been
determined to be complete by city staff.
(C) Construction plans for all required improvements shall have been approved by the city
engineer.
(D) Fees in lieu of parkland dedication as required by this article, if applicable, shall have
been paid.
(E) Performance and maintenance guarantees for all required improvements shall have been
established pursuant to this article.
(F) Copies of any agreements required providing for the proper and continuous operation,
maintenance, and supervision of any facilities that are of common use or benefit which cannot
be satisfactorily maintained, or which have been rejected for operation and/or maintenance, by
an existing public agency shall be executed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/508
(G) Written acceptance of all improvements required by this article by the city engineer or, in
lieu of acceptance, assurance of completion of said improvements pursuant to this article, shall
be received by the city.
(H) Applicable fees pursuant to city ordinance shall be paid, including, but not limited to, all
professional fees, engineer, and attorney fees incurred by the city for or with respect to the
review, processing and approval of the application for the approval of the subdivision plat.
(I) Notes shall be added to the plat describing any variances approved by the commission.
(2) City staff shall, upon determination that all provisions of this article have been satisfied, and all
the above conditions have been met, obtain signatures certifying final plat approval by the
chairperson of the commission, and the mayor, as attested to by the city secretary.
(3) Once the original final plat has been certified by the chairperson of the commission and the
mayor, city staff shall notify the developer that the original final plat is ready for reproduction.
(4) The developer, at his/her own expense, shall make two (2) photographic mylar copies of the
original, signed final plat, and return the photographic mylar copies and the original final plat to the
city engineer for recordation.
(5) If the land area represented by the subdivision is located outside the corporate limits of the city
on the date of its filing for recordation with the official county records, then it must be approved by
the commissioners court of the county prior to recordation. It shall be the responsibility of the
developer to be familiar with the process, procedures, and requirements necessary to secure county
approval. Such approval shall be evidenced by the signature of the statement of certification by the
county judge.
(6) City staff shall, after the photographic mylar copies and the original final plat have been duly
recorded in the official county records, return the original final plat to the developer within five (5)
working days by notifying the developer that the original final plat is available for pickup at the
office of the city engineer.
(7) The city shall keep one (1) photographic mylar copy of the original approved final plat on file
as public record.
(i) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any final plat by the council, commission or the city
engineer, the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plats shall be and remain responsible for
the adequacy of the design and nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve or waive the
responsibility of the developer or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.125), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.056 Amended plats
(a) Purpose. An amended plat that meets all of the informational requirements set forth in this article may be
approved and recorded by the city without vacation of the preceding plat, without a public hearing, and without
approval of other lot owners within the platted subdivision provided that any persons with a vested interest
affected by the plat amendment sign the plat and application; and that the purpose of the amended plat is:
(1) To correct an error in any course or distance shown on the preceding plat; or
(2) To add any course or distance that was omitted on the preceding plat; or
(3) To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the preceding plat; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/508
(4) To indicate monuments set after death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or
surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; or
(5) To show the proper location or character of any monument which has been changed in location,
character, or shown incorrectly on the preceding plat; or
(6) To correct any other type of scrivener or clerical error or omission as previously approved by
the commission and council; such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to: lot
numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent recorded plats; or
(7) To correct an error in courses and distances of lot lines between two (2) adjacent lots where lot
owners join in the application for an amended plat and neither lot is abolished, provided that such
amendment does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions and does not have a
material adverse effect on the property rights of the other owners in the plat; or
(8) To relocate a lot line in order to cure an inadvertent encroachment of a building or
improvement on a lot line or on an easement; or
(9) To relocate one (1) or more lot lines between one (1) or more adjacent lots where the owner or
owners of all such lots join in the application for the amended plat, provided that such amendment
does not attempt to remove recorded covenants or restrictions, or increase the number of lots.
(b) Format. The format of an amended plat shall be the same as the format for a final plat.
(c) Content. The content of an amended plat shall be the same as the content requirements for a short form
final plat.
(d) Procedure.
(1) The amended plat may be submitted without reapproval of a preliminary plat or construction
plans. The amended plat, prepared by a surveyor, and engineer if required, and bearing their seals
shall be submitted to the city for approval before recordation of the plat.
(2) Legible prints, as indicated on the application form shall be submitted to the city along with the
following:
(A) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(B) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have
been paid.
(C) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the plat.
(D) The city shall require the following note on the amended plat: This subdivision is subject
to all general notes and restrictions appearing on the plat of ____________, Lot(s) ______,
recorded at Cabinet ______, Slide _______ of the Plat Records of ____________ County,
Texas.
(e) Notification. Public notification and public hearings shall not be required for an amended plat.
(f) Approval. The city engineer shall forward an administratively complete amended plat meeting the
requirements of this article to the planning and zoning commission. The planning and zoning commission shall
act within thirty (30) days of receipt of an administratively complete submittal. However, if in the city engineer's
or the planning and zoning commission's determination, the amended plat does not satisfy this article, the city
engineer may require the plat to be processed in accordance with the final plat procedures of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/508
(g) Expiration. Approval of an amended plat shall expire if said plat is not recorded in the plat records of the
county within six (6) months of city approval.
(h) Recordation. Recordation of an amended plat shall follow the same recordation provisions of a final plat.
(i) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any amended plat by the planning and zoning commission,
the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plats shall be and remain responsible for the
adequacy of the design and nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve or waive the
responsibility of the developer or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.126), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.057 Short form final plats
(a) Purpose. The provision of adequate data concerning land use, utility requirements, traffic impact, streets,
easements and dedications is vital to ensure the continued health, safety and welfare of the city's residents.
Recognizing that the significance of this data is reduced for the small scale projects that are most heavily
impacted by the burden of producing this data, the city allows alternate procedures for simple resubdivisions, lot
splits, and the platting of existing development and of land proposed for site development where public
improvements are not required.
(1) Applicants for subdivisions or resubdivisions creating no more than four (4) new lots may
follow the procedure set forth below provided that the subdivision meets all of the following criteria:
(A) The city engineer shall certify that the proposed subdivision meets all the requirements of
the short form final plat.
(B) No new public street shall be necessary for each lot to access a public street.
(C) Each of the lots is contiguous with at least one (1) of the other lots in the subdivision for
a distance of at least fifty (50) feet.
(D) No off-site improvements to the city's infrastructure are determined to be necessary by
the city engineer.
(E) No off-site drainage improvements are determined to be necessary by the city engineer.
(F) No new easements shall be necessary to serve each lot and the plat shall show existing
easements thereon.
(2) The commission may require the standard final plat procedures outlined in this article, if the
commission determines that the plat is inconsistent with any element of the master plan, or any
established city ordinances, codes or policies.
(b) Format. The format of the short form final plat shall correspond with the format for final plats as required
by this article.
(c) Content. The content of the short form final plat shall correspond with the content for final plats as
required by this article, except that:
(1) Construction plans may not be required.
(2) The city may permit omission of any informational requirements that are determined by the
city to place an excessive burden on the applicant, including, but not limited to contours, centerlines
of existing watercourses, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/508
(3) The city shall require the following note on the final plat: This subdivision is subject to all
general notes and restrictions appearing on the plat of ______________, Lot(s) ______, recorded at
Cabinet _______, Slide _______ of Plat Records of ____________ County, Texas.
(d) Procedure. The procedure for review and approval of a short form final plat shall follow the procedure for
final plats, except that:
(1) The short form final plat may be submitted without approval of a preliminary plat or
construction plans. The plat, prepared by a surveyor, and engineer if required, and bearing their seals
shall be submitted to the commission for approval before recordation of the plat.
(2) Legible prints, as indicated on the application form shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days
prior to the regular meeting of the commission along with the following:
(A) Completed application forms and the payment of all required fees.
(B) Twenty (20) copies of the deed restrictions or covenants, if such documents are to be
used. These shall be filed for record in conjunction with the filing of the plat.
(C) Certification from all applicable taxing authorities that all taxes due on the property have
been paid.
(D) Notification materials as required herein.
(E) A petition requesting annexation, if applicable.
(F) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the plat.
(3) For projects located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, one (1) extra copy of the
above-referenced items must be provided to the county for review and approval. The applicant shall
be responsible for any additional information required by the county for short form final plat
approval.
(e) Notification. Notification procedures for a short form final plat shall be the same as those identified for
preliminary plan.
(f) Approval. The approval process of a short form final plat shall be the same as the approval of a final plat.
(g) Revision. The revision process of a short form final plat shall be the same as the revision process
described for a final plat.
(h) Recordation. The recordation procedures of a short form final plat shall be the same as the procedures for
a final plat.
(i) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any short form final plat by the commission, council or
city engineer, the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plats shall be and remain
responsible for the adequacy of the design and nothing in this article shall be deemed or construed to relieve or
waive the responsibility of the developer or his/her engineer for or with respect to any plat submitted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.127), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.058 Vacation of undeveloped subdivision
When no lots on a plat of subdivision have been sold, the developer may request the vacation of the plat prior to
the time that the improvements covered by the guarantees are installed, and when such plat is vacated, all fiscal
sureties shall be returned to the developer. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.128), adopted 8/9/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/508
Sec. 10.02.059 Revisions to pending preliminary plat or final plat
This section shall apply to preliminary plats or final plats legally filed and pending approval before the
commission or city council which substantially vary from the previously filed and approved plat (such plats shall
be referred to herein as a “project in progress”).
(1) Purpose. Submission of a revised preliminary plat to the city shall be required when substantial
changes to a project in progress are proposed on an approved preliminary plat.
(2) Revision to preliminary plat. If one or more of the following changes to a project in progress
has been made before the approval of a preliminary plat, the developer shall meet with staff in a preconference
meeting to discuss the changes to the previously submitted preliminary plat prior to
resubmitting to the commission and council to ensure compliance with city regulations. The
following are deemed substantial changes requiring resubmission:
(A) Any change that causes the preliminary plat to be inconsistent with the city's master plan
for the property.
(B) More than a 5% change in the overall concept or design of the development or layout of
the lots.
(C) Any change in land use categories that total more than five percent (5%) of the land area.
(D) Any change in the total number of residential or nonresidential lots totaling more than
five percent (5%) of the total number of lots for any individual category of lots.
(E) Any change in classification of arterial or collector streets or in alignment of arterial,
collector or minor streets of more than 150 feet.
(F) Any change in parkland that totals more than five percent (5%) of the proposed parkland
area.
(G) Any change in detention pond or drainage channel location by more than 150 feet.
(H) Any change in phase timing by more than one year.
(I) Any change that would not be consistent with the original intent of the approving body, or
would require a variance.
(3) Revision to final plat. If one or more of the following changes to a project in progress has been
made after approval of a preliminary plat and after the filing or approval of a final plat, the developer
shall meet with staff in a pre-conference meeting to discuss changes to the previously submitted plat
prior to resubmitting to the commission and council. The following are deemed substantial changes
requiring submission to the city:
(A) Any change that causes the final plat to be inconsistent with the city's master plan.
(B) Any change in land use categories that total more than one percent (1%) of the land area.
(C) Any change in the total number of residential or nonresidential lots totaling more than
one percent (1%) of the total number of lots for any individual category of lots.
(D) Any change in classification of arterial or collector streets or in alignment of arterial,
collector, or minor streets of more than 75 feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/508
(E) Any change in parkland that totals more than one percent (1%) of the proposed parkland
area.
(F) Any change in detention pond location by more than 75 feet.
(G) Any change in drainage channel location by more than 75 feet.
(H) Any change in phase timing by more than one year.
(I) Any change that would not be consistent with the original intent of the approving body, or
would require a variance.
(4) Procedure for submission.
(A) A preliminary plat that is required to be resubmitted to the city under this section shall be
submitted pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 10.02.053.
(B) Construction plans and final plats that are required to be submitted to the city under this
section shall be submitted pursuant to the procedures set forth in sections 10.02.054 and
10.02.055.
(C) For cause shown, the city council may waive the requirement for resubmission of a
revised plat.
(5) Current regulations govern. If a preliminary plat, construction plans or final plat of a project in
progress is required to be resubmitted under this section, the subdivision shall be governed by the
regulations, ordinances, rules, expiration dates, or other properly adopted requirements of the city in
effect at the time of the resubmission to the city.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.129), adopted 8/9/04)
Secs. 10.02.060–10.02.100 Reserved
Division 3. Design Standards
Sec. 10.02.101 Generally
(a) Additional regulations. In addition to the requirements established by this article, all development within
the city limits shall be designed so as to comply with the intent and provisions of the zoning ordinance, building
and housing codes, master plan, regulations of the state department of transportation and the department of state
health services, and any other applicable law or regulation adopted by a unit of federal, state or local
government; and all development within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city shall comply with this article
and all other applicable laws and regulations adopted by a unit of federal, state or local government.
(b) Standards in general. The minimum design standards as contained herein shall provide the basic criteria
for evaluating proposed preliminary plats, construction plans, final plats, amended plats, short form final plats,
and other development or improvements subject to this article. The city may, however, establish reasonable
design requirements in excess of these established minimum standards, or grant variances from those established
minimum standards, where by reason of exceptional topographic, cultural, historic, archaeological, hydrologic,
or other physical conditions of the property to be developed or of an adjacent tract, the strict adherence to these
standards will result in an inappropriate subdivision design or cause unnecessary hardship.
(c) Coordinated design. The quality of life and the community in the Rockdale urban area is dependent on the
quality of design of the individual developments in which people live and work. Good community design
requires the coordination of the efforts of each developer of land within the urban area. It is intended that the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/508
urban area shall be designed as a group of integrated residential neighborhoods and appropriate commercial,
industrial and public facilities. Therefore, the design of each development shall be prepared in accordance with
the applicable principles established by the master plan for land use, circulation, community facilities and public
utility services and in accordance with the following general principles:
(1) The neighborhood, as a planning unit, is intended as an area principally for residential use, and
of a size that can be served by one (1) elementary school. Space for recreational, educational and
shopping facilities to serve the residents of the neighborhood should be provided and designed as an
integral part of each neighborhood. The size of lots and blocks should be designed to provide for
adequate water and wastewater service, traffic circulation, light, air, open space, landscaping and offstreet
parking. The arrangement of lots and blocks and the street system should be designed to make
the most advantageous use of topography and natural physical features. Tree masses and large
individual trees should be preserved to the greatest extent possible. The system of sidewalks and
roadways and the lot layout should be designed to take advantage of the visual qualities of the area.
(2) The components of the street system should in different degrees serve the separate purposes of
access to property and safe, efficient movement of traffic. Land use types should be served by
roadways whose capacity increases in proportion to the traffic generation of the land use. Design and
location of points of access to property should be appropriate to the volume and speed characteristics
of traffic utilizing the intersection.
(3) An open space system throughout the urban area should provide a range of active and passive
recreation opportunities. Park, open space and recreation facilities should be located with sensitivity
to user population, natural features, traffic generation, and nearby land use.
(4) Land use arrangement and design should minimize the difference in intensity between adjacent
uses in order to provide for the provision of water, wastewater and roadways sufficient to serve the
proposed densities and provide for compatible neighboring developments. Step-down patterns of use
surrounding major activity centers, combined with buffering techniques, should ensure that
residential densities are compatible with each other, and that residential development is not adversely
impacted by higher intensity uses.
(5) Public utilities and infrastructure should be provided within all subdivisions in order to ensure
the health, safety and well-being of the public. Utility capacity should be sufficient to meet accepted
standards of service to reasonably anticipated development. Where excess capacity in utility lines or
facilities within a subdivision will further the efficient and desirable extension of utilities to adjacent
property, equitable provision of such capacity is essential to the orderly growth of the urban area.
(6) Construction of water, wastewater, drainage, gas, electric, telephone and cable television
utilities that require utility cuts of a public street shall be repaired pursuant to applicable city
ordinances.
(d) Policy. All improvements within the city's jurisdiction shall be designed in accordance with good
engineering practices.
(1) The commission shall not recommend approval or approve any plat or plan which does not
meet the minimum requirements of this article in making adequate provisions for improvements that
protect the public health, safety and property, and benefit the present and future owners of property
within the development, other lands within the city and neighboring areas.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the developer to design and construct improvements, in
accordance with:
(A) The requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/508
(B) Good engineering practices.
(C) Approved engineering plans for construction.
(D) The regulations and principles of law established pursuant to the state law.
(E) Any variances granted.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.131), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.102 General plat requirements
(a) All requirements pertaining to lot size, yard size, dwelling size, lot coverage, height, parking, loading and
screening contained in the current zoning ordinance of the city shall be adhered to for development under this
article.
(b) Streets.
(1) The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all proposed streets shall
conform to the general plan of the community, and their relationship shall be considered to that of the
existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in
their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets.
(2) Where such is not shown in the general plan for the community, the arrangements of streets in a
subdivision shall:
(A) Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in
surrounding areas;
(B) Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the city. A variance will
be allowed to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make
continuation of or conformance to an existing street impracticable; and
(C) Be laid out so that they shall intersect, as nearly as possible, at right angles.
(3) Residential (minor) streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic shall be
discouraged.
(4) Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred fifty feet (150) shall be avoided.
(5) Street right-of-way widths shall conform to the city's thoroughfare plan, and shall conform to
the following:
Class of Street Right-of-Way Width in Feet
A - Entrance roadway 200
B - Major thoroughfare 120
C - Major thoroughfare 100
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/508
D - Secondary thoroughfare 80
E & F - Collector 60
G - Minor 50
(6) Half streets shall be prohibited, except where necessary to the reasonable development of the
subdivision in conformance with the other requirements of these regulations and where the city finds
it will be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the street has already been
provided adjacent to an area to be subdivided; the other remaining portion of the street shall be
platted within such subdivision. Where part of a residential or collector street is being dedicated
along a common property line, the first dedication shall be one-half of the proposed street right-ofway
plus five feet (5').
(7) Cul-de-sacs in residential additions shall not be longer than six hundred feet (600') from the
nearest intersection, and in industrial areas they shall not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') from the
nearest intersecting street, and there shall be provided at the closed end a turnaround having an
outside roadway diameter of at least eighty feet (80') and a street property line diameter of at least
one hundred feet (100').
(8) All streets shall be paved, and paving shall conform to section 10.02.103, “Improvements,” of
these regulations.
(9) Street grades shall be established regarding topography, proposed land use, and the facilities in
the area surrounding the land to be subdivided. Minimum grades shall be three-tenths percent
(0.30%) on concrete streets only and five-tenths percent (0.50%) on all other types of street paving.
(10) Street name markers shall be installed in accordance with the prescribed type currently in use
by the city, or an approved equal, as approved by the city manager. Street markers and erection
thereof will be at the expense of the subdivider.
(11) Residential lots shall not face arterial streets or thoroughfares, and driveway or alley
pavement cuts shall not be permitted on arterial streets. Alleys shall be provided along side and rear
lot lines on arterial streets for rear entrance.
(c) Alleys.
(1) Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial districts and shall be paved with
reinforced concrete, except that the city may waive this requirement where other definite and assured
provision is made for service access, such as off-street loading, unloading, and parking consistent
with and adequate for the uses proposed.
(2) Alleys may be required in all residential areas. Where required, they shall be paved with
reinforced concrete.
(3) The minimum right-of-way width of an alley shall be twenty feet (20') in industrial and
commercial areas and fifteen feet (15') in residential areas. The alley turnouts shall be paved to the
property line and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley paving at that point. The radii of
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/508
the turnouts for alleys intersecting thoroughfares shall be sixteen feet (16') and shall be ten feet (10')
at intersections with all other streets.
(4) Alley intersections and sudden changes in alignment shall be avoided, but, where necessary, lot
corners shall be cut off at least fifteen feet (15') on each tangent to permit safe vehicular movement.
(5) Dead-end alleys shall be avoided where possible, but, if unavoidable, they shall be provided
with adequate turnaround facilities, as determined by the city.
(6) All alleys shall be paved, and the paving shall conform to section 10.02.103, “Improvements,”
of these regulations.
(7) Where driveways connect to alleys in commercial, industrial, or residential areas, fences may
be constructed along the rear lot line of any lot to a point within five feet (5') of a point where the
driveway would intersect the alley pavement at ninety degrees (90°). Fences are optional.
(d) Lots.
(1) All lots shall conform to the regulations as set forth in the city's zoning ordinance.
(2) Corner lots in residential areas shall be ten feet (10') wider than inside lots so as to allow the
required setback from both streets.
(3) Each lot shall face onto a public street or a private drive, except in a planned unit development.
Lots with street frontage at both front and rear shall be avoided, except when the lot backs onto a
highway or major thoroughfare.
(4) Side lines of lots shall be approximately at right angles to straight street lines and radial to
curved street lines.
(5) The minimum lot size outside the city limits shall be 7,500 sq. ft. with a minimum front yard
width of 75 feet. Lots designed as cul-de-sacs may request a smaller front yard width on a showing
that the cul-de-sac reduces the linear feet available to provide for 75 feet, provided the general
intentions of the section are met.
(6) Lots to be served by septic systems shall have a minimum of 1 acre per LUE and conform to
the county and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality regulations based on percolation tests.
(7) Building setback lines shall be recorded on plats for property within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
(e) Easements.
(1) Easements across lots on rear or side lot lines shall be provided for utilities when necessary and
shall be at least fifteen feet (15') wide.
(2) Where a subdivision is bounded by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or stream, there shall
be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way conforming substantially to the lines of
such watercourse, or of such width to provide for any future anticipated construction, plus a
minimum of ten feet (10') on each side.
(f) Blocks.
(1) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with regard to the following
items:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/508
(A) Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use
proposed;
(B) Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions;
(C) Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of traffic; and
(D) Limitations of topography.
(2) Where no existing subdivision controls, the blocks shall not exceed one thousand two hundred
feet (1,200') in length nor be less than five hundred feet (500') in length, except in certain instances
where topographical features warrant special consideration. These limits shall be exceeded only upon
specific approval by the city. Blocks longer than six hundred feet (600') shall be avoided in business
districts.
(g) Survey monuments and lot markers.
(1) Permanent survey reference monuments. A concrete monument, six inches (6") in diameter and
twenty-four inches (24") long, shall be placed on all boundary corners. A copper pin 1/4 inch in
diameter embedded at least three inches (3") in the monument shall be placed at the exact intersection
point on the monument. The monuments shall be set at such an elevation that they will not be
disturbed during construction, and the top of the monument shall be no less than twelve inches (12")
below the finished grade of the development.
(2) Lot markers. Lot markers shall be 1/2-inch reinforcing bar, eighteen inches (18") long, or
approved equal, and shall be placed at all lot corners flush with the ground, or below ground, if
necessary, in order to avoid being disturbed.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.132), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.103 Improvements
(a) Standard specifications and construction details.
(1) All improvements proposed for any subdivision to be developed under the jurisdiction of this
article shall be furnished and installed by the subdivider/developer in accordance with the applicable
divisions of Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, as adopted by the city and the
other applicable specifications noted herein, or in the absence of such specifications and details, to
meet the approval of the city.
(2) All improvements, even in previously approved but still in unimproved subdivisions, or in
resubdivided tracts, shall conform to the city's current regulations and specifications for street,
drainage, and utility construction.
(3) Where reference is made within these regulations to the standard specifications, it shall be
understood that the word “owner” is to be interpreted as the developer or subdivider and the words
“owner's representative” are to be interpreted as the developer's engineer or inspector. Where the
standard specifications allow options not specifically addressed by these regulations, the developer's
engineer shall request guidance from the city in writing.
(b) Street paving.
(1) Concrete strength requirements.
(A) Concrete curb and gutter. Concrete curb and gutter shall be constructed of a batch design,
providing a twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand five hundred (3,500)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/508
pounds per square inch (psi). No. 4 deformed steel bars shall be used for reinforcing.
(B) Reinforced concrete pavements and monolithic curb. Concrete pavement and monolithic
curb properly and continuously reinforced shall be constructed of a concrete batch design,
providing the appropriate twenty-eight (28) day compressive strength. The minimum
reinforcement shall be no. 4 deformed bars spaced at twenty-four (24) inches center to center,
both ways.
(2) Pavement types and thicknesses.
(A) Collector and minor streets and alleys in residential areas.
(i) The subdivider/developer shall, at his own cost and expense, pay for constructing all
streets and alleys in residential areas within his subdivision and one-half (1/2) of all
perimeter streets.
(ii) A six-inch (6") thickness of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced
concrete pavement on a compacted subbase shall be required.
(iii) An alternate type of pavement may be eight-inch (8") thickness of compacted
flexible base on a compacted subbase with a 2-inch thickness of type C asphaltic concrete
surface, except in alleys. All alleys shall be paved with reinforced concrete.
(B) Collector streets and alleys in commercial or industrial areas.
(i) The subdivider/developer shall, at his own cost and expense, pay for constructing all
collector streets and alleys within his subdivision and one-half (1/2) of all perimeter
streets.
(ii) Collector streets and alleys shall be designed and constructed with eight-inch (8")
thickness of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced concrete pavement on a
compacted subbase.
(C) Major thoroughfare construction.
(i) On roadways, adjacent to the proposed subdivision that are designated to be major
thoroughfares, the subdivider/developer shall be required to construct at his own cost
expense the outer 22 feet of the street section with integral curbs on each side.
(ii) Where major thoroughfares traverse a subdivision, the subdivider shall be required,
at his own cost and expense, to construct, a 22-foot wide section (measured face to face of
curbs) plus integral curbs on both sides along the outer portion of each side of the
roadway.
(iii) Thoroughfares shall be designed and constructed with an eight-inch (8") thickness
of three thousand five hundred (3,500) psi reinforced concrete pavement on a compacted
subbase.
(3) Street and R.O.W. requirements.
(A) Residential streets, collector streets, and alleys.
(i) Residential street paving shall be a minimum of twenty-six feet (26') in width,
measured between the faces of curbs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/508
(ii) Collector street paving shall be a minimum of forty feet (40') in width, measured
between the faces of curbs, except that the width for collector streets in industrial and
commercial areas must be a minimum of forty-four feet (44') in width and thirty-six feet
(36') around schools, measured between the faces of the curbs.
(iii) Alley paving shall be ten feet (10') wide in residential areas and sixteen feet (16')
wide in commercial and industrial areas. Alley turnouts shall be paved to the property line
and shall be at least two feet (2') wider than the alley paving at that point. Paving radius
where alleys intersect residential and collector streets shall be ten feet (10') and, where
alleys intersect thoroughfare streets, the radius shall be fifteen feet (15').
(4) Roadway classifications. The following minimum pavement widths are set by this article for
construction as follows:
Roadway Classification Minimum
Right-of-Way
Width
Minimum Pavement Width Between
Faces of Curbs
Class A - Entrance roadway 200' Two 36' traffic lanes and two 8' parking lanes
divided by a 50' median
Class B - Major thoroughfare 120' Two 36' traffic lanes divided by a 16' median
Class C - Major thoroughfare 100' Two 33' traffic lanes divided by a 15' median
Class D - Secondary thoroughfare 80' Four 11' traffic lanes
Class E - Collector street 60' Two 12' traffic lanes and two 8' parking lanes
Class F - Collector street 60' Two 10' traffic lanes and two 8' parking lanes
Class G - Minor (residential) street 50' One 10' traffic lane and two 8' parking lanes
Note: The minimum width of a median adjacent to a left turn lane shall be five feet (5').
(5) Street returns.
(A) The minimum radius for all street returns shall be twenty feet (20'). The radius for all
street returns on major thoroughfares shall be thirty feet (30').
(B) Returns for driveways on residential streets shall be ten feet (10'). Commercial and
industrial driveway returns shall be a minimum of ten feet (10') and a maximum of twenty feet
(20') except in special cases.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/508
(6) Miscellaneous reinforced concrete requirements.
(A) Reinforcing steel. All steel reinforcing for street and alley concrete paving shall be
deformed no. 4 bars at twenty-four inch (24") centers both ways and shall meet ASTM
designation A-15, A-16, or A-408.
(B) Sawed dummy joints. Sawed dummy transverse joints shall be not greater than 20'-2"
apart or as required by the city at intersections. Longitudinal sawed dummy joints shall be
required in all pavements where the concrete is poured in a continuous width of 30 feet or more.
The longitudinal dummy joint shall be located at one-third point of the width or as directed by
the city.
(C) Expansion joints. Expansion joints shall be placed at distances no greater than 600 feet
and shall be constructed in accordance with the city's standards. Construction joints shall be
constructed in accordance with the expansion joint standard. Expansion joints shall have dowels
#5 smooth at 24-inch centers. Construction joints shall have the reinforcing bars continuous
through the joint.
(D) Longitudinal pavement slopes.
(i) The minimum longitudinal standard alley pavement slopes shall be five percent.
(ii) The maximum longitudinal slopes are as follows:
Type of Street Maximum Slope
Major thoroughfare 6%
Collector streets 8%
Minor streets 10%
(iii) Maximum grades for alleys shall be 8% within 30 feet of its intersection with a
street and 14% elsewhere.
(iv) The minimum grades for streets and alleys shall be 3%.
(E) Longitudinal radius.
(i) The minimum centerline radii shall be as follows:
Major thoroughfare 1,000'
Collector street 500'
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/508
Minor street 150'
(ii) A 100-foot tangent must be provided in the center of all reverse curves.
(F) Transverse pavement cross-sections.
(i) The transverse pavement slope for all non-divided streets shall consist of a parabolic
curve from the pavement centerline to the gutter. The crown of the parabolic curve shall
be four (4) inches above the gutter grade on residential streets and six (6) inches on
collector streets. For divided streets, the transverse slope shall be 2% or as required by the
city.
(ii) The transverse slope back of the curb shall vary between 1/4 inch per foot minimum
to 3/4 inch per foot maximum. If a steeper grade is required, retaining walls shall be
constructed along the property line.
(7) Lime stabilization.
(A) Stabilization of the subgrade shall be required under all street pavement where the
plasticity index of the subgrade is 15 or greater. This stabilization shall be 6 inches thick with 6
percent hydrated lime by weight.
(B) Hydrated lime shall be spread uniformly over the soil to be treated and sprinkled to the
proper moisture content. The soil, lime, and water shall be mixed until a homogeneous product
is obtained that is free of clods and lumps. The mixture shall then be immediately rolled and
compacted to 95% standard proctor density.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.133), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.104 Sidewalks
(a) Concrete sidewalks shall be provided on each side of all streets and shall have a width of not less than four
feet (4') and thickness of not less than four inches (4") and shall be constructed of three thousand (3,000) psi
concrete on both sides of all streets and thoroughfares within the subdivision, except that sidewalks will not be
required in industrial areas. Sidewalks shall be constructed two feet (2') from the property line within the street
or thoroughfare right-of-way and shall extend along the street frontage including the sides of corner lots and
block ends. Construction of sidewalks adjacent to curbs in residential areas will be considered where driveway
entrances are constructed from the rear of lots on each side of the street for the full length of the block or where
mountable curbs are installed. In these instances, the sidewalks shall be five feet (5') wide.
(b) Sidewalks in commercial areas shall be a minimum width of five feet (5') or extend from the back of the
curb to the building line as required by the city.
(c) All concrete for sidewalks shall be placed on a two-inch (2") sand cushion and shall be reinforced with 6 x
6 no. 10 gauge welded wire fabric.
(d) Longitudinal slope of sidewalks shall be that of the curb adjacent to the sidewalk. The transverse slope of
the sidewalk shall be 1/4 inch per foot starting at the back of the curb. The maximum ground slope from the
edge of the sidewalk on the property line side shall not exceed 11%. If it does exceed eleven percent (11%), a
retaining wall that is acceptable to the city shall be provided on the property line.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.134), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.105 Storm sewer
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/508
(a) General. Plans, profiles, and specifications shall be prepared for storm sewer improvements to be
constructed and shall show the locations, sizes, grades, hydraulic gradients, flow arrows, and other details for the
proposed pipe, inlets, manholes, culverts, outlet structures, and other appurtenances. Each sheet of the plans and
profiles shall bear the seal, signature, and date of the registered professional civil engineer who prepared them.
(b) The subdivider/developer shall pay for the cost of all drainage improvements connected with development
of his subdivision, including any necessary off-site channels or storm sewers and acquisition of any required
easements.
(c) An enclosed storm sewer shall be provided in all areas where the quantity of the accumulated storm runoff
does not exceed two hundred (200) cubic feet per second (cfs).
(d) In drainage courses where the accumulated storm runoff is more than two hundred (200) cfs and less than
five hundred (500) cfs, either an enclosed storm sewer system or a concrete-lined channel shall be constructed.
(e) In drainage courses where the accumulated storm runoff is more than five hundred (500) cfs, the drainage
improvements may be either an enclosed storm sewer system, a concrete-lined channel, or an earthen channel.
Earthen channels shall be designed according to the criteria as set forth herein for open channel sections.
(1) Rational Method. The design of storm drainage improvements in the city shall be based on
flood discharges determined from the Rational Method. The formula for calculating storm flows in
this manner is:
Q = CIA, where,
Q is the storm flow at a given point, measured in cubic feet per second;
C is the percentage of rainfall on a given area that flows off as free
surface water;
I is the average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a period
equal to the time of flow from the farthest point of the drainage area
to the first inlet or given point on the storm sewer;
A is the area in acres tributary to the design point.
(2) Runoff coefficient “C”. The runoff coefficient, which considers the slope of the terrain, the
character of the land use, the length of overland flow, and the imperviousness of the drainage area,
shall be determined from the ultimate land development plan of the city. The runoff coefficient for
the appropriate land uses shall be as follows:
Commercial areas 0.90
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/508
Industrial areas 0.80
Residential areas 0.60
Apartment areas 0.80
Park areas 0.40
(3) Rainfall intensity “I”.
(A) The rainfall intensity-frequency curves, which are shown on Plate 1, are plotted from
data published by the U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bureau, Technical Paper No. 40.
Editor's note–Plate 1 is not printed herein.
(B) The intensity, I, in the formula Q = CIA, is determined from these curves by arriving at a
time of concentration and adapting a storm frequency upon which to base the drainage
improvements.
(4) Time of concentration. The time of concentration, which is the time of flow from the farthest
point of the drainage area to the first inlet in the system, or given point on the storm sewer, consists
of the time required to flow in the gutter to the inlet, plus the time of flow in the storm sewer. A
minimum time of concentration of fifteen (15) minutes shall be used for all areas except commercial
areas, and a minimum time of concentration of ten (10) minutes shall be used in commercial areas. A
nomograph, shown on Plate 2, is attached for estimating the time of concentration.
Editor's note–Plate 2 is not printed herein.
(5) Storm frequency. Design storm frequencies for storm drainage improvements in the city shall
be as follows:
Type of Facility
Frequency
Description of Area to be
Drained
Maximum
Concentration
Allowed
(Minutes)
Design
Frequency
(Years)
*Storm
***sewers
Residential, commercial and
industrial
30 25
**Culverts, bridges,
channels and creeks
Any type of area less than 100
acres
30 25
***Culverts, bridges,
channels, and creeks
Any type of area greater than 100
acres but less than 1,000 acres
45 50
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/508
****Culverts,
bridges, channels,
and creeks
Any type of area greater than
1,000 acres
60 100
* When the maximum time of concentration or area to be drained is exceeded, the design shall be based on a
fifty (50) year frequency.
** When the maximum time of concentration or area to be drained is exceeded, the design shall be based on a
one hundred (100) year frequency.
*** Whenever, in a storm sewer, an inlet is located at a low point so that flow in excess of the storm sewer
capacity would be directed onto private property, the design frequency shall be increased beyond twenty-five
(25) years. If the inlet location is such that overflow could cause damage or serious inconvenience, it may be
desirable to increase the design frequency to as much as one hundred (100) years.
**** When the maximum time of concentration of sixty (60) minutes is exceeded on any area to be drained, the
design shall be based on a one hundred (100) year frequency having a maximum time duration of 60 minutes.
(6) Area. The area used in determining flows by the “Rational Method” shall be calculated by
subdividing a map into drainage areas within the basin contributing stormwater runoff to the system.
(7) Spread of water.
(A) During the design storm, the quantity of stormwater that will be allowed to collect in the
streets before being intercepted by a storm drainage system is referred to as the “spread of
water.” In determining the limitations for carrying the stormwater in the street, the ultimate
development of the street shall be considered. The use of the street for carrying stormwater
shall be limited to the following.
Spread of Water
Major thoroughfares One traffic lane each side to remain
clear
Collector streets One (1) traffic lane to remain clear
Residential streets Six-inch (6") depth of flow at curb
(B) Curves are provided on Plate 3 for determining the spread of water for certain gutter
slopes, gutter discharge, and pavement crown. Also provided are nomographs, Plate 4 and Plate
5, for determining the capacity of parabolic gutters for various widths of streets and a curve for
determining the curb inlet opening length (Plate 6).
Editor's note–Plates 3, 4, 5 and 6 are not printed herein.
(C) The length of inlet opening for each cubic feet per second of gutter flow is as follows:
Street Grade Length of Inlet Opening in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/508
Feet per CFS
Less than 2% 1.0
2% to 3.5% 1.5
Greater than 3.5% 2.0
(8) Storm sewer design.
(A) Stormwater runoff in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets shall be intercepted in
inlets and carried away in a storm sewer system. Storm sewer capacity shall be calculated by
Manning's Formula:
Q =
1.486
AR 2/3 S 1/2
n
Where,
Q is the discharge in cubic feet per second;
A is the cross-sectional area of flow in square feet;
R is the hydraulic radius in feet;
S is the slope of the hydraulic gradient in feet per foot; and
n is the coefficient of roughness (n = 0.013 for concrete pipe and
0.015 for poured culverts).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/508
(B) In the design of the storm sewer system, the elevation of hydraulic gradient of the storm
sewer shall be a minimum of one and one-half feet (1.5') below the elevation of the adjacent
street gutter.
(C) Storm sewer pipe sizes shall be so selected that the average velocity in the pipe will not
exceed fifteen feet (15') per second nor be less than three feet (3') per second.
(D) Storm sewer pipe shall be reinforced concrete culvert pipe conforming to ASTM
Description C-76 class III and shall be a minimum of eighteen inches (18") in diameter.
(9) Open channel design.
(A) Stormwater runoff in excess of that allowed to collect in the streets in developed areas
and runoff in undeveloped areas may be carried in open channels (not in the street right-ofway).
Open channel capacity shall be calculated by Manning's Formula, and roughness
coefficients shall be as follows:
Type of Lining Roughness
Coefficient “n”
Maximum
Permissible Mean
Velocity
Earth (Bermuda grass) 0.035 8 ft. per sec.
Earth (non-vegetated) 0.030 5 ft. per sec.
Concrete-lined 0.015 15 ft. per sec.
Weathered rock 0.030 15 ft. per sec.
(B) Open channels shall be constructed with a trapezoidal cross-section and shall have side
slopes no steeper than 3:1 in earth and 1.5:1 when lined with concrete.
(C) Where the grade of the open channel must be 0.30%, or less, the channel shall be
concrete-lined regardless of the amount of runoff.
(D) Concrete lining in channels shall have a minimum thickness of six (6) inches and shall be
reinforced with 12 x 12 W4 x W4 welded wire fabric with a nominal diameter of 0.225 inches
and a nominal weight of 0.136 lbs./L.F.
(E) Concrete-lined channels shall have a reinforced concrete toe wall constructed along the
base and side slopes of the lined channel with a minimum vertical depth of two (2) feet. A
horizontal concrete section, one (1) foot in width, shall be constructed between the top of the
channel lining and the toe wall.
(F) The subdivider/developer shall dedicate a right-of-way on all earthen and concrete-lined
channels of sufficient width to provide for excavation of the open channel of proper width, plus
ten feet (10') on each side to permit ingress and egress for maintenance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/508
(10) Culvert design.
(A) At locations of creek crossing with proposed roadway improvements, it is sometimes
necessary to receive and transport stormwater under the roadway in culverts. The quantity of
flow shall be determined by the Rational Method, and the capacity of the culvert shall be
calculated by Manning's Formula.
(B) Design of culverts shall include the determination of upstream backwater conditions as
well as downstream velocities and flooding conditions. Consideration shall be given to the
discharge velocity from culverts, and the following limitations are required.
Culvert Discharge–Velocity Limitations
Culvert Discharging Onto Maximum Allowable
Velocity (f.p.s.)
Earth 6
Sod earth 8
Paved or riprap apron 15
Shale 10
Rock 15
(C) Generally, all culverts shall be designed with a free outfall, and the following head losses
shall govern the design of the culvert.
(i) Frictional head loss:
hf = SfL
Where,
Sf = Slope of frictional gradient in feet per foot; and
L = Length of culvert in feet
(ii) Head loss due to change in velocity:
hv = V2
2 - V1
2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/508
2g 2g
Where,
V2 = Velocity in culvert;
V1 = Velocity in channel upstream from culvert; and
g = Acceleration due to gravity
(iii) Head loss at upstream entrance to culvert due to entrance and change in section:
he = V2
2 - V1
2 where V1 is equal to or less than six
feet (6') per second.
2g 2g
he = V2
2 - .05 V1
2 where V1 is greater than six feet
(6') per second.
2g 2g
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.135), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.106 Water systems
Water systems, provided through the city or other service provider, shall have sufficient number of outlets and
shall be of sufficient size to furnish adequate domestic water, to furnish fire protection to all lots, and to conform
with the city's comprehensive master plan and in the extraterritorial jurisdiction to complement the city's
comprehensive master plan. The city shall make the final determination of the adequacy of water mains
proposed. All water system improvements shall be installed at the cost and expense of the subdivider.
(1) The minimum size of water main shall be six-inch (6") diameter and shall be looped. The
distribution system shall be gridironed with minimum size six-inch (6") diameter mains at intervals
not to exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200'). Where intervals between “cross-connecting”
mains must exceed one thousand two hundred feet (1,200') or where dead-ends must exist, eight inch
(8") diameter or larger mains shall be installed.
(2) In cul-de-sacs of less than three hundred feet (300') in length where a fire hydrant is not
required, flush valves shall be installed.
(3) Eight-inch (8") and larger mains shall be installed in all streets in zoning districts commonly
referred to as “commercial” or “industrial,” with minimum size eight-inch (8") intersecting mains
every six hundred feet (600'). Where dead-ends must exist, eight-inch (8") or larger mains shall be
installed with a flush valve or fire hydrant installed. The minimum limits set forth in the above shall
not be exceeded except upon the specific approval by the city, but in no event shall these
requirements be less than the minimum required by the state department of insurance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/508
(4) All water mains shall be constructed within street rights-of-way or easements dedicated to the
city.
(5) All water mains twelve inches (12") in diameter and smaller shall be polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
pipe or ductile iron pipe. Water mains larger than twelve-inch (12") may be constructed with either
reinforced concrete steel cylinder pipe, ductile iron pipe, or PVC.
(6) (A) The ductile iron pipe shall have a single rubber gasket joint, shall have a cement
mortar lining of the “Enameline” type, or approved equal, and shall have a minimum cover of
forty-two inches (42"). Water mains fourteen-inch (14") and larger may be either ductile iron
pipe, thickness class 50 minimum, with cement mortar lining; reinforced concrete steel cylinder
pipe, class 150 minimum; or PVC. Ductile iron pipe shall be required in all bores, in unstable
soil conditions (expansive clays, unstable subsoil), in or near creeks, or where lines must be
installed at shallow depths (less than 36").
(B) The ductile iron pipe shall be centrifugally cast in metal molds in accordance with the
latest edition of the applicable specifications of ANSI A21.5c (AWWA C151) and Federal
Specification WW-P-421c. The joint details shall be in accordance with the applicable
specifications of ANSI A21.11 (AWWA C111), latest edition. All ductile iron pipe shall be
polywrapped.
(7) (A) Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe shall be new, manufactured in the United States of
America, and shall conform to the current specifications of AWWA C900 or C909, PVC pipe,
with cast iron outside dimensions and with rubber ring joints. PVC water pipe shall be listed by
Underwriters' Laboratories and approved for use in cities and towns of Texas by the state
department of insurance. The rigid PVC pipe shall bear the seal of approval (or “NSF” mark) of
the National Sanitation Foundation Testing Laboratory for potable water pipe.
(B) Provisions must be made for contraction and expansion at each joint with a rubber ring
and an integral thickened bell as part of each joint. Pipe and fittings must be assembled with a
nontoxic lubricant. Pipe shall be made from NSF approved class 12454-A or B PVC compound
conforming to a minimum ASTM resin specification D-1784. PVC pipe shall be class 150 (DR
18) and meet the physical dimensions as shown on the following list.
Nominal Size Outside Diameter Class 150 (DR 18)
Nominal Wall
Thickness
6 6.90 0.406
8 9.05 0.533
10 11.10 0.654
12 13.20 0.777
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/508
(C) PVC pipe shall be designed for a minimum 150 psi water pressure, plus 35 psi surge
allowance. Service connections shall not be made by direct tapping for service lines; a brass
tapping saddle shall be used to tap service lines.
(8) (A) All pipes for water mains shall be placed on a six-inch (6") layer of crushed rock or
rounded gravel bedding material.
(B) The trench shall be backfilled with a minimum of six inches (6") of crushed stone or sand
sides and twelve inches (12") of crushed stone or sand over the top of the pipe and consolidated
to a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. This is basic–class “B” as defined by
ASCE Manual No. 37 and AWWA C900-75. Final backfill is to conform to section W.4.16.1, or
section W.4.16.2. The class “B” embedment material is further defined as follows:
(i) 95% of material passing 3/4" screen.
(ii) 95% of material retained on no. 4 screen.
(iii) Cushion sand acceptable by the city.
(C) Tracer tape, blue in color, similar to Terra Tape or an approved equal “D” Detectable, as
supplied by Griffolyn Co., Inc., Houston, Texas, shall be installed in the backfill material over
the top of all water mains in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
(9) Fittings shall be ductile iron with single rubber gasket joints and shall be cement-lined and
coated inside and out with a seal-coat of bituminous material, unless the pipe material is reinforced
concrete steel cylinder, in which case special fitting shall be furnished. All ductile iron fittings shall
conform to the applicable standards and specifications of ANSI, latest edition.
(10) (A) Gate valves shall conform to American Water Works Association Specification
C500, latest edition. Valves shall be designed for a minimum water working pressure [of] 150
pounds per square inch. Gate valves shall have a clear waterway equal to the full nominal
diameter of the valve and shall be opened by turning to the left. Each valve shall have the
maker's initials, pressure rating, and year in which manufactured cast in the body.
(B) All valves buried in the ground shall be provided with cast-iron valve boxes of proper
dimensions to fit over the valve bonnets and to extend to such elevation at or slightly above the
finished street grade or ground line, as approved by the city. Tops shall be complete with covers
and shall be adjustable. Valve boxes shall be set vertical and concentric with the valve stem.
Any valve box which has so moved from its original position as to prevent the application of
the valve key shall be satisfactorily reset by the developer at his own expense. A reinforced
concrete pad of the dimensions 2'-0" x 2'-0" x 6", shall be poured around all valve boxes, unless
otherwise directed by the city.
(11) Fire hydrants shall conform strictly to AWWA Standard Specifications for Fire Hydrants for
Ordinary Water Works Service, C502, latest edition, except for changes or additions specifically
outlined as follows:
(A) Fire hydrants shall be placed on block corners or near the center of the block to place all
of every lot within a radius of five hundred feet (500') in residential areas, but under no
circumstances shall a hose-lay of more than six hundred feet (600') be made from the fire
hydrant to cover all of every lot within the subdivision or tract under development.
(B) Fire hydrants shall be located in commercial and industrial areas so that all of every lot
shall be within a radius of three hundred feet (300'), but under no circumstances shall a hose-lay
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/508
of more than three hundred feet (300') be made in order to adequately afford fire protection to
the building or buildings.
(C) All fire hydrants shall have one (1) pumper nozzle and two (2) hose nozzles with the
city's standard threads, shall have a main barrel valve opening of not less than five inches (5"),
and shall be placed on connecting mains of not less than six inches (6") in diameter. Six-inch
(6") gate valves shall be placed on all fire hydrants leads.
(D) The bonnets of all fire hydrants shall be painted by the subdivider/developer in
accordance with the size of the water main in which the fire hydrant lead is attached.
(i) 6-inch main - Silver.
(ii) 8-inch main - Royal blue.
(iii) 10-inch main and larger - Standard yellow.
(E) The operating nut shall be designed to prevent seepage of rain or sleet and the
accumulation of dust around the revolving nut. The operating nut shall conform to the standards
now in use by the city. The hydrant valve shall open by turning to the left.
(F) The hydrant top or bonnet shall be free draining of a type that will maintain the operating
mechanism in readiness to use under freezing conditions. It shall be so designated [designed] as
to make tampering difficult and shall be provided with convenient means to afford lubrication
to insure ease of operation and the prevention of wear and corrosion.
(G) The body of the hydrant shall be equipped with a breakable flange, or breakable cast-iron
flange bolts, just above the grade line.
(H) All hydrants shall be of such design as will permit their extension without excavating in
case of future grade changes.
(I) The complete hydrant shall be of such design that when the hydrant barrel is broken
through traffic collision, it may be replaced without excavating or breaking the pavement. The
barrel and operating mechanism shall be so designed that in case of accident, damage or
breaking of the hydrant above or near the grade level, the main valve will remain reasonably
tight against leakage or flooding.
(J) Changes in shape or size of the waterway shall be accomplished by means of easy curves.
The junctions of hose or pumper nozzles with the barrel shall be rounded to ample radii.
Exclusive of the main valve opening, the net area of the waterway of the barrel and foot piece
of the smallest part shall be not less than 150 percent of that of the net opening of the main
valve.
(K) Hydrants shall be provided with an automatic and positively operating, non-corrodible
drain or drip valve so as to drain the hydrant completely when the main valve is shut. A drain
valve operating by springs or gravity is not acceptable.
(L) Operating stem whose threads are not located in the barrel or waterway shall be made of
genuine wrought iron or steel and shall be bronze bushed where passing through the stuffing
box. Operating threads must be sealed against contact with the water at all times regardless of
open or closed position of main valve. All operating stems shall be coupled opposite the break
flange with a breakable coupling or coupled in such a way as to part without breaking.
(M) Unless otherwise specified by the city, hydrants shall be furnished with “O” ring seals.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/508
(N) The hydrant head shall be constructed so that it may be rotated to face the nozzles in any
desired direction. The developer shall rotate the fire hydrant in such a direction to best serve the
city.
(O) Hydrants closing with the pressure must have a bronze cap nut to seal the bottom end of
stem threads against contact with water.
(P) If required by the city, the developer shall furnish drawings with complete detailed
dimensions of the hydrant proposed for the subdivision.
(Q) (i) Fire hydrants shall be placed at all locations shown in the plans. Each hydrant
shall be set upon a slab of stone or concrete not less than four inches (4") thick and less
than one (1) square foot of surface area. Where solid rock exists in the bottom of the
trench and same is excavated to the proper depth to form a foundation for the hydrant, the
slab of stone or concrete above specified may be omitted.
(ii) The hydrant shall be set perpendicular, and to the proper depth, and shall be
carefully and substantially blocked against firm trench walls using class 2,000 concrete as
herein specified.
(iii) There shall be placed around the base of the hydrant not less than seven (7) cubic
feet of sound broken stone or clean gravel, or other suitable material, to provide reservoir
capacity so that the hydrant will completely drain when closed.
(iv) If required, extensions shall be installed on fire hydrant barrels so that the fire
hydrant will be properly installed and exposed at finished grade.
(R) The above-mentioned fire hydrants in residential, commercial, and industrial tracts of
real estate located in the city shall be installed and operable prior to the erection of any building
in which combustible material is used as determined by the fire chief of the city.
(S) The owner of any commercial or industrial tract property contemplated for development
under this article on which fire hydrants and water mains are to be installed shall provide
easements to the city whereby the fire, police and water utilities departments of the city shall
have ready ingress and egress to, from, and across such property to any location on such
property when necessary to extinguish a fire or to prevent the occurrence of a fire or to
maintain, service and inspect such fire hydrants and water mains that may be installed or when
such access to and from said property is essential to the preservation of life or property.
(12) All pipe, fittings, valves, services, embedment materials, testing procedures, and other
facilities related to the water system improvements shall be furnished and installed in conformance
with the applicable specifications of ASTM, AWWA, and ANSI, latest editions.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.136), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.107 Wastewater systems
Wastewater facilities shall be furnished and installed to adequately service the subdivision and shall conform to
the city's wastewater plan. The adequacy of the wastewater facilities provided by the subdivider/developer shall
be determined by the city.
(1) Materials.
(A) Wastewater mains may be polyethylene-lined ductile iron pipe or PVC.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/508
(B) Wastewater mains 4 inches through 15 inches in diameter (PVC) pipe shall conform to
the specifications of ASTM D-3034, SDR 35 or SDR 26. Pipe in sizes greater than 15 inches in
diameter shall be type T-1 A and T-2 B as specified in ASTM designation F-679. Joints for the
PVC pipe and fittings shall be compression rubber gasket joints. The bell shall consist of an
integral wall section with factory-installed ring securely locked in bell groove to provide
positive seal under all installation conditions. Fittings and accessories shall be manufactured
and furnished by the pipe supplier, or approved equal, and shall have bell and/or spigot
configuration identical to that of the pipe.
(C) Connections shall be made with fabricated fittings. Field-glued connections are not
allowed. When PVC pipe passes through a manhole wall, sleeves with a rubber ring joining
shall be used to provide a positive watertight connection.
(D) The PVC pipe shall be placed on a six-inch (6") layer of crushed rock or rounded gravel
bedding material. The trench shall be backfilled with a minimum of six inches (6") of crushed
stone or sand on the sides and twelve inches (12") crushed stone or sand over the top of the pipe
and consolidated to a minimum of 95 percent standard proctor density. This is basic–class “B”
embedment as defined by ASCE Manual No. 37 and AWWA C900-75 and ASTM C-2321, with
five percent (5%) maximum Mandrell Test to be performed. Final backfill is to conform to
section S.4.17. The class “B” embedment material is further defined as follows:
(i) 195% [sic] of material passing 3/4" screen.
(ii) 95% of material retained on no. 4 screen.
(iii) Cushion sand acceptable to the city.
(E) The encasement, embedment, and backfill requirements for PVC pipe and ductile iron
pipe shall conform to the standard details and specifications of the city.
(2) Minimum size main. The minimum diameter of sewer mains shall be eight inches (8"). Sixinch
(6") diameter sewer mains may be acceptable only for short distances at dead-ends (not to
exceed 400 feet) and only in locations approved by the city. Cleanouts shall be installed on all deadend
sewer lines.
(3) Locations. Wherever possible, sewers shall be located in alleys or easements and shall be a
minimum of five feet (5') to six and one-half feet (6-1/2') deep to the invert.
(4) Alignment and grades. All sewers shall be laid in straight alignment with a uniform grade
between the manholes. Grades and appurtenances of sanitary sewers shall conform to the
requirements of the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), and the following are the
minimum slopes which shall be provided for a velocity of at least 2.0 feet per second; however,
slopes greater than these are desirable.
Sewer Pipe - Diameter Minimum Slope in
Feet per 100 Feet
4-inch (service mains) 1.000
6-inch 0.500
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/508
8-inch 0.330
10-inch 0.250
12-inch 0.200
15-inch 0.150
18-inch 0.110
21-inch 0.090
24-inch 0.080
27-inch 0.060
30-inch 0.055
36-inch 0.045
(5) Infiltration.
(A) Prior to the acceptance, the sewer pipe shall be subject to leakage tests. The leakage
outward or inward (exfiltration or infiltration) shall not exceed two hundred (200) gallons per
inch of the pipe diameter per mile per twenty-four (24) hours for any section of the system.
(B) Other testing procedures (exfiltration, air, etc.) may be used subject to the approval of the
city.
(C) Any developer or contractor causing infiltration or inflow into the city's system, either
knowingly or unknowingly, shall be required to pay all expenses incurred by the city due to said
infiltration or inflow as determined by the city manager.
(6) Lift stations. All lift stations shall be designed and constructed with two or more sewage
pumps, and the stations shall be capable of pumping the design maximum flow with the largest
pump-out of service. Detailed design data, plans, and specifications of the pumps shall be submitted
to the city manager prior to the purchase and installation of the pumps.
(7) Force mains.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/508
(A) All force mains shall be PVC or ductile iron pipe for wastewater mains. Adequate
provisions shall be made for the embedment of the pipe.
(B) At design for average flows, a cleansing velocity of at least two (2) feet per second shall
be maintained. Where necessary, automatic air relief valves shall be placed at high points in the
force main to prevent air locking.
(8) Manholes.
(A) Manholes shall be placed at points of change in alignment, grade, or size of sewer, the
intersection of sewers, and the end of all sanitary sewer mains that will be extended at a later
date. Manholes shall be precast reinforced concrete or fiberglass.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.137), adopted 8/9/04)
(B) Maximum manhole spacing for sewers with straight alignment and uniform grades
should be determined so as to assure continuous operation based on available cleaning
equipment. The maximum manhole spacing shall be as follows:
Minimum Design Standards
Sewer Pipe Size Manhole Diameters Maximum Distance
Between Manholes
6" 4'-0" 400 feet
8" 4'-0" 650 feet
10" 4'-0" 800 feet
12" 5'-0" 800 feet
15" 5'-0" 800 feet
18" 5'-0" 800 feet
21" 5'-0" 800 feet
24" 5'-0" 800 feet
30" 6'-0" 800 feet
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/508
36" 6'-0" 800 feet
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.137), adopted 8/9/04; Ordinance adopting Code)
(9) Cleanouts. Standard cleanouts shall be constructed at the ends of all sanitary sewers. A 2'-0" x
2'-0" x 6" reinforced concrete pad shall be placed around all cleanouts.
(10) All pipe, manholes, cleanouts, embedment materials, testing procedures, and other
improvements associated with the installation of the sanitary sewerage system improvements shall be
furnished and constructed in conformance with the applicable specifications of ASTM, ANSI, and
AWWA, latest editions.
(11) All manholes shall be equipped with a rainstopper installed between the lid and ring.
Rainstoppers shall be as manufactured by Southwestern Packing & Seals of Shreveport, Louisiana, or
an approved equal.
(12) Septic system. Lots to be served by septic systems shall have a minimum of 1 acre per LUE
and conform to the county and Texas Commission on Environmental Quality regulations based on
percolation tests. Septic systems serving more than one house, apartment, multifamily or commercial
or industrial site shall contain 1 acre for each LUE. As an example, a duplex is a multifamily home
with two living units (LUE) would be required to be located upon a minimum of three acres. The city
council may consider but is not required to reduce the acreage requirements herein if the nearest
wastewater line with capacity is more than 1000' from the property boundary.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.137), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.108 Utility services
(a) All services for utilities shall be made available for each lot in such a manner so as to eliminate the
necessity for disturbing the street and the alley pavement, curb, gutter, sidewalks, and drainage structures when
connections are made.
(b) The subdivider/developer shall provide separate service lines for water and wastewater to each lot or point
of metering.
(c) (1) All water service lines from the main to the meter shall be a minimum of one-inch (1")
polyethylene tubing in accordance with ASTM D-2239 and shall be installed as part of a single water
service group.
(2) The meters shall be located a minimum of two feet (2') behind the curb with cover at an
elevation to coincide with the final top of curb grade. The meter shall be centered in the meter vault,
which shall be plastic with a cast iron inspection cover.
(3) Water services shall be located ten feet (10') upstream of the center of the lot.
(d) (1) Sewer service lines shall have a minimum diameter of four inches (4"), shall meet the
same requirements for sanitary sewers described above, shall be constructed from the main to the lot
property line using wyes and necessary bends, and shall have a minimum cover at the property line of
four feet (4'), where possible.
(2) All sewer service locations shall be at least ten feet (10') downstream from the center of each
lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/508
(e) The subdivider/developer shall place a suitable marker at the point where said service lines are stubbed out
so that these lines can be easily located for connection by the city. Suitable markers shall be “W” for water and
“S” for sewer stamped in top of curb. Letters shall have a minimum height of two inches (2") and a minimum
width of two inches (2").
(f) The subdivider/developer shall make arrangements with all other appropriate utility companies for the
extension of their respective utility lines and service to and within the addition and for any costs or refunds of
such cost.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.138), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.109 Street lighting
(a) Street lighting shall conform to the latest edition of the Illuminating Engineering Society Handbook.
Round tapered standards with bracket arms shall be used, and lighting levels, as recommended, shall be provided
for very light traffic in residential areas, medium traffic on collector streets, and heavy traffic on thoroughfares.
In no instance shall the spacing between streetlights exceed four hundred (400) feet.
(b) Cost of installation of street lighting shall be borne by the subdivider/developer.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.139), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.110 Parks
A fee consistent with the city's current schedule of fees shall be paid to the city by the subdivider/developer to be
combined with other funds dedicated for the acquisition of parkland or recreational facilities. At its option, the
city council may accept land dedicated for parkland by the subdivider/developer in lieu of park fees if such land
conforms with the comprehensive master plan of the city. Minor preliminary plats (10 acres or less) are excluded
from park fees. The area of land to be dedicated shall be not less than 8 percent of the total area proposed within
the subdivision, inclusive of adjoining street rights-of-way. No more than 50 percent of a parkland dedication
may be within the 100-year frequency floodplain. The city reserves the right to refuse property within the 100-
year frequency floodplain and determine the appropriateness of the location of the parkland in conjunction with
the uses proposed on the property. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.140), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.111 Filing fees and charges
(a) Fees and charges shall be paid to the city manager when any plat is tendered to the planning and zoning
commission. Each of the fees and charges shall be paid in advance, and no action of the planning and zoning
commission or any other board or agency shall be valid until the fee or fees shall have been paid to the officer
designated therein.
(b) The city shall calculate the following basic fees and charges for plat review.
(1) Platting fees:
(A) Review and general discussion of concept plan (pre-application conference): $250.00.
(B) Preliminary plat: $500.00 plus $25.00 per lot.
(C) Final plat: $250.00 plus $25.00 per lot.
(2) Fees shall be charged on all preliminary and final plats, regardless of the action taken by the
city staff and the planning and zoning commission and whether the plat is approved or denied by the
city council and are nonrefundable.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/508
(3) (A) The subdivider shall be charged a capital improvement recovery (CIP) fee per lot
for payment of a proportionate share of capacity in all major facilities that the city has
previously constructed and/or will need to add to serve the additional lots. This impact fee will
cover such improvements as elevated and ground storage reservoirs, high service pumping
station, water supply and treatment facilities, major transmission mains, outfall sewer mains,
wastewater pumping stations, and wastewater treatment plants.
(B) The amount of the CIP fee shall be calculated by the city and shall be based upon current
construction costs for the development of the improvements. The developer shall pay for the
cost of all construction and material tests required or ordered by the city on his development.
(4) Before commencing construction, there shall be a fee paid to the city by the
subdivider/developer equal to two and one-half percent (2.5%) of the total cost for water, sanitary
sewer, paving, and drainage improvements. Said fee shall cover the cost of construction observation
and quality control required by the standard specifications and performed by outside laboratories.
After determination of the actual cost of said quality control paid to the outside laboratories by the
city, the difference, if any, between the two and one-half percent (2.5%) fee and the actual cost shall
be refunded to the subdivider/developer. If the actual cost exceeds the two and one-half percent
(2.5%) fee, no additional fee shall be paid by the subdivider/developer.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.141), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.112 Other requirements
(a) Sight barrier fence. Commercial and industrial areas shall be separated from adjoining properties
containing noncommercial or industrial uses by the erection of a sight barrier fence minimum of six feet (6') in
height constructed of materials to be determined by the city. This shall not apply between the property and a
street. Sight barriers authorized in the city zoning ordinance may be utilized to comply with this requirement.
The city council reserves the right to reduce the sight barrier requirements depending on the type of proposed
development and the adjoining uses. As vacant land may be developed as residential, sight barriers shall be
required as a buffer.
(b) Floodprone property. Any proposed plat containing a buildable lot with more than 50% of a single lot
within the 100-year floodplain or of such a size and dimension that the crossing of the floodplain through a
buildable lot causes the property to be unbuildable without modification of the floodplain shall be rejected
unless adequate infrastructure is also built to modify the floodplain. Such modifications to the floodplain will
require appropriate approval.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.142), adopted 8/9/04)
Secs. 10.02.113–10.02.160 Reserved
Division 4. Improvements
Sec. 10.02.161 Improvements
(a) Purpose. The provisions of this article, as set forth in this section, are designed and intended to insure that,
for all subdivisions of land within the jurisdiction of the city, all improvements as required herein are installed in
a timely manner in order that:
(1) The city can provide for the orderly and economical extension of public facilities and services.
(2) All purchasers of property within the subdivision shall have a usable, buildable parcel of land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/508
(3) All required improvements are constructed in accordance with the city standard details and
specifications.
(b) General policy.
(1) Upon approval of a final plat, amended plat or short form plat by the commission, and prior to
it being signed by the chairperson of the commission and the mayor of the city, and before said final
plat, amended plat or short form plat shall be allowed to be recorded in the plat records of the county,
the applicant requesting plat approval shall, within the time period for which the plat has been
conditionally approved by the city:
(A) Construct all improvements as required by this article, and provide a surety instrument
guaranteeing their maintenance as required herein; or
(B) Provide a surety instrument guaranteeing construction of all improvements required by
this article, and as provided for herein.
(2) In all instances, the original copy of the final plat, amended plat or short form plat, without
benefit of required signatures of city officials, shall be held in escrow by the city and shall not be
released for any purpose until such time as the conditions of this section are complied with.
(3) Upon the requirements of this section being satisfied, the final plat, amended plat or short form
plat shall be considered fully approved, except as otherwise provided for in this article, and the
original copy of the plat shall be signed by the appropriate city officials and city staff shall file said
plat in the plat records of the county.
(4) All improvements shall be designed and installed so as to provide for a logical system of
utilities, drainage and streets and to create continuity of improvements for the development of
adjacent properties. Water, wastewater, transportation and drainage improvements shall be extended
to the perimeter of the development, except that the commission is authorized to vary or modify the
requirement for extending water, wastewater, transportation and drainage improvements to the
perimeter of a subdivision in accordance with the procedural requirements contained in this article.
(c) Completion of improvements. Prior to the signing of the approved final plat, amended plat or short form
plat by the chairman of the commission and mayor of the City of Rockdale, the developer shall:
(1) Complete all improvements required by this article in accordance with the approved
construction plans and subject to the approval of the city engineer and acceptance by the city, except
as otherwise provided for in this article.
(2) Construct all sidewalks as shown on the approved construction plans and according to the city
standard details and specifications. Sidewalks must be constructed and approved for each lot prior to
issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(d) Alternative to completing improvements. The city may waive the requirement that the developer complete
all improvements required by this article prior to the signing of the approved plat, contingent upon securing from
the developer a guarantee, as provided for by this section, for completion of all required improvements,
including the city's cost for collecting the guaranteed funds and administering the completion of improvements,
in the event the developer defaults. The commission and council must be notified that this waiver was granted at
the time of preliminary plat approval or in the case of amended plats or short form plats upon notice and
approval. Such guarantee shall take one (1) of the following forms:
(1) Performance bond. The developer shall post a performance bond with the city, as set forth
herein, in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated construction costs for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/508
all remaining required improvements, using the standard city form. The performance bond must be
good for a minimum of eighteen (18) months.
(2) Escrow account. The developer shall deposit cash, or other instrument readily convertible into
cash at face value, either with the city, or in escrow with a bank or savings and loan institution. The
use of any instrument other than cash shall be subject to the approval of the city. The amount of the
deposit shall equal one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated construction costs for all
remaining required improvements. In the case of any escrow account, the developer shall file with the
city an agreement between the financial institution and the developer guaranteeing the following:
(A) That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in trust until released by the city and
may not be used or pledged by the developer as security in any other matter during that period.
(B) That in the case of a failure on the part of the developer to complete said improvements,
the financial institution shall immediately make the funds in said account available to the city
for use in the completion of those improvements.
Such escrow account agreement shall be prepared using the standard city form.
(3) Letter of credit. The developer shall provide a letter of credit from a bank or other reputable
institution or individual which is good for a minimum of eighteen (18) months. This letter shall be
submitted to the city and shall certify the following:
(A) That the creditor does guarantee funds equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
estimated construction costs for all remaining required improvements.
(B) That, in the case of failure on the part of the developer to complete the specified
improvements within the required time period, the creditor shall pay to the city immediately,
and without further action, such funds as are necessary to finance the completion of those
improvements, up to the limit of credit stated in the letter.
(C) That this letter of credit may not be withdrawn, or reduced in amount, until approved by
the city according to provisions of this article.
Such letter of credit shall be prepared using the standard city form. The city reserves the
right to reject any performance bond or letter of credit with or without cause.
(4) Cost estimates. A registered professional engineer licensed to practice in the State of Texas
shall furnish estimates of the costs of all required improvements to the city engineer who shall review
the estimates in order to determine the adequacy of the guarantee instrument for insuring the
construction of the required facilities. The city engineer may require adjustments of estimates if the
city engineer determines the estimate is too low.
(5) Surety acceptance. The bank, financial institution, insurer, person or entity providing any letter
of credit, bond or holding any escrow account, pursuant to this article, shall meet or exceed the
minimum requirements established by city ordinance and shall be subject to approval by the city.
(6) Sufficiency. Such surety shall comply with all statutory requirements and shall be satisfactory
to the city attorney as to form, sufficiency, and manner of execution as set forth in this article. All
such surety instruments shall be both a payment and performance guarantee.
(7) If the project is located in the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, and is subject to the
bonding requirements of the county for the construction of roadways, then that amount of money
shall be reduced from the amount required to be posted with the city, provided that the instrument is
transferable from the county to the city upon annexation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/508
(e) Time limit for completing improvements. The period within which required improvements must be
completed shall be incorporated in the surety instrument and shall not in any event, without prior approval of the
city, exceed one (1) year from date of final, amended or short form plat approval.
(1) The commission may, upon application of the developer and upon proof of hardship,
recommend to the council extension of the completion date set forth in such bond or other instrument
for a maximum period of one (1) additional year. Such hardship may include delays imposed due to
city projects. An application for extension shall be accompanied by an updated estimate of
construction costs prepared by a registered professional engineer, licensed to practice in the State of
Texas. A surety instrument for guaranteeing completion of remaining required improvements must be
filed in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the updated estimate of construction
costs as approved by the city engineer and must extend for six (6) months beyond the extension
period approved.
(2) The council may at any time during the period of such surety instrument accept a substitution
of principal sureties upon recommendation of the commission.
(f) Failure to complete improvements. Approval of all plats shall be deemed to have expired in subdivisions
for which no assurances for completion have been posted or the improvements have not been completed within
one (1) year of plat approval, unless otherwise approved by the city. In those cases where a surety instrument has
been required and improvements have not been completed within the terms of said surety instrument, the city
may declare the developer and/or surety to be in default and require that all the improvements be installed.
(g) Inspection and acceptance of improvements. The city engineer shall inspect all required improvements, to
insure compliance with city requirements and approved construction plans.
(1) When all required improvements have been satisfactorily completed, the city engineer shall
either:
(A) Accept, in writing, the improvements as having been satisfactorily completed; or
(B) Issue a punch list to the developer denoting items remaining to be completed.
(2) The city engineer shall have ten (10) working days to complete this inspection upon
notification by the developer.
(3) The city engineer shall issue the report within ten (10) working days of the date of inspection.
(4) The city shall not accept dedications of required improvements nor release or reduce a
performance bond or other assurance, until such time as it determines that:
(A) All improvements have been satisfactorily completed.
(B) Five (5) copies of as-built plans or record drawings have been submitted to and approved
by the city engineer, along with a statement prepared by a licensed professional engineer that all
improvements have been installed and constructed in accordance with the submitted as-built
plans.
(C) Copies of all inspection reports, shop drawings and certified test results of construction
materials have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer.
(D) Diskette(s) containing computed-generated drawings of all public improvements shown
on the construction plans have been submitted to the city engineer to update city record
drawings.
(E) The required maintenance guarantee has been provided.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/508
(F) Any and all other requirements identified in the platting process have been satisfied.
(h) Reduction or release of improvement surety instrument.
(1) A surety instrument may be reduced with the approval of the city engineer, and the
treasurer/director of finance, upon actual construction of required improvements by a ratio that the
improvement bears to the total public improvements required for the subdivision, as determined by
the city engineer.
(2) Before the city shall reduce said surety instrument, the developer shall provide a new surety
instrument in an amount equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the estimated cost of the
remaining required improvements, and such new surety instrument shall comply with this article.
(3) The substitution of a new surety instrument shall in no way change or modify the terms and
conditions of the performance surety instrument or the obligation of the developer as specified in the
performance surety instrument.
(4) In no event shall a surety instrument be reduced below ten percent (10%) of the principal
amount of the original estimated total costs of improvements for which surety was given, prior to
completion of all required improvements.
(5) The city shall not release a surety instrument unless and until all the conditions of this article
have been met.
(i) Maintenance bond required.
(1) Before the release of any surety instrument guaranteeing the construction of required
subdivision improvements or the signing of the final, amended or short form plat where subdivision
improvements were made prior to the filing of the plat for recordation, the developer shall furnish the
city with a maintenance bond or other surety to assure the quality of materials and workmanship, and
maintenance of all required improvements including the city's costs for collecting the guaranteed
funds and administering the correction and/or replacement of covered improvements in the event the
developer defaults.
(2) The maintenance bond or other surety instrument shall be satisfactory to the city attorney as to
form, sufficiency, and manner of execution.
(3) Said bond or other instrument shall be in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the cost of
improvements verified by the city engineer and shall run for a period of one (1) calendar year
measured from the date of release of the performance surety instrument, or signing and recording of
the final plat whichever is later.
(4) In an instance where a maintenance bond or other surety instrument has been posted and a
defect or failure of any required improvement occurs within the period of coverage, the city may
declare said bond or surety instrument to be in default and require that the improvements be repaired
or replaced.
(5) Whenever a defect or failure of any required improvement occurs within the period of
coverage, the city shall require that a new maintenance bond or surety instrument be posted for a
period of one (1) full calendar year sufficient to cover the corrected defect or failure.
(j) Plans for improvements. Plans for the improvements required by this article shall be prepared, reviewed
and approved in accordance with the provisions set forth in this article.
(k) Acceptance of improvements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/508
(1) During the course of installation and construction of the required improvements, the city
engineer or his/her designated representative shall make periodic inspections of the work to insure
that all improvements comply with city requirements.
(2) Upon completion of all required improvements, the developer may seek acceptance of all
public improvements by the city by following the procedures set forth in the applicable sections of
this article.
(l) Maintenance of improvements. Where a subdivision contains drainage, transportation, water or wastewater
improvements, parks and grounds held in common, or other physical facilities necessary or desirable for the
welfare of the area, or that are of common use or benefit which will not be, or cannot be, satisfactorily
maintained by an existing public agency, provision shall be made which is acceptable to the city council for the
proper and continuous operation, maintenance, and supervision of such facilities. Drainage facilities may be
required to be maintained by a property owners' association or the property owners. A copy of the agreements
providing for the proper and continuous operation, maintenance and supervision of such facilities shall be
presented to and approved by the council, and approved as to form by the city attorney, at the time of final
platting and shall be filed of record with the plat thereof.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.151), adopted 8/9/04)
Secs. 10.02.162–10.02.200 Reserved
Division 5. Administration
Sec. 10.02.201 Generally
For all development of land within the scope of this article, a plan of the development shall be prepared and
submitted to the city for approval or disapproval, as provided for in this article.
(1) City responsibilities. The city shall administer the provisions of this article and in furtherance
of such authority, the city shall:
(A) Maintain permanent and current records with respect to this article, including
amendments thereto.
(B) Receive and file all preliminary plats, construction plans, and final plats together with
applications therefor.
(C) Forward copies of the preliminary plat, construction plans, and final plat to the county,
when the development is located within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(D) Review all preliminary plats, construction plans, amended plats, short form plats and
final plats to determine whether such plats comply with this article, the master plan, applicable
laws, and the zoning ordinance, where applicable.
(E) Forward plans and plats to the commission as required by this article, together with its
recommendations thereon.
(F) If required, forward plans and plats to the council, together with the recommendations of
the commission and city staff.
(G) Make such other determinations and decisions as may be required of the city by this
article, the commission or the council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/508
(2) Interpretation of provisions. In the interpretation and application of the provisions of this
article, the following regulations shall govern:
(A) In the city's interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be regarded
as minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience,
prosperity and welfare. This article shall be regarded as remedial and shall be liberally
construed to further its underlying purposes.
(B) Whenever both a provision of this article and any other provision of this article, or any
provision in any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind contains any
restrictions covering any of the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive
or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
(C) Where there arises a question concerning the meaning or intent of a provision of this
article, the city is hereby implored to render a written decision setting forth the exact manner in
which said provision shall be interpreted and administered. In the event exception is taken by
any interested party to such a decision the matter shall be appealed to the commission, and, as
appropriate, to the city council, whose decision shall be final.
(D) Any written decision shall be attached to and made a part of this article, until rescinded
by amendment of this article as provided for herein.
(E) The terms, provisions and conditions of this article shall be interpreted and applied in a
manner consistent with chapter 212, Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code, and, particularly as to property
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.161), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.202 Variances
A variance to the provisions of this article shall be considered an exception to the regulations, rather than a right.
Whenever a tract to be developed is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by development of such
unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in this article would result in
substantial hardship or inequity, the commission may vary or modify, except as otherwise indicated, such
requirement of design as provided for herein, but not of procedure or improvements, so that the developer may
improve his/her property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interests of
the city are protected and the general intent and spirit of this article, the master plan and zoning ordinance are
preserved in accordance with the following provisions:
(1) Jurisdiction. When a written request for a variance from the design requirements of this article
is filed:
(A) The commission may approve such written request for variances to the design standards
and such variance(s), if granted, shall also be considered to be a modification of the zoning
regulations, but not the zoning districts, applicable to the specified property within such
development within the city limits; or
(B) Would constitute a major departure from the applicable provisions of this article for such
features as: lot size, setback lines, etc., such variance request shall be considered by the council
in accordance with its powers and procedures as set forth in the zoning ordinance, and their
decision shall be final; and
(C) After giving notice of such requested variances, the commission may consider each such
variance request during the course and process of considering the application for subdivision
plat approval given or granted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/508
(2) Notification. The notification procedures for variance requests shall be the same as the
notification procedures described for a preliminary plan.
(3) Approval. In granting approval of a request for variance, the commission and council shall
conclude that the variance is not contrary to the public interest and, due to special conditions, and so
that the variance observes the spirit of this article and concludes that substantial justice is done.
Variance must be noted on the final plat. Variances shall not modify zoning requirements unless also
granted a zoning variance or as an approved development agreement. The commission and council
shall meet these requirements by making findings that:
(A) The public convenience and welfare will be substantially served;
(B) The appropriate use of surrounding property will not be substantially or permanently
impaired or diminished;
(C) The hardship from which relief is sought is not solely of an economic nature; and
(D) In granting the variance the spirit of this article is observed and substantial justice is
done.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.162), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.203 Conditions for issuing a building permit
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing
structure, on any lot or tract of land and no municipal utility service will be furnished to such lot or tract which
does not comply with the provisions of this article and all applicable elements of the master plan, except as
herein exempted or upon the written application and approval of a variance. Building plans shall not include
portions of building within the 100-year floodplain. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.163), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.204 Fees
To defray the costs of administering this article, the applicant seeking plat approvals shall pay to the city, at the
time of submittal, the prescribed fees as set forth in the current administrative fee schedule approved by the
council, and on file in the office of the city, together with all engineering and other professional fees and
expenses incurred by the city for and with respect to such application and plat. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A
(9.164), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.205 Amendments
The council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and regulations for the administration
of this article. This article may be enlarged or amended by the council after public hearing, due notice of which
shall be given as required by law. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.165), adopted 8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.206 Violations
Except as otherwise provided for in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
develop, improve or sell any lot, parcel, tract or block of land within the city's territorial jurisdiction for other
than agricultural purposes, regardless of the size or shape of said lot, parcel, tract or block, unless such lot,
parcel, tract or block of land conforms with this article. (Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.166), adopted
8/9/04)
Sec. 10.02.207 Enforcement
(a) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article, or shall fail to comply
therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits shall be deemed guilty of an offense and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/508
shall be liable for a fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2000.00). Each day the violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein.
(b) Administrative action. The city engineer and/or the city manager shall enforce this article by appropriate
administrative action, including but not limited to the rejection of plans, maps, plats and specifications not found
to be in compliance with this article and good engineering practices, and the issuance of stop work orders.
(c) Court proceedings. Upon the request of the city council, the city attorney or other authorized attorney shall
file an action in the district courts to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this article, or to obtain
declaratory judgment, and to seek and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or to recover damages in an
amount sufficient for the city to undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring about compliance
with a requirement regarding the property and established pursuant to this article.
(Ordinance 2004-08-09 (6), ex. A (9.167), adopted 8/9/04)
CHAPTER 11
TAXATION
ARTICLE 11.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
(Reserved)
ARTICLE 11.02 PROPERTY TAX†
Sec. 11.02.001 Penalty to defray costs of collection of delinquent taxes
Ad valorem taxes that remain delinquent on July 1 of the year in which they become delinquent shall incur an
additional penalty to defray costs of collection, said penalty to be in the amount of fifteen percent (15%) of the
amount of taxes, penalty and interest due the city, which fee shall be an authorized collection expense. (1996
Code, art. 1.400)
State law references–Contract with attorney for collection of taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 6.30; imposition of penalty for collection
of delinquent taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, secs. 33.01, 33.07, 33.08.
Sec. 11.02.002 Residence homestead exemption for elderly and disabled
(a) Definitions. For purposes of this section:
Disabled. Under a disability for purposes of payment of disability insurance benefits under Federal Old-Age,
Survivors, and Disability Insurance.
Qualifying trust. A trust:
(1) In which the agreement, will, or court order creating the trust, an instrument transferring
property to the trust, or any other agreement that is binding on the trustee provides that the trustor of
the trust or a beneficiary of the trust has the right to use and occupy as the trustor's or beneficiary's
principal residence residential property rent free and without charge except for taxes and other costs
and expenses specified in the instrument or court order:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/508
(A) For life;
(B) For the lesser of life or a term of years; or
(C) Until the date the trust is revoked or terminated by an instrument or court order that
describes the property with sufficient certainty to identify it and is recorded in the real property
records of the county in which the property is located; and
(2) That acquires the property in an instrument of title or under a court order that:
(A) Describes the property with sufficient certainty to identify it and the interest acquired;
and
(B) Is recorded in the real property records of the county in which the property is located.
Residence homestead. A structure (including a mobile home) or a separately secured and occupied portion of a
structure (together with the land, not to exceed 20 acres, and improvements used in the residential occupancy of
the structure, if the structure and the land and improvements have identical ownership) that:
(1) Is owned by one or more individuals, either directly or through a beneficial interest in a
qualifying trust;
(2) Is designed or adapted for human residence;
(3) Is used as a residence; and
(4) Is occupied as the individual's principal residence by an owner, by an owner's surviving spouse
who has a life estate in the property, or, for property owned through a beneficial interest in a
qualifying trust, by a trustor or beneficiary of the trust who qualifies for the exemption.
Trustor. A person who transfers an interest in real or personal property to a qualifying trust, whether during the
person's lifetime or at death, or the person's spouse.
(b) Exemption adopted. As authorized by Texas Tax Code sections 11.13(d) and (e), the city council hereby
adopts an allowance of a $5,000.00 homestead exemption from ad valorem taxes for city property owners sixtyfive
(65) years of age and over or for those adult property owners who are disabled. An eligible disabled person
who is sixty-five (65) years of age or over may not receive the homestead exemption for both qualifying as “65
or over” and “disabled,” but may choose either. Each person desiring such exemption shall file an application
with the county appraisal district, such application being in a form and filed at such time as shall be required by
law.
(Ordinance 2016-04-11(8B) adopted 4/11/16)
State law reference–Residence homestead exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.13.
Sec. 11.02.003 Exemption for charitable organizations
The city adopts a tax exemption status for charitable organizations. An organization claiming exempt status must
obtain certification from the state comptroller declaring it eligible. (Ordinance 06-10-02 adopted 7/8/02;
Ordinance adopting Code)
State law reference–Tax exemption for charitable organizations, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.18.
Sec. 11.02.004 Freeport goods
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/508
In accordance with article VIII, section 1-j(b) of the Texas Constitution, the city does hereby rescind any and all
prior action to tax freeport goods. The city does further exercise its authority under Texas Constitution article
VIII, section 1-j(b) and exempts all tangible personal property that would otherwise be taxable under article
VIII, section 1-j(b) of the Texas Constitution and section 11.251 of the Texas Tax Code. The city does hereby
make the tax-exempt status of freeport goods effective as of August 19, 2013. (Ordinance 2013-08-19(5A)
adopted 8/19/13)
State law reference–Tangible personal property (freeport goods) tax exemptions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.251.
Sec. 11.02.005 Goods in transit
Goods in transit, as defined in Texas Tax Code section 11.253(a)(2), as amended by senate bill 1, enacted by the
82nd Texas Legislature in special session, shall be exempt from property taxation by the city. (Resolution
R2013-08-05(5) adopted 8/5/13)
State law reference–Tax exemption for goods in transit, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 11.253.
ARTICLE 11.03 SALES AND USE TAX*
Sec. 11.03.001 Adopted
A local sales tax of one percent (1%) was adopted by the voters of the city at an election held on April 6, 1968.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.201)
Sec. 11.03.002 Development district tax
(a) Dissolution of existing district. It is declared that the existing Rockdale Municipal Development District is
hereby dissolved and its sales and use tax at the rate of one-half of one percent is hereby terminated as of
midnight on September 30, 2010.
(b) Creation of new district.
(1) It is declared that the new Rockdale Municipal Development District and the imposition of a
sales and use tax at a rate one-half of one percent for the purpose of financing development projects
[of] benefit to the district are hereby established as of 12:01 on October 1, 2010.
(2) It is further declared that the boundaries of the Rockdale Municipal Development District shall
contain all of the city and all of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, both as of the date of the
election and conforming automatically over time to any future changes in the boundaries of the city
and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, so that the entirety of such area is contained within and
creates the boundaries of such district.
(Ordinance 2010-09-13 adopted 9/13/10)
Sec. 11.03.003 Tax on sale of gas and electricity for residential use
(a) The tax heretofore imposed by the city pursuant to the provisions of the Local Sales and Use Tax Act is
hereby continued on the sale, production, distribution, lease, or rental of and the use, storage or other
consumption of gas and electricity for residential use.
(b) The sale, production, distribution, lease or rental of and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and
electricity for residential use shall not be exempt from the tax imposed by the city under the Local Sales and Use
Tax Act.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.202)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/508
State law reference–Authority of municipality to impose tax on sales of gas and electricity, V.T.C.A., Tax Code, sec. 321.105.
ARTICLE 11.04 HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 11.04.001 Definitions
The following words, terms and phrases are, for the purpose of this article, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning, defined as follows:
Consideration. The cost of the room, sleeping space, bed, or other facility in such hotel, and shall not include the
cost of any food served or personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning
and readying of such room, sleeping space, bed or other facility for occupancy.
Hotel. Any building or buildings, trailers or other facilities in which the public may, for a consideration, obtain
sleeping accommodations. The term shall include hotels, motels, tourist homes, houses or courts, lodging
houses, and inns, but “hotel” shall not be defined so as to include hospitals, sanitariums or nursing homes.
Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to use or possession, of any room or rooms, sleeping space, bed
or other facility in a hotel for any purpose.
Occupant. Anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has a right to use or possess any room or rooms,
sleeping space, bed or other facility in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license,
contract, or agreement.
Permanent resident. Any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or rooms or
sleeping space or other facility in a hotel for at least thirty (30) consecutive days during the current calendar year
or preceding year.
Person. Any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any
hotel.
Quarterly period. The regular calendar quarters of the year, the first quarter being composed of the months of
January, February, and March; the second quarter being the months of April, May, and June; the third quarter
being the months of July, August, and September; and the fourth quarter being the months of October,
November and December.
Tax collector. The tax collector-assessor of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.601)
Sec. 11.04.002 Levy; rate; exceptions
(a) There is hereby levied a tax of seven percent (7.0%) of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person
who, under a lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or
possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is in a hotel where such cost of occupancy is at
the rate of seven percent (7.0%) of the price of a room. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost
of food served by the hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those
services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for possession. (Ordinance 2012-12-19(6A) adopted
12/19/12)
(b) Exceptions are as follows:
(1) There shall be no tax imposed upon a permanent resident as defined herein.
(2) No tax shall be imposed for federal or state employees traveling on official business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/508
(1996 Code, sec. 1.602)
Sec. 11.04.003 Collection
Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel located in the city or within its
extraterritorial jurisdiction shall collect the tax imposed in section 11.04.002 herein for the city. (1996 Code, sec.
1.603)
Sec. 11.04.004 Reports
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period (beginning the last day of the month following the
second quarterly period of calendar year 1993), every person required to collect the tax imposed hereby shall file
a report with the tax collector showing the consideration paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter,
the amount of tax collected on the city's behalf on such occupancies, and any other information as the tax
collector may reasonably require. Every person required to collect the tax shall also file a copy of the quarterly
report filed with the state comptroller in connection with the state hotel occupancy tax. (1996 Code, sec. 1.604)
Sec. 11.04.005 Rules and regulations; access to records
The tax collector shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are necessary to effectively collect
the tax levied herein, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him
to determine the correctness of any report filed as required by this article and the amount of taxes due under the
provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 1.605)
Sec. 11.04.006 Violations; criminal penalty
If any person required by the provisions of this article to collect the tax imposed herein, make reports as required
herein, and pay to the tax collector the tax imposed herein shall fail to collect such tax, shall fail to file such
report, or shall fail to pay such tax, or if such person shall file a false report, such person shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in accordance with the general penalty
provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code, and each twenty-four (24) hours of any such violation shall
constitute a separate offense. (Ordinance 12-08-03-1, sec. 3, adopted 1/12/04)
Sec. 11.04.007 Penalty and interest on delinquent taxes; enforcement actions
(a) Any person who shall fail to file a report as required herein or who shall fail to pay the tax as imposed
herein when said report or payment is due shall forfeit five percent (5%) of the amount due as a penalty. In the
event any such past due tax is not paid within thirty (30) days after the due date, the person shall forfeit an
additional five percent (5%) of such tax. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per
annum beginning sixty (60) days from the date such taxes were due and payable.
(b) The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person who has failed to file a
report, filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax as required herein:
(1) Bring suit pursuant to section 351.004, Texas Tax Code, against the person who is required to
collect the tax or file a report as required herein to collect the tax not paid, to enjoin the person from
operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed, as applicable, to ask the court to
assess a penalty equal to 15 percent of the total amount of the tax owed, and/or to [ask] the court to
award reasonable attorney's fees; or
(2) Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under state law.
(c) Remedies provided in this article for violations of this article are in addition to other available remedies.
(Ordinance 12-08-03-1, sec. 4, adopted 1/12/04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/508
Sec. 11.04.008 Use of revenue
(a) The revenue derived from any hotel occupancy tax imposed and levied by this article may be used only to
promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that use is limited to the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing,
operation, and maintenance of convention or civic center facilities (as such is defined in V.A.T.S. Tax
Code, section 351.001);
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention
delegates or registrants;
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and
convention delegates or registrants to the municipality or its vicinity;
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including
instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art, creative writing, architecture, design and allied
fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television, tape
and sound recordings, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and
exhibition of these major art forms; and
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting
solicitations and promotional programs to encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit
preserved historic sites or museums which are located in the municipality or its vicinity that would be
frequented by tourists, convention delegates, or other visitors to the municipality.
(b) Revenue derived from the hotel occupancy tax shall be expended only in a manner which directly
enhances and promotes tourism and the convention and hotel industry as hereinbefore delineated. Such revenue
shall not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the municipality which
are not directly related to promoting the hotel and convention industry or tourism in the municipality.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.608)
Sec. 11.04.009 Contract for management of funded programs and activities
(a) The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private
organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel
occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual budget of the entity to which it
delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least
annually listing the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the municipality.
(b) The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the municipality from the tax in a separate account
established for that purpose and may not commingle that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any
other account.
(c) The municipality may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its
convention and visitors programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by
contract as provided herein.
(d) The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated
creates a fiduciary duty in the person or entity with respect to the revenue provided by the municipality to the
person or entity under the contract.
(e) A person or entity with whom the municipality contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain
complete and accurate financial records of each expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/508
or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records available for inspection and
review.
(f) Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel
expenses, and other administrative costs only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion
and servicing of expenditures hereinbefore authorized. The portion of the total administrative costs for activities
for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed the administrative costs actually incurred in
conducting the authorized activities.
(g) Hotel occupancy tax revenue may not be spent for travel for a person to attend an event or conduct an
activity the primary purpose of which is not directly related to the promotion of the person's job in an efficient
and professional manner.
(1996 Code, sec. 1.609)
Sec. 11.04.010 Effective date
The hotel occupancy tax authorized herein shall become effective commencing on the first day of the month
following the date upon which this article has been adopted and enacted by the city. (1996 Code, sec. 1.610)
ARTICLE 11.05 TAX ABATEMENT GUIDELINES*
Sec. 11.05.001 Purpose and objective
The city is committed to the promotion of economic development and to an ongoing improvement in the quality
of life for its residents. Insofar as these objectives are generally served by the enhancement and expansion of the
local economy, the city will, on a case-by-case basis, give consideration to providing tax abatement incentives as
a stimulant for economic development. It is the policy of the city that said consideration would be provided in
accordance with the criteria outlined in this document and as required by state law. However, nothing herein
shall imply or suggest that the city is under any obligation to provide any incentive to any applicant. All
applicants shall be considered on a case-by-case basis.
Sec. 11.05.002 Criteria for tax abatement incentives
(a) The following criteria shall be used to determine whether any tax abatement incentives shall be granted to
any proposed project, development and/or redevelopment (“project”):
(1) The project does not include property that is owned or leased by a member of the city council
or planning and zoning commission; provided, however, that if the property owner's property is
subject to a tax abatement agreement when the owner becomes a member of the city council or
planning and zoning commission, the property owner would not lose the benefit of the tax abatement
agreement due to the person's new membership on the city council or planning and zoning
commission.
(2) The project conforms to all the requirements of the city ordinances and regulations.
(3) The project is within a reinvestment zone.
(b) Additional criteria to be considered for any project:
(1) The project involves a minimum increase in property value of $50,000.00.
(2) The project makes a substantial contribution to redevelopment efforts or special area plans by
enhancing either functional or visual characteristics, i.e., parking, circulation, facades, materials,
signs, historic structures, etc.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/508
(3) The project has high visibility, image impact, or is of a significantly higher level of
development quality.
(4) The project is an area which might not otherwise be developed because of constraints of
topography, ownership patterns, site configuration, etc.
(5) The project can serve as a prototype and catalyst for other development of a higher standard.
(6) The project stimulates concentrations of employment and/or commercial activity.
(7) The project generates greater employment than would otherwise be achieved, i.e.
commercial/industrial vs. residential or manufacturing vs. warehouse.
Sec. 11.05.003 Guidelines
The following guidelines shall be used when considering tax abatement:
Category I Dollar Value of Improvement Points
Objective
Criterion
$50,000.00–$100,000.00 3
$101,000.00–$250,000.00 6
$251,000.00–1,000,000.00 9
>$1,000,000.00 12
Category II
Number of Jobs Created or
Retained
(that would not otherwise be
created or retained)
Points
Objective
Criterion
1–5 3
6–15 6
16–30 9
>31 12
Category III Positive Impact on the Points
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/508
Community
Subjective
Criterion
No significant Positive Impact 0
Desirable Positive Impact 6
Exceptional Positive Impact 12
Total Points Awarded:
Schedule Sum of Points Years of Abatement % Abatement
<6 None None
6–9 2 40%
12–15 2 50%
18–21 2 60%
24–27 3 80%
30 4 80%
36 5 80%
Sec. 11.05.004 Application procedures
(a) Any person, business or corporation desiring that the city provide tax abatement incentives to encourage
their location or expansion of operations within the city shall be required to comply with the following
application procedures. However, nothing within these guidelines shall imply or suggest that the city is under
any obligation to provide an incentive to any applicant. All applications shall be on an application form
approved by the city manager. The application shall be accompanied by a plat showing the location of the
project, a complete legal description of the property where the project will be located, a brief description of the
project including the estimated cost, type of business operation proposed and type of jobs that may be created,
expected source of labor, and either a current financial statement (if currently in business) or a proposed
financial statement (if a start-up), together with any additional information that may be requested by the city
manager.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/508
(b) Once the application has been received, the information submitted will be reviewed by the city staff and
the city's municipal development district (MDD) staff for completeness and accuracy. Additional information
may be requested from city staff or the MDD, as needed. Following this review, copies of the complete
application package and all departmental and MDD staff comments will be provided to the city council and the
MDD board of directors and to other taxing entities that may be willing to participate in offering tax abatement
incentives. The city's municipal development district board of directors may make a recommendation on
awarding or denying the tax abatement request.
(c) At a city council meeting, the application for any tax abatement incentives may be considered. The city
will comply with certain public notice and hearings that are required as mandated by state law prior to the
execution of a tax abatement agreement.
(d) Should the city council determine that it is in the best interest of the city to provide tax abatement
incentives to a particular applicant, a resolution shall be adopted declaring that under the guidelines and criteria
established herein, the applicant is eligible for tax abatement and that the mayor and/or city manager are
authorized to negotiate and execute a contract with the applicant enumerating the type of incentives and
governing any conditions applicable to it. Any agreement so adopted must include at least the following specific
items:
(1) Description of the type of tax abatement to be provided and its duration;
(2) Legal description of the property to be designated as a reinvestment zone;
(3) Detailed information regarding the type, number, location, costs and timetable of the project;
(4) A statement granting the access to and inspection of the property and proposed improvements
by city inspectors and officials to ensure that the improvements or repairs are made according to
specifications and conditions of the agreements;
(5) A statement limiting the uses of the property consistent with the general purpose of
encouraging development or redevelopment of the zone during the period that property tax
exemptions are in effect;
(6) Any specific terms and conditions to be met by applicant; and
(7) A statement providing for the recapturing of property tax revenue lost as a result of the
agreement if the owner of the property failed to make the improvements or repairs as provided by the
agreement. As a general rule, the company must be in continuous operation for the period of the
abatement and an additional term thereafter equal to the term of the abatement.
(e) It is the intention of the city to establish a tax abatement policy and negotiate agreements which are legally
subject to being adopted under the laws of the state. Should any provision of this plan or any agreements made
hereunder be determined to be in conflict with statutes and laws of this state, such state laws shall be controlling.
(f) No promise, condition, representation or warranty, express or implied, not set forth in the agreement shall
be binding. None of the terms and conditions of the agreement may be changed, modified, waived or cancelled
except by a writing signed by all of the parties who signed the original agreement.
(g) The applicant/owner of the project subject to tax incentives shall certify annually to the city council that
the applicant/owner is in full compliance with each applicable term of the agreement. At a minimum, the
certification shall include a statement that the improvements have been completed and the initial value of the
project meets the requirements of the agreement. The city and its agents shall have the right of entry to verify the
annual certification. The applicant/owner shall provide access to the records, files and other information for such
an inspection during normal business hours.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/508
Sec. 11.05.005 Recapture
(a) A recapture of abated taxes will occur of a condition of default occurs at any time prior to the end of the
term of the agreement.
(b) A default under the agreement occurs when any obligation of the applicant/owner to the agreement is not
fulfilled in strict accordance with the terms thereof, including (by way of example and not limitation) failure to
employ the requisite number of jobs within the time allowed by the agreement.
(c) A default under the agreement occurs if it is determined by the city or any other abating entity that such tax
abatement was obtained through fraud.
(d) A default also occurs if the applicant/owner is in default in the payment of unabated taxes to any taxing
jurisdiction within the reinvestment zone, regardless of whether that entity is an abating entity.
(e) A default also occurs if any portion of the property involved with the project is disposed of by any means
or in any manner without replacement of equivalent value. The term disposition includes, as example and not
limitation, sale, theft, abandonment, obsolescence due to lack of repair (but not functional obsolescence),
destruction by casualty without replacement, or any other cessation of use.
(f) No default shall be actionable until the applicant/owner has received written notice from the city or other
abating entity of the alleged default and the same has not been cured within thirty (30) days following such
written notice.
(g) Termination of the agreement and the resulting recapture shall be retroactive to the effective date of the
agreement.
(h) Termination of the agreement shall be effected by resolution, after notice and public hearing. Written
notice of a final resolution terminating the agreement shall be given to the business/applicant/owner. There is no
administrative appeal from such determination.
(i) On termination, the business/applicant/owner shall then become liable for the payment of all taxes that
would otherwise have become due, but for the tax abatement agreement for all the years during which the
agreement was in effect. Said taxes shall be paid to each entity abating such taxes within sixty (60) days
following such notice of termination. If the taxes are not paid as required or if it is determined that the tax
abatement was obtained through fraud, then all such taxes due shall include any statutory penalty and interest
from the date they would have otherwise become delinquent but for the agreement, until the date they are
actually paid.
(j) A partial recapture of taxes may take place if the business/owner/applicant does not fulfill all of the terms
of the agreement but does accomplish the agreement to an extent that would have qualified it for a lesser
abatement.
Sec. 11.05.006 Term and amendments to these guidelines and criteria
The guidelines and criteria adopted herein shall be effective for two years from the date of adoption and shall not
be amended or repealed except by three-fourths (3/4th) vote of the city council.
(Ordinance 2013-02-11(6B) adopted 2/11/13)
CHAPTER 12
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/508
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES
ARTICLE 12.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 12.01.001 State traffic code adopted
The city council hereby adopts the Texas Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways, known as article 6701d
of Vernon's Texas Civil Statutes, as heretofore and hereafter amended, and ordains that such act shall be in full
force and effect upon all streets, roads, alleys and thoroughfares within the city. (1996 Code, art. 10.100)
Editor's note–Since adoption of this provision, the regulations contained in the Uniform Act Regulating Traffic on Highways
(V.T.C.S., article 6701d) have been recodified and are now located in V.T.C.A., Transportation Code.
Sec. 12.01.002 Street name changes
Ordinances redesignating the names of streets or parts of streets are on file in the city secretary's office. Such
ordinances are specifically saved from repeal upon adoption of the Code of Ordinances. (Ordinance adopting
Code)
ARTICLE 12.02 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES†
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.02.001 State manual adopted
All traffic-control devices, including signs, signals, and markings on pavement and curbs, used for the purpose
of directing and controlling traffic within the city shall conform with the Texas Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways, Volumes I and II. All traffic-control devices so erected shall be
official traffic-control devices of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 10.201)
State law reference–Adoption of sign manual and specifications, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.001.
Sec. 12.02.002 Obedience; enforcement if device not in place
The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-control device applicable thereto,
placed in accordance with the provisions of this article, unless otherwise directed by a traffic or police officer,
subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle. No provision of this article for
which official traffic-control devices are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official device is not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an
ordinarily observant person. (1996 Code, sec. 10.207)
State law references–Compliance with traffic-control device, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004; no enforcement against
alleged violator if traffic-control device not in proper position or sufficiently legible, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 544.004(b).
Secs. 12.02.003–12.02.030 Reserved
Division 2. Traffic Schedules*
Sec. 12.02.031 Through streets
The city hereby designates certain streets as through streets. The designated through streets for the city are
described in Traffic Control Device Inventory–Schedule I on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/508
is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from
time to time by ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all
times. Whenever any ordinance modification of this city designates and describes a through street, it shall be the
duty of the city to place and maintain a stop sign, or, on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation at
any intersection, a yield sign, on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at any such
street is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection of two (2)
such through streets, or at the intersection of a through street and a heavily traveled street not so designated, stop
signs shall be erected at the approaches of either or both of said streets as may be determined by the city upon
the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1996 Code, sec. 10.202)
Sec. 12.02.032 Four-way stop intersections
The city hereby designates certain intersections to be controlled by four-way stop signs. The designated fourway
stop intersections for the city are described in Traffic Control Device Inventory–Schedule II on file in the
office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and incorporated in this code as if set out at length
herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. A current schedule
shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. (1996 Code, sec. 10.203)
Sec. 12.02.033 Schedule of stop sign intersections adopted
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by stop signs. The designated
special hazard intersections for the city to be controlled by stop signs are described in Traffic Control Device
Inventory–Schedule III on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and
incorporated in this code as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by
ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. (1996
Code, sec. 10.204)
Sec. 12.02.034 Schedule of yield sign intersections adopted
The city hereby designates certain special hazard intersections to be controlled by yield signs. The designated
special hazard intersections for the city to be controlled by yield signs are described in Traffic Control Device
Inventory–Schedule IV on file in the office of the city secretary. This schedule is hereby adopted and
incorporated in this code as if set out at length herein. The schedule may be amended from time to time by
ordinance of the city council. A current schedule shall be maintained by the city secretary at all times. (1996
Code, sec. 10.205)
Sec. 12.02.035 School zones
(a) The purpose of a reduced speed school zone is to increase driver awareness and to promote lower vehicle
speed at a location where schoolchildren are crossing a roadway. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6B) adopted 11/12/07)
(b) The city hereby designates school zones on certain streets. A maximum speed limit of twenty (20) miles
per hour during the hours of 7 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m. on regularly scheduled school days is
established within the designated school zones, except school zones on state highways, where the maximum
speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour. (Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6B) adopted 11/12/07; Ordinance
adopting Code)
(c) The following schedule of school zone regulations shall apply:
(1) Elementary campus. 20 mph 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m. on regular
scheduled school days as follows:
(A) Wilcox Street:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/508
(i) Northbound mid-block of Wilcox Street between W. Bell Avenue and W. Davilla
Avenue to mid-block of Wilcox Street between W. Belton Avenue and Murray Avenue.
(ii) Southbound mid-block of Wilcox Street between Murray Avenue and W. Belton
Avenue to mid-block of Wilcox Street between W. Davilla Avenue and W. Bell Avenue.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6B) adopted 11/12/07)
(B) W. Bell Avenue:
(i) Wilcox Street west to Bowser Street.
(ii) Bowser Street east to College Street.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6B) adopted 11/12/07; Ordinance adopting Code)
(C) Bowser Street:
(i) Northbound mid-block of Bowser Street between W. Cameron Avenue (U.S. 79) and
W. Bell Avenue to the intersection of Bowser Street and Murray Avenue.
(ii) Southbound from the intersection of Bowser Street and Murray to mid-block of
Bowser Street between W. Bell Avenue and W. Cameron Avenue (U.S. 79).
(D) Belton Avenue:
(i) Eastbound from Bowser Street to Wilcox Street.
(ii) Westbound from Wilcox Street to Bowser Street.
(E) Evelyn Street:
(i) Southbound from Murray Avenue to W. Belton Avenue.
(ii) Northbound from W. Belton Avenue to Murray Avenue.
(F) College Street:
(i) Southbound from Murray Avenue to W. Bell Avenue.
(ii) Northbound from W. Bell Avenue to Murray Avenue.
(G) W. Davilla Avenue:
(i) Eastbound from Marrs Street to Wilcox Street.
(ii) Westbound from Wilcox Street to Marrs Street.
(H) Marrs Street:
(i) Southbound from W. Davilla Avenue to W. Bell Avenue.
(ii) Northbound from W. Bell Avenue to W. Davilla Avenue.
(I) Murray Street:
(i) Westbound from Copeland Street to Bowser Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/508
(ii) Eastbound from Bowser Street to Copeland Street.
(2) One way. 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m. on regular scheduled school days as
follows:
(A) West Belton: Eastbound from Bowser Street to Wilcox Street.
(B) West Bell: Westbound from Marrs Street to Bowser Street.
(C) Bowser Street: Northbound from W. Bell Avenue to Murray Avenue.
(D) College Street: Southbound from W. Belton Avenue to W. Bell Avenue.
(E) W. Davilla Avenue: Westbound from Wilcox Street to Marrs Street.
(F) Marrs Street: Southbound from Davilla Avenue to W. Bell Street.
(3) Non-parking. 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 to 4 p.m. on regular scheduled school days as
follows:
(A) W. Belton Avenue: North and south lines from Bowser Street to Wilcox Street.
(B) College Street: East and west lines from W. Belton Avenue to W. Bell Avenue.
(C) Bowser Street: East and west lines from W. Bell Avenue to W. Belton Avenue.
(D) W. Davilla Avenue: North and south lines from College Street to Marrs Street.
(E) Marrs Street: West and east lines from W. Davilla Avenue to W. Bell Avenue.
(F) W. Bell Avenue: North and south lines from Marrs Street to Bowser Street.
(4) High school campus. 20 mph, 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m. on regularly
scheduled school days as follows:
(A) Murray Avenue:
(i) Westbound from Dyer Street to mid-block of Murray Avenue between Childress
Drive and Meadow Drive.
(ii) Eastbound from mid-block of Murray Avenue between Meadow Drive and
Childress Drive to Dyer Street.
(B) Childress Drive:
(i) Northbound from Colorado Avenue to Murray Avenue.
(ii) Southbound from Murray Avenue to Colorado Avenue.
(C) Pecos Avenue:
(i) Eastbound from Meadow Drive to Childress Drive.
(ii) Westbound from Childress Drive to Meadow Drive.
(D) Colorado Avenue:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/508
(i) Eastbound from Meadow Drive to Childress Drive.
(ii) Westbound from Childress Drive to Meadow Drive.
(5) Junior high campus. 20 mph, 7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4 p.m. on regularly
scheduled school days as follows:
(A) Bushdale Road:
(i) Northbound from Murray Avenue to bus barn.
(ii) Southbound from bus barn to Murray Avenue.
(Ordinance 2007-11-12 (6B) adopted 11/12/07)
Sec. 12.02.036 No vehicular traffic zones (school buses only)
A sign stating “No Vehicular Traffic - Buses Only from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. on regular scheduled school days”
shall be placed on the northwest side of Davilla Avenue at the intersection of College Avenue, allowing only
school buses to travel Davilla Avenue west of College Avenue onto Marrs Street to W. Bell Avenue. (Ordinance
03-1003 (2) adopted 4/14/03)
Sec. 12.02.037 Pedestrian crosswalks
Pedestrian crosswalks shall be established appropriately across Childress Drive:
(1) Just south of the intersection with Colorado Avenue.
(2) Just south of the intersection with Zana Lane.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.210)
(3) At the intersection with Pecos Avenue on the south side, allowing pedestrians safe passage to
Colorado Avenue. (Ordinance 03-1102 (2) adopted 4/8/02)
ARTICLE 12.03 OPERATION OF VEHICLES*
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 12.03.001 Engine braking system
(a) Definitions.
Engine braking system. Any switch or device that adjusts vehicle engine timing and compression to slow the
vehicle or which converts the motor from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of
vehicle braking without the use of wheel brakes.
(b) Prohibited. Knowingly utilizing or permitting the utilization of an engine braking system while operating a
motor vehicle on a public street or highway within the city limits of the city, by any person is hereby prohibited,
and the same is declared to be a public nuisance.
(c) Defense established. It is an affirmative defense to conviction of an offense under this section that the
engine braking system was used to slow the motor vehicle in order to avoid imminent danger.
(d) Signs. The city manager is hereby directed to ensure signs are installed at appropriate locations within the
city rights-of-way prohibiting the use of engine braking exhaust systems except during emergency operations as
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/508
set forth in this section.
(e) Presumption. Following the posting of signs informing the public of the prohibition of this section, it shall
be presumed that the person violating the provisions knowingly violated its terms.
(f) Enforcement. The city police department shall enforce this section.
(Ordinance 2014-09-08(7A) adopted 9/8/14)
Secs. 12.03.002–12.03.040 Reserved
Division 2. Speed Limits*
Sec. 12.03.041 General speed limits; reasonable and prudent speed required
No person shall drive a vehicle on any street in the city limits at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent
under the conditions and having regard to the actual and potential hazards then existing. In every event, speed
shall be so controlled as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or conveyance entering
the highway in compliance with legal requirements, and it shall be the duty of all persons to use due care. No
person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle within the corporate limits of the city on any
paved street at a greater speed than thirty (30) miles per hour unless signs are erected designating another speed
limit, or on any unpaved street at a greater speed than twenty (20) miles per hour, or in any alley at a greater
speed than fifteen (15) miles per hour. (1996 Code, sec. 10.301)
State law references–Maximum speed requirement, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.351; prima facie speed limits, V.T.C.A.,
Transportation Code, sec. 545.352.
Sec. 12.03.042 Establishment of other speed limits
Whenever the city shall determine upon the basis of an engineering and/or traffic investigation that the thirty
(30) miles per hour speed limit hereinbefore set forth is greater or less than is reasonable or safe under the
conditions found to exist at any intersection or other place, or upon any part of the street or highway, the city
shall upon authorization by the city council by appropriate ordinance establish such speed limit as shall be
effective at all times when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected at such intersection or other place
or part of the highway or street. (1996 Code, sec. 10.302)
Sec. 12.03.043 Driving at slow speed
No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede the normal and reasonable movement of
traffic, except when reduced speed is necessary for safe operation, or in compliance with law, or at the direction
of a police officer. Police officers are hereby authorized to enforce this provision by directions to drivers and, in
the event of apparent willful disobedience to this provision and refusal to comply with the direction of an officer
in accordance herewith, the continued slow operation by a driver shall be a misdemeanor. (1996 Code, sec.
10.303)
State law reference–Minimum speed limits, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.363.
Sec. 12.03.044 Exception for authorized emergency vehicles
Speed limitations set forth in this division shall not apply to an authorized emergency vehicle when responding
to an emergency call or when used in pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, or when responding to
but not upon returning from a fire alarm, and the driver thereof sounds audible signal by bell, siren or exhaust
whistle, and/or when such emergency vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp exhibiting a red light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of five hundred (500) feet to the front of such
vehicle. This provision shall not relieve the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/508
with due regard for the safety of all persons using the street, nor shall it protect the driver of any such vehicle
from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. (1996 Code, sec. 10.304)
State law reference–Operation of authorized emergency vehicles, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, ch. 546.
Sec. 12.03.045 Speed limits on specific streets
No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle or other vehicle upon the following described streets at a
greater speed than the speed designated for that street or portion of that street as set forth herein, and any speed
in excess of the limits set forth in this section shall be prima facie evidence that such speed is neither reasonable
nor prudent and is unlawful:
(1) U.S. 79, for traffic moving in an easterly direction:
(A) For the first 1.003 miles from the west city limit: 55 mph. Within the limits of said 55
mph speed zone, from 364 feet east of the west city limit to approximately 1526 feet east of the
west city limit, the speed limit shall be 35 mph when so signed for school zone.
(B) For the next 0.651 miles: 45 mph.
(C) For the next 0.390 miles: 40 mph.
(D) For the next 0.345 miles: 35 mph.
(E) For the next 0.622 miles: 30 mph.
(F) For the next 0.240 miles: 35 mph.
(G) For the next 0.215 miles: 40 mph.
(H) For the next 0.385 miles: 45 mph.
(I) For the next 0.430 miles: 50 mph.
(J) For the next 0.114 miles to the east city limit: 55 mph.
(2) U.S. 79, for traffic moving in a westerly direction:
(A) For the first 0.114 miles from the east city limit: 55 mph.
(B) For the next 0.430 miles: 50 mph.
(C) For the next 0.385 miles: 45 mph.
(D) For the next 0.215 miles: 40 mph.
(E) For the next 0.240 miles: 35 mph.
(F) For the next 0.622 miles: 30 mph.
(G) For the next 0.345 miles: 35 mph.
(H) For the next 0.390 miles: 40 mph.
(I) For the next 0.651 miles: 45 mph.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/508
(J) For the next 1.003 miles: 55 mph. Within the limits of said 55 mph speed zone, from
approximately 364 feet east of the west city limit to approximately 1526 feet east of the west
city limit, the speed limit shall be 35 mph when so signed for school zone.
(Ordinance 2009-07-13 (7A) adopted 7/13/09)
(3) FM 487, for traffic moving in a southerly direction:
(A) For 0.262 miles from the north city limits: 35 mph.
(B) For the next 0.374 miles, to U.S. 79: 30 mph.
(C) Thence, the FM 487 route traverses in a westerly direction concurrently on U.S. 79 to the
U.S. 79 and FM 487 centerline intersection. Speed limits along this section are as established
for U.S. 79.
(D) Commencing in a southerly direction from the point where the centerline of U.S. 79
intersects FM 487, for the next 0.215 miles: 40 mph.
(E) For the next 0.219 miles: 50 miles per hour, to Roberts Street.
(F) For the next 0.350 miles: 55 miles per hour to the city limits.
(4) FM 487, for traffic moving in a northerly direction:
(A) For 0.219 miles from the south city limits: 50 mph.
(B) For the next 0.215 miles to U.S. 79: 40 mph.
(C) Thence, the FM 487 route traverses in an easterly direction concurrently on U.S. 79 to the
U.S. 79 and FM 487 centerline intersection. Speed limits along this section are as established
for U.S. 79.
(D) Commencing in a northerly direction from the point where the centerline of U.S. 79
intersects FM 487, for the next 0.374 miles: 30 mph.
(E) For the next 0.262 miles, to the north city limits: 35 miles per hour.
(Ordinance adopted 6/8/98)
(5) Farm to Market Road 908, for traffic moving in both directions:
(A) For the first 0.280 miles from the north city limit: 35 mph.
(B) For the next 0.544 miles: 30 mph.
(C) For the next 0.461 miles to the south city limit: 35 mph.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.305)
(6) U.S. 77, for traffic moving in a southerly direction, for 0.631 miles from the north city limit, to
the south city limit: 60 mph.
(7) U.S. 77, for traffic moving in a northerly direction, for 0.631 miles from the south city limit, to
the north city limit: 60 mph.
(Ordinance adopted 11/10/03)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/508
(8) Metcalfe Street for traffic moving in both directions: 25 miles per hour. (Ordinance 2015-09-
14(8A) adopted 9/14/15)
ARTICLE 12.04 PARKING*
Sec. 12.04.001 Definitions
Loading zone. A space or section of the curb, and adjacent street or avenue, set aside for exclusive use of loading
or unloading of persons, merchandise, supplies and materials.
Operator. Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as hereinabove defined.
Park and parking. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or merchandise.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
Standard of time. All hours of times mentioned in this article refer to and shall be determined by Central
Standard Time as commonly known, except that in the event a different standard time be established or
proclaimed by the United States for the area including the city, all such hours shall be determined by such
officially proclaimed standard time so long as same shall remain in effect.
Street. Any public street or avenue located in the city.
Vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported upon a street or highway,
except those operated upon rails or tracks.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.401)
Sec. 12.04.002 Times when applicable
The regulations provided for in this article shall apply on all days other than Sundays and holidays but only
between the hours of 8 o'clock a.m. and 6 o'clock p.m., and shall apply to all things covered or included in this
article, except as to use of loading zones as provided in section 12.04.009 hereof, use of parking spaces for
loading and unloading as provided in section 12.04.010 hereof, and parking of over-length vehicles and vehicles
with trailers attached as provided in section 12.04.014 hereof, which said sections 12.04.009, 12.04.010,
12.04.014, and 12.04.018 each specify the time of its own applicability. (Ordinance 2017-07-10(9D), sec. 2,
adopted 7/10/17)
Sec. 12.04.003 Limited parking zones
(a) The following described parts of streets in the city are hereby established as a limited parking zone, to wit:
(1) Cameron Avenue from the west line of Green Street westward to the east line of Burleson
Street;
(2) Burleson Street from [on] the east side thereof from the south line of Cameron Avenue to the
north line of Bell Street;
(3) Bell Street from the west line of Burleson Street easterly to the west line of Ackerman Street;
(4) Main Street from the Missouri-Pacific railroad tracks northerly to the north line of Bell Street;
(5) Ackerman Street from the south [line] of Bell Street southerly to the north line of the alley in
Block Nos. 1 and 2.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/508
(b) Each of the above references and [to] streets are to be [as shown on the] official map adopted by the city,
and, except where otherwise shown herein, said parking area includes both sides of said streets.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.403)
Sec. 12.04.004 Marking of loading zones
Loading zones for handling of passengers and heavy or bulky merchandise shall be laid out and designated by
yellow or orange colored lines painted on the curb or surface of the street, or both, with the words “Loading
Zone” painted thereon. (1996 Code, sec. 10.404(a))
Sec. 12.04.005 Designation of non-parking zones
Non-parking zones, to be kept free of parking at all times, day and night, except where otherwise provided, shall
be laid out and designated by red lines painted on the curb or surface of the street. No vehicle shall be parked in
non-parking spaces, except fire trucks in case of fire. (1996 Code, sec. 10.404(b); Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.006 Manner of parking
Any vehicle parked on Main, Ackerman or Cameron Street in any parking space shall be parked at an angle of
approximately twenty (20) degrees with the curb, with the right front wheel touching the curb, and shall be
parked wholly within the lines marked on the street and curb forming such parking space as provided for in this
article, while vehicles parked on Bell Street within the parking zone shall be parked parallel to the street, and be
parked wholly within the parking space provided for in this article. (1996 Code, sec. 10.405)
State law reference–Additional parking regulations, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 545.303.
Sec. 12.04.007 Vehicles to be parked within designated space
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to park any vehicle in such a way that said vehicle shall not be
wholly within the area of the parking space being used, as designated by lines or marks on the surface of the
street under the provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 10.406)
Sec. 12.04.008 Defacing or changing lines or markings
It shall be unlawful and an offense for any person to mar, erase, deface, add to, or change any line, mark or color
placed upon the curbs or streets in said parking zone under the provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec.
10.407)
Sec. 12.04.009 Use of loading zones
(a) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to stand or park a vehicle in a loading zone for the purpose
of loading or unloading passengers for a period of time in excess of five (5) minutes.
(b) The use of loading zones for the loading and unloading of merchandise etc., shall be for handling of bulky
or heavy merchandise, supplies or material. Such loading and unloading must be performed in an expeditious
manner, and no vehicle shall remain in a loading zone for any period of time longer than necessary for such
purposes, and in no event longer than for thirty (30) minutes.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vehicle to stand or park a vehicle in a loading zone for
the purpose of loading and unloading bulky or heavy merchandise, supplies and material for a longer period of
time than necessary to load and unload expeditiously such merchandise, supplies, and material, and in no event
for a longer period of time than thirty (30) minutes.
(d) The provisions of this section shall apply on all days and hours, and the city manager is authorized, with
the consent of the city council, to cause to be painted, in addition to the words “Loading Zone Hours,” the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/508
following words: “Reserved ______ a.m. to ______ p.m.”, and insert hours in said blank spaces, and then such
regulations shall apply to such loading zone or zones, respectively, during such reserved hours only.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.408)
Sec. 12.04.010 Use of parking spaces for loading and unloading
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to stop or park same in a parking space for the purpose of
loading and unloading merchandise, supplies and materials, except where the place of business to which
merchandise is to be delivered does not have either (i) a usable entry from an adjoining alley, or (ii) an officially
designated loading zone on that part of the street adjacent to such place of business; and where there is neither a
usable entry to a place of business from an alley, nor an officially designated loading zone on that part of the
street adjacent to such place of business, the operator of a vehicle may use not to exceed two (2) parking spaces
for loading or unloading at such place of business, for the length of time necessary to expeditiously load or
unload such freight, but it shall be unlawful for any operator of a vehicle to use more than two (2) parking
spaces for such loading and unloading or to use either one (1) or two (2) spaces for a longer time than necessary
to expeditiously unload and load such merchandise, in such excepted instances. (1996 Code, sec. 10.409)
Sec. 12.04.011 Impoundment of unlawfully parked vehicles
(a) In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked in or upon any regularly designated parking
space, or in or upon any street within the parking zone established by this article, in violation of and contrary to
any of the provisions of this article, the same shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and shall be
removed by any police officer and taken to some place designated by the city manager and/or chief of police for
such purposes, and there kept by such officer until application for its redemption shall be made by the owner of
said vehicle or by his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the
city secretary according to the fee schedule in appendix A of this code together with all other costs of removal
and storage that may have accrued thereon.
(b) In the event the vehicle so impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent within
five (5) days after said impounding, then such vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, and costs, in the
manner provided by ordinances of the city for the sale of impounded vehicles.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.410; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.012 Impoundment fees additional to other penalties
The remedy and impound fee and costs provided for above shall be cumulative of any and all other penalties
provided by the ordinances of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 10.411)
Sec. 12.04.013 Parking in alleys
(a) Definitions. For the purpose of this section:
Alley. Any public alley located in the city and designated as an alley on the official map of the city.
Motor vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be transported upon a street or
highway.
Operator. Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as hereinabove described.
Park. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the purpose of, and while
actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or merchandise.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/508
(b) Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle, or for any person having
registered in his name any motor vehicle under the state registration laws of Texas, to cause, allow, permit, or
suffer any motor vehicle or any such registered motor vehicle in his possession or under his control to stop, stand
or park a motor vehicle within an alley located within the city limits.
(c) Loading and unloading.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator to stand or park a motor vehicle in an alley for
the purpose of loading or unloading passengers for a period of time in excess of five (5) minutes.
(2) The use of an alley for the loading and unloading of merchandise shall be for handling of bulky
or heavy merchandise, supplies or material. Such loading and unloading must be performed in an
expeditious manner, and no vehicle shall remain in an alley for any period of time longer than
necessary for such purpose, and in no event longer than for thirty (30) minutes.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a vehicle to stand or park a motor vehicle in
an alley for the purpose of loading and unloading bulky or heavy merchandise, supplies and material
for a longer period of time than necessary to load and unload expeditiously such material, supplies,
and material, and in no event for a longer period of time than thirty (30) minutes.
(d) Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked in or
upon any alley in violation of and contrary to any of the provisions of this article, the same shall be and is hereby
declared to be a nuisance per se, and shall be removed by any police officer or his designate and taken to some
place designated by the city police department for such purposes, and there kept by such officer until application
for its redemption shall be made by the owner of said vehicle or by his duly authorized agent, who shall be
entitled to the possession thereof upon payment to the city of the fee listed in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code, together with all costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle
so impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent within ten (10) days after said
impounding, then such vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, and costs, in the manner provided by
ordinances of the city, so incurred by the city.
(e) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.414; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.014 Commercial vehicles
(a) Definition. For the purpose of this section, “commercial motor vehicle” shall mean any motor vehicle,
other than a motorcycle, passenger car, or pickup, that is designed or used primarily for the transportation of
property, including any passenger car that has been reconstructed so as to be used primarily for delivery
purposes, with the exception of passenger cars used in the delivery of the United States mail.
(b) Parking restricted. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a commercial motor vehicle or
associated trailer, or for any person having registered in his name any commercial motor vehicle under state
registration laws of Texas, to cause, allow, permit, or suffer any commercial motor vehicle, in his possession or
under his control, to be or remain parked in the following districts as defined by the zoning ordinance:
(1) Family dwelling districts;
(2) Duplex districts;
(3) Apartment districts;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/508
provided, however, commercial motor vehicles may be parked in such districts for the purpose of loading and
unloading of merchandise, furniture, supplies and materials; provided further that such loading and unloading
must be performed in an expeditious manner and no commercial motor vehicles will remain in such districts for
any period of time longer than necessary for such purposes; and provided further that in no event shall a
commercial motor vehicle or associated trailer be permitted to remain parked in said districts if in the opinion of
any officer of the city police department said parking creates a hazard or nuisance.
(c) Impoundment of unlawfully parked vehicles. In the event any commercial motor vehicle or associated
trailer be found standing or parked in or upon any street in the above-defined districts in violation of and
contrary to any of the provisions of this article, the same shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se
and shall be removed by any police officer or his designate and take such vehicle to a place designated by the
chief of police for such purposes, and there kept by such officer until application for its redemption shall be
made by the owner of said vehicle or his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to the possession thereof
upon payment to the city secretary in the amount shown in the fee schedule appendix A to this code, together
with all costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle so impounded shall
not be redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent within ten (10) days after said impounding, then such
vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, and costs, in the manner provided by ordinances of the city.
(d) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.415; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 12.04.015 Parking prohibited on certain streets
(a) Calhoun Drive. Parking shall be prohibited on the Calhoun Drive median or curbside, adjacent to the
median, from Highway 79 to the northernmost end of Calhoun Drive.
(b) Travis Street near railroad tracks. No parking signs shall be placed on Travis Street so there will be no
parking within fifty (50) feet of the railroad tracks.
(c) Meadow Drive.
(1) Definitions. For the purpose of this subsection:
Motor vehicle. Any device in, upon or by which any person or property may be
transported upon a street or highway.
Operator. Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as hereinabove described.
Park. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than temporarily for the
purpose of, and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers or
merchandise.
Person. An individual, firm, partnership or corporation.
(2) Parking restricted. It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of a motor vehicle, or for any
person having registered in his name any motor vehicle under state registration laws of Texas, to
allow, permit or suffer any motor vehicle, or any such registered motor vehicle in his possession or
under his control, to stop, stand or park a motor vehicle on Meadow Drive from U.S. Highway 79
(also known as Cameron Avenue) north to Murray Avenue, all of which area is located within the city
limits.
(3) Report of violations. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to report:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/508
(A) The location as nearly as possible on that portion of Meadow Drive on which a vehicle is
or has been parked in violation of any of the provisions of this subsection;
(B) The name of the state and number of the license plate, if any, attached to such vehicle,
and a brief description of such vehicle;
(C) The date and hour such motor vehicle was placed in violation of this subsection.
(4) Notice of violation; payment of fine. Each such police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a
notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of the
provisions of this article, and instructing such owner or operator to report to the municipal court in
the city in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator may, within twelve (12) hours of the
time when such notice was attached to said vehicle, pay to the judge or clerk of said court, or other
designated employee of the city, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum as
provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of this code. The failure of
such owner or operator to make such payment within said twelve hours following such violation shall
render him subject to the penalties hereinafter provided.
(5) Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or
parked on the herein defined portions of Meadow Drive and in violation of and contrary to any of the
provisions of this article, the same shall be and is hereby declared to be a nuisance per se, and shall
be removed by any police officer or his designate and taken to some place designated by the city
police department for such purpose, and there kept by such officer until application for its redemption
shall be made by the owner of said vehicle or by his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to
the possession thereof upon payment to the city of the fee listed in the fee schedule in appendix A of
this code, together with all costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event
the vehicle so impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent within ten (10)
days after said impounding, then such vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, and costs, in the
manner provided by ordinances of the city, so incurred by the city.
(6) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of
an offense, and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found
in section 1.01.009 of this code.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.416)
(d) Alcoa Street. Parking shall be prohibited on the south side of Alcoa Street between Dyer Street and Miller
Street. The no parking area is designated as a tow-away zone for purposes of violation enforcement by the city
police department. The no parking area is to be described as follows: Beginning at a point in the south curbline
of Alcoa Street located 56 feet east of the Alcoa/Dyer Street intersection, thence 82 feet east to a point in said
curbline, this being the end point, which is located 126 feet west of the Alcoa/Miller Street intersection. Total
footage to be designated “no parking” is 82 feet. (Ordinance adopted 5/10/99)
(e) Wilcox Street. Parking shall be prohibited on the east side of Wilcox in front of the fire station. The no
parking area is designated as a tow-away zone for purposes of violation enforcement by the city police
department. The no parking area is to be described as follows: Beginning at a point in the east curbline of
Wilcox Street located at the right-of-way line of the north side of West Bell Street, thence 101 feet north to a
point in said curbline, this being the end point, which is located 199 feet south of the West Davilla/Wilcox Street
intersection. Total footage to be designated “no parking” is 101 feet. (Ordinance adopted 12/13/99)
Sec. 12.04.016 Parking on streets adjacent to post office property
It shall be unlawful for any owner or operator of any vehicle to stop or park any vehicle in his possession or
under his control on that half of any street adjacent to the lots on which the United States post office is located in
the city, and being Lot Numbers 10, 11, 12 and 13 of Block 8 of the city, the west line of which lot is common
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/508
with the east line of Ackerman Street, and the north line of which is common with the south line of Bell Street,
for a longer period of time than fifteen (15) consecutive minutes between the hours of 8 o'clock a.m. and 6
o'clock p.m. of all days except Sundays and holidays. (1996 Code, sec. 10.412)
Sec. 12.04.017 Parking along U.S. Highway 79
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of persons, or corporation to park or leave standing any car,
truck, tractor, bus or any type of vehicle upon any part or portion of U.S. Highway 79 between San Gabriel and
Green Streets, and between Burleson and Scarbrough Streets, from curb to curb of same, within the city limits.
(1996 Code, sec. 10.404(c))
Sec. 12.04.018 Miscellaneous restrictions
(a) Parking certain vehicles for longer than four hours. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of
persons, or corporation to park or leaving standing any motor vehicle, car, truck, tractor, bus, haul trailer, house
trailer, recreational vehicle, semitrailer, trailer, boat trailer, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, or boat upon any public
street for more than four (4) consecutive hours between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(b) Parking of trailers connected to vehicles. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of persons,
or corporation to park or leave standing any trailer unless it is connected to a motor vehicle.
(c) Parking near mailbox. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, association of persons, or corporation to
park or leaving standing any motor vehicle, car, truck, tractor, bus, haul trailer, house trailer, recreational vehicle,
semitrailer, trailer, boat trailer, all-terrain vehicle, dirt bike, or boat within fifteen (15) feet of a mailbox unit
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
(d) Impoundment of illegally parked vehicles. In the event any vehicle shall be found standing or parked in
violation of and contrary to any of the provisions of this section, the same shall be and is hereby declared to be a
nuisance per se, and shall be removed by any police officer or his designate and taken to some place designated
by the city police department for such purpose, and there kept by such officer until application for its redemption
shall be made by the owner of said vehicle or by his duly authorized agent, who shall be entitled to the
possession thereof upon payment to the city of the fee listed in the fee schedule in appendix A of this code,
together with all costs of removal and storage that may have accrued thereon. In the event the vehicle so
impounded shall not be redeemed by its owner or his authorized agent within ten (10) days after said
impounding, then such vehicle shall be sold for such penalty, charges, and costs, in the manner provided by
ordinances of the city, so incurred by the city.
(e) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(Ordinance 2017-07-10(9D), sec. 3, adopted 7/10/17)
ARTICLE 12.05 PEDESTRIANS*
Sec. 12.05.001 Walking along roadway
(a) Use of sidewalk. A pedestrian may not walk along and on a roadway if an adjacent sidewalk is provided
and is accessible to the pedestrian.
(b) Areas where no sidewalk provided. If a sidewalk is not provided, a pedestrian walking along and on a
roadway shall if possible walk on the left side of the roadway or the shoulder of the roadway facing oncoming
traffic.
(c) Use of roadway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/508
(1) If the pedestrian walks along and on a roadway as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the
pedestrian shall not impede, obstruct, or disrupt the normal and reasonable movement of vehicular
traffic.
(2) Pedestrians shall walk single file and at no time walk side by side along and on a roadway.
(d) Presumption regarding violations. In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the
defendant named in the complaint was walking side by side along and on a roadway shall constitute in evidence
a prima facie presumption that traffic was impeded, obstructed, or disrupted in violation of this section.
(e) Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an offense,
and upon conviction shall be fined as provided for in the general penalty provision found in section 1.01.009 of
this code.
(Ordinance adopted 9/8/03)
State law reference–Pedestrian walking along roadway, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code, sec. 552.006.
CHAPTER 13
UTILITIES
ARTICLE 13.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 13.01.001 Penalty
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter, or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any
of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and shall be liable for a
fine not to exceed the sum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein. (Ordinance 4-09-01,
sec. 2, adopted 4/9/01)
Sec. 13.01.002 Jurisdiction over electric utility
(a) The city does hereby elect to have the public utility commission of the state exercise exclusive original
jurisdiction over electric utility rates within the existing and future incorporated limits of the city.
(b) The city hereby expressly retains the exclusive jurisdiction over rates, operations, and services of water
and sewer utilities within the existing and future incorporated limits of the city.
(1996 Code, art. 11.600)
State law reference–Municipal jurisdiction over electric utility, V.T.C.A., Utilities Code, ch. 33.
ARTICLE 13.02 ADMINISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICES
Sec. 13.02.001 Application for services; restriction on new water connections
(a) Written application shall be made to the city upon forms furnished for water, sewer, and garbage
collection. Such application shall state the name and the address of the applicant, and any other information
which the city deems necessary.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/508
(b) No new water connections to the city water supply will be allowed above elevation 530 feet above mean
sea level, as determined by the official U.S. Geological Survey map.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.101)
Sec. 13.02.002 Connection to water and wastewater service mandatory
(a) All owners or occupants of buildings, or the agents for the owners of buildings, situated in any section of
the city where water lines now exist or where the same may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the
land on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within two hundred (200) feet of any such
water line, are hereby required to install, or cause to be installed, suitable water lines on their property and
connect the same with the city water lines under the supervision of the city water superintendent.
(b) All owners or occupants of buildings, or the agents for the owners of buildings, situated in any section of
the city where sanitary sewer now exists, or where it may hereafter exist, and where the property line of the land
on which any such building is situated approaches or extends to within two hundred (200) feet of any such
sewer, are hereby required to construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets on their property, and
connect the same with the city sewer, under the supervision of the city sewer superintendent.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.102; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.02.003 Water and wastewater deposit
(a) Amount. There shall be a water and wastewater deposit paid to the city for each customer. The schedule of
deposits is as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(b) Refunds. Any deposit made to the city by any applicant shall be held by the city until such applicant's
utility service for which the deposit was made shall be terminated. Upon termination of such service, the
applicant shall be entitled to a refund of said deposit, less any amount which is due and owing to the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.103)
Sec. 13.02.004 Metering
(a) Meters required. Meters shall be required to measure the consumption of each utility service furnished by
the city, except garbage collection and sewage service.
(b) Control of meters. All meters, curb cocks, goosenecks, valves, and meter boxes connected with the city's
water main and service pipe, including those furnished at the expense of consumers or property owners, shall
remain under direct control of the city.
(c) Tampering with meters. It shall be unlawful for any person other than those authorized by the city to
connect, disconnect, move, or tamper with any such meter, or to turn on or off the water at the curb cock or
valve, or to open or tamper with any meter box.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.104)
Sec. 13.02.005 Maintenance of water system
The superintendent of the water department shall constantly inspect all parts of said water system and maintain
them in good condition, and shall keep in good repair at all times for constant service all pumps, machinery,
hydrants, and all other waterworks fixtures and property. The superintendent shall at all times endeavor to keep a
sufficient supply of water in the tanks to:
(1) Assure adequate fire protection and pressure;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/508
(2) Make taps and connections to mains and repairs, etc.; and
(3) Keep said water system in good condition.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.105)
Sec. 13.02.006 Temporary cut-off of service
The water superintendent may, at any time, order the water cut off for repairs, extension, or other purposes from
any premises connected to the system. Unless immediate cut-off is necessary due to emergency circumstances,
all reasonable efforts should be made to inform affected water customers of the cut-off of the water supply prior
to doing so. (1996 Code, sec. 11.106)
Sec. 13.02.007 Liability of city for damage
The city shall not be liable for any damage to property of any consumer of any utility service furnished by the
city except when such damage is due to the negligence of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.107)
ARTICLE 13.03 WATER AND SEWER RATES AND CHARGES*
Sec. 13.03.001 Payment
(a) Due date; disconnection of service. Payment must be received on or before the 20th of the month
following the month in which the water and/or wastewater services were performed. Failure to pay on or before
the 20th will result in the assessment of a late fee. If past due, the late payment must be received on or before the
27th of the month. Failure to pay on or before the 27th will result in the disconnection of the service on the 28th
of the month and the assessment of a service fee. Late payment and service fees for reinstatment shall be as
provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 2018-01-08(8A), sec. 1, adopted
1/8/18)
(b) General requirements. General requirements are as follows:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of all adults living in a residence or any partner in a business to
pay all past due bills in full in addition to all regularly applicable deposits and fees prior to service
being turned on.
(2) Any service transferred during a billing period will cause at least a minimum bill or additional
as usage dictates to be generated at each residence.
(c) Additional sanctions. In addition to sanctions provided for by the utility ordinance, the city is entitled to
exercise sanctions provided for the other ordinances of the city for failure to pay the bill for water and
wastewater services when due, up to and including termination of service.
(1996 Code, art. 11.300)
Sec. 13.03.002 Adoption and review
The city council shall fix and approve the rates charged for its services and review these rates periodically. (1996
Code, sec. 11.201)
Sec. 13.03.003 Water charges
(a) The schedule of monthly rates or charges for water service furnished by the city shall be as provided for in
the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (Ordinance 2008-09-23 (4C), sec. 3, adopted 9/23/08)
(b) These rates shall apply to all customers. (Ordinance 2018-01-08(8A), sec. 2, adopted 1/8/18)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/508
Sec. 13.03.004 Tap fees
Water and wastewater tap fees are as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. (1996
Code, sec. 11.203)
Sec. 13.03.005 Extension of water utilities outside city limits
No water utilities will be extended outside the city limits to any area, land, subdivision, or lot that has not
complied with all the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.204)
Sec. 13.03.006 Wastewater rates
(a) Monthly wastewater rates apply to all customers. Rates for customers are found in appendix A of this
code. (Ordinance 2018-01-08(8A), sec. 3, adopted 1/8/18)
(b) Anyone receiving city water service and connected to the city wastewater must pay the above wastewater
charges regardless of whether the building is occupied or not.
(c) The city will develop administrative procedures for determining the estimated amounts of water usage that
goes into the wastewater system for treatment that comes from business or commercial customers. This
procedure will only be applied when there is a reasonable belief that a large portion of the monthly water usage
is not going into the system for treatment. The city is not responsible for estimating usage unless the customer
requests such a review.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.205)
Sec. 13.03.007 Extension of sewer utilities outside city limits
No sewer utilities will be extended outside the city limits to any area, land, subdivision or lot that has not
complied with all the requirements of the subdivision regulations of the city. (1996 Code, sec. 11.206)
Sec. 13.03.008 Miscellaneous fees
Miscellaneous fees will be as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code. Customerrequested
meter testing and meter rereads will be performed at the convenience of the department schedule and
to accommodate needs of more pressing work. (1996 Code, sec. 11.207)
ARTICLE 13.04 SOLID WASTE*
Sec. 13.04.001 Contract for service; collector's permit; hauling waste
The city council is hereby authorized to contract with any person, firm or corporation for the collection and
disposition of all garbage, trash and rubbish from the city. No person, firm or corporation shall collect garbage,
trash or rubbish for hire who does not first obtain a permit to do so from the city council. The city council shall
not be required to issue such permit upon application but may refuse to grant the same without assigning any
reason therefor. It shall be necessary that any applicant for such a permit and any person, firm or corporation
which shall haul their own garbage, trash or rubbish provide vehicles with suitable tops or covers over the
garbage, trash or rubbish hauled therein to prevent the blowing or scattering of the same. Any permit issued by
the city may be revoked when in the opinion of the city council the public health or welfare requires such
revocation.
Sec. 13.04.002 Receptacles required
It shall be the responsibility of every person, firm or corporation occupying any premises to provide such
receptacles for garbage as may be required by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/508
Sec. 13.04.003 Monthly charge; billing
There shall be charged, assessed and collected from each person, firm or corporation within the corporate limits
of the city a sum determined by contract with a commercial collector, as approved by the city council, which
sum shall be added to the monthly charges for each and every water meter or meters and/or sewer connections
listed or registered in his/her or its name and through which water or sewer service is purchased, used or
obtained from the city, which sum shall be listed as a separate item on each bill and shall be payable as and when
the bill charged against any water consumer and/or sewer user for water or sewer is paid.
Sec. 13.04.004 Unlawful use of dumpster
(a) Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for any person or business, other than the owner or occupant of the
premises for whom dumpster collectors have been furnished and who is currently paying a garbage pickup
charge, to place anything in such dumpster.
(b) Penalty. Any person found guilty of violating subsection (a) of this section shall be fined in the amount of
$1.00 to $200.00 per conviction.
Sec. 13.04.005 Disposal at city yard; use of dumpsters at public facilities
(a) Use of the containers at the city yard is by permit only. Permits will be issued at city hall. Permits can be
obtained from 8:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays. Permits will be issued only to
citizens of the city and the county. Permits will not be issued to out-of-county residents or to commercial
haulers. Permits will be good only for that and only on the day issued. Citizens may go by the city yard to
unload, but must obtain a ticket stating how many or what size load is to be deposited. City employees writing
up this ticket must obtain the name of the person wishing to use the dumpster as well as the license number of
the vehicle from which the trash came from and put on the ticket. After they have deposited their trash they are
to come immediately to city hall and pay for this service. Fee charges for this service shall be as provided for in
the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(b) All household garbage hauled to this collection station will be required to be bagged for container loading
purposes. No loose household garbage will be accepted. All brush must be cut and trimmed into no more than 4-
foot lengths. Old lumber and other wood products must be cut into no more than 4-foot lengths. Brush and old
lumber will not be required to be tied or bound. Liquids or chemicals in any type or size container or dead
animals of any size will not be accepted.
(c) The collection station at the city yard will remain open from 8:30 a.m. to 12:00 noon, 1:00 p.m. until 4:00
p.m., Monday through Friday, excluding holidays.
(d) The city will have dumpsters at our public facility locations, such as ballfields, parks, etc., and are for the
use of our citizens using these facilities. They are not there for the placement of household garbage by anyone. It
will be the policy of the city to prosecute anyone, citizen or nonresident of the city, who places any trash that
does not originate from that site in these containers, which will constitute illegal dumping.
(e) Refer to the fee schedule in appendix A of this code for rates covering user fees for waste collection at the
collection station.
(Ordinance adopted 3/8/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.04.006 Collection of trees and brush; chipping service
The city parks department will provide pickup and disposal of unbundled tree limbs and brush within the city
limits under the following procedure:
(1) An authorization form must be completed at city hall requesting the service, signed by the
person requesting said service, and payment must be made in full at the time the request is submitted.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/508
(2) A charge/fee shall be assessed and paid in an amount as provided for in the fee schedule found
in appendix A of this code for any one truckload of debris, up to and including what can be hauled in
a one-ton flatbed truck. All additional loads, or partial loads, will be at an additional charge.
(3) Tree limbs, trunks and brush must be cut into pieces or sections that are of appropriate size to
be loaded into a truck bed and of sufficiently small weight so as to be loaded by one or two
employees without any type of mechanical assistance.
(4) Debris to be disposed of under this section must be placed at the curb or side of a city street so
as to permit city employees to load without entering onto private property.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.209)
(5) An form must be completed at city hall requesting the service, signed by the person requesting
said service, and payment must be made in full at the time the request is submitted. Refer to the fee
schedule in appendix A of this code. Tree limbs, trunks and brush must be stacked on the owner's
property at curbside facing the street in order for city crews to feed the material into the chipper.
Diameter of the limbs cannot exceed 4" in diameter, and length should be no more than 10 feet.
(Ordinance adopted 12/13/99; Ordinance adopting Code)
ARTICLE 13.05 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CONSUMER
Sec. 13.05.001 Disconnection of water service for nonpayment of charges
(a) Authorized. If, after receipt of written notification from the city that water service is to be discontinued,
then the city manager shall have the authority to cause all services to be disconnected or terminated. (1996 Code,
sec. 11.401; Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Reconnection fee for resumption of service. Any consumer of utility services furnished by the city whose
utility services have been disconnected or terminated for the nonpayment of the rates and charges therefor may
have such utility services resumed by paying all rates, charges, and penalties due the city by such consumer, and
in addition thereto a reconnection fee as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(c) Obtaining water by illegal means.
(1) Pulling of meter. If, after the city has discontinued its services because of nonpayment, the
consumer subsequently cuts his water back on, the city will then pull its meter and assess an
additional charge as provided for in the fee schedule found in appendix A of this code.
(2) Penalty for circumventing meter. If, after the city has pulled its meter, the consumer still
obtains water by circumventing the meter, then there will be an additional charge as provided for in
the fee schedule found in the appendix A of this code.
(3) Payment of charges and penalties. All cumulative rates, charges, reconnection fees, and
penalties due the city by such consumer must be paid in full before service will be restored by the
city.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.401)
Sec. 13.05.002 Connection and repair of service
(a) Generally. The city shall install and maintain all service connections from water mains to the customer's
meter within the city, and it shall be unlawful for any other person or persons to repair or renew the service pipe
from the main to the meter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/508
(b) Tapping main. It shall be unlawful for any plumber or other person, other than the tapper employed by the
city waterworks, to tap any street main, make connection with the street main, or extend the service pipe from
the main, said work to be under exclusive control of the city waterworks.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.402)
(c) Interconnections. Interconnections or cross-connection of the city's water or wastewater system, whether
directly or through the customer's private system, to another source of water or otherwise, is strictly prohibited.
Upon connection to the system, customers shall construct, and each customer shall maintain, water and
wastewater connections and appurtenances so as to avoid infiltration of any substance into the city water system.
City personnel shall have access to all customer water and wastewater line connections and appurtenances
within reasonable time periods to inspect for suspected unauthorized connections. The city reserves the right to
immediately and without notice disconnect water or wastewater services to any customer whose internal private
system has been found to be interconnected or cross-connected, and to assess against the customer such penalties
as are provided by law and penalties provided herein in addition to any charges necessary to repair the damaged
or contaminated portion of the system.
(d) Certification that system is adequate and operational. Connections shall not be made to either the city
water or the wastewater system until the city's operator or other party designated by the city council has certified
that the respective system or applicable portion thereof is adequate and operational. Water service shall not be
provided to any residential, business, commercial or industrial unit not in compliance with the rules and
regulations promulgated by the department of state health services and the state commission on environmental
quality, as set out in the Texas Water Code, or as otherwise required by statute, regulation or ordinance.
(e) Service access. Upon application for connection to the water or wastewater system, the applicant shall
grant an easement of ingress and egress to and from the meter or point of service for such installation,
maintenance and repair as the city, in its judgment, may deem necessary. Taps and connections will not be made
when, in the opinion of the city's operator, the work area is obstructed by building materials and debris or the
work area is not completed to finished grade. When sidewalks, driveways, fences or other improvements have
been constructed prior to application for service, such application shall be construed and accepted as a waiver of
a claim for damages to such improvements resulting from the reasonable actions of the city's operator in
installation of the customer's connection.
(f) Meters, valves, etc., to be city property. All meters, fittings, boxes, valves and appurtenances installed by
city personnel shall remain the property of the city. City maintenance of the water service ends at the customer
side of the connection to the water meter itself. City maintenance of the wastewater service ends at the tap, or
point of connection, of the lateral line into the city wastewater line.
(g) Persons authorized to make connections and repairs; multiple connections. All connections to the city
water system and/or wastewater system shall be made by the city's operator unless specified otherwise by the
city council. No person, other than the properly authorized agents of the city, shall be permitted to tap or make
any connections with the mains or distribution or collection lines of the city's water system or wastewater
system, except for emergency firefighting purposes, or make any repairs or additions to or alterations in any
meter box, tap, pipe, cock or other fixture connected with the water service, except by the written permission of
the city council. No new dual or multiple connections (being more than one user on a single meter) shall be
permitted, unless otherwise permitted herein.
(h) Plan approval required.
(1) Each applicant for a connection shall, within ten (10) days prior to payment of tap fees, submit
to the city operator the following information:
(A) One set of drawings showing details of building plumbing, site plumbing and the
location, size and number of proposed connections to the city's water system and/or wastewater
system; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/508
(B) A general description of the type of proposed establishment.
(2) The city's operator or other party designated by the city council shall review the information
presented and may approve or reject the application, or request that further information be submitted
prior to approval of the application. The applicant shall be notified in writing as to the basis for
rejection. Failure to construct the facilities in accordance with approved drawings shall constitute a
basis for denial of city water or wastewater services. If the application information is not timely
made, the city shall not be held responsible for delays in the installation of any water or wastewater
connection. Payment of tap fees to the city prior to the approval of plans shall not constitute approval
of said plans or approval for service as set forth herein; any unauthorized connection or connections
may be removed at the expense of the person or firm causing such connection or connections to be
made.
(Ordinance 4-09-01, sec. 3, adopted 4/9/01)
Sec. 13.05.003 Sewer connections
(a) Required. All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for owners, where the property line is within
two hundred (200) feet of a sanitary sewer are hereby required to construct, or cause to be constructed, suitable
water closets on their property, and to connect the same with the city sanitary sewer system under the direction
and supervision of the city. All repairs to a sanitary sewer line or a new sanitary sewer line from the sewer main
to the building (the service line) shall have a backflow prevention device approved by the city installed.
(b) Maintenance. It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any building connected with the city
sanitary sewer system to keep and maintain the connection to the sewer system in perfect condition and free
from obstruction.
(c) Use of privy or septic tank. It shall be unlawful for any person to build, construct, dig, repair or upgrade,
or use any dry toilet, surface privy, cesspool, or septic tank within the city
(1996 Code, sec. 11.403; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.05.004 Responsibility for leakage
All property owners, their agents, and/or tenants shall be held responsible as consumers for loss of water due to
leakage in pipes or plumbing on the discharge side of the meter or on the property; and if this water is not paid
for according to the rates provided herein, when it becomes due, the water shall be cut off by the city waterworks
department and not turned on again until all claims are paid or adjusted as provided for in section 13.03.001 and
section 13.05.001. In the event of any change during this time of payment of billing for past leakage, the
landlord and/or property owner shall be held accountable for payment of this billing before service will be
extended and water furnished to a second or other tenant. (1996 Code, sec. 11.404)
Sec. 13.05.005 Turning water on or off
No plumber or any other person shall turn water service on or off from the street stopcock without first obtaining
approval from the city waterworks superintendent or authorized representative, [except] in cases of emergency.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.405)
Sec. 13.05.006 Extension of service to other premises
After water is introduced into a building, or upon any premises, the same shall not be extended by any plumber
or any other person to any other premises for additional fixtures without written permission of the city
waterworks department. (1996 Code, sec. 11.406)
Sec. 13.05.007 Right of entry
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/508
Every person taking service from the city waterworks department shall at all reasonable times permit the
manager of the city waterworks, its superintendent, or agents to enter any premises and building for examination
of pipes, connections, and fixtures, and to determine how the water is being used. Refusal of the right of entry by
any consumer shall result in refusal of a water supply from the city waterworks until such permission is granted.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.407)
Sec. 13.05.008 Tapping or other work on mains
Is shall be unlawful for any plumber or person, other than the tapper employed by the city waterworks, to tap
any street main, make connection with the street main, or extend service pipes from the main; said work shall be
under the exclusive control of the city waterworks. (1996 Code, sec. 11.408)
Sec. 13.05.009 Installation and repair of service pipes
(a) The city waterworks reserves the right to make all repairs and renewals of service pipes from the main to
the curb, and it shall be unlawful for any other person or persons to repair or renew service pipe from the main to
the meter.
(b) All service pipe shall be laid at least twelve (12) inches under the ground and provided with a cut-off valve
inside the property line so that water may be cut off in the event of an emergency.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.409)
Sec. 13.05.010 Emergency shut-off valve
The consumer shall install and have approved a cut-off valve inside of the property line at a location accessible
in case of emergency, and shall not use the curb cock at the meter in lieu thereof. (1996 Code, sec. 11.410)
Sec. 13.05.011 Defacing, breaking into or tampering with waterworks property
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to deface the houses, walls, machinery, or fixtures
connected with, or pertaining to, the city waterworks and its system.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage, or tamper with any part of the water system of the
city for any purpose whatsoever, or in any other manner maliciously interfere with or prevent the running and
operation of such system and the water supply therein.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.411)
State law reference–Criminal mischief by tampering with public communications, public water, gas, or power supply, V.T.C.A., Penal
Code, sec. 28.03.
Sec. 13.05.012 Defacing, breaking into or tampering with sewage works property
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, uncover, deface or tamper with any
structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is part of the municipal sewage works. Any person violating this
section shall be subject to immediate arrest under the charge of disorderly conduct. (1996 Code, sec. 11.412)
Sec. 13.05.013 Waste of water
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully or negligently waste water in any manner whatsoever. Any person
having knowledge of any condition whereby water is being wasted shall immediately notify the superintendent
of the city water department. (1996 Code, sec. 11.413)
Sec. 13.05.014 Water use during fire or other emergency
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/508
In case of fire or other emergency, water consumers shall be required to shut off lawn sprinklers or any steady
flow of water in use when the fire or emergency occurs, and keep the same off until the emergency is under
control. (1996 Code, sec. 11.414)
Sec. 13.05.015 Use of fire hydrants
(a) Generally; opening hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided for the sole purpose of use in extinguishing
fires, and shall be used or opened only by the water and fire departments or such persons as may be given
authority by the city manager or city water department superintendent.
(b) Taking water; obstructing access. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry away water from a fire
hydrant without written permission from the water superintendent, or to place upon or about any fire hydrant
valve, curb cock, meter, or meter box any object, material, debris, or structure of any kind so as to prevent
immediate access to same.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.415)
Sec. 13.05.016 Furnishing water to premises outside city
(a) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any customer of the city water to knowingly resell, give, or
otherwise furnish water to any land or premises outside the corporate limits of the city without first having
received a permit therefor approved by the city council.
(b) Application for permit. Any consumer of city water within the corporate limits of the city who desires to
resell, give, permit, of otherwise furnish water to land or premises outside of the corporate limits shall first make
application in writing for a permit to do so with the city manager, stating the use or uses to be made of such
water and the maximum amount of water estimated to be resold or furnished monthly outside the corporate
limits. Upon receipt of such application for said permit, the city manager shall forthwith refer such application to
the city council, who shall have the sole and absolute authority to grant or refuse such application for such
permit in accordance with what it believes to be the best interest of the city, its citizens, and residents.
(c) Violations. In the event that any consumer of city water violates or continues to violate the provisions of
this section, and refuses to immediately discontinue the resale or the furnishing of water to land or premises
outside the corporate limits of the city, the city manager shall have the authority, after giving written notice to
such consumer by certified United States mail, return receipt requested, to immediately cease and desist from
such violation, to disconnect and suspend, or cause to be disconnected and suspended, all water service to the
land or premises of the consumer from which the water is being supplied to the land or premises outside the
corporate limits of the city.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.416)
Sec. 13.05.017 Incorporation of provisions into consumer contracts
All of the provisions of this article shall be deemed to be incorporated into every contract between the city
waterworks and its consumers, and each consumer shall be charged with the responsibility for knowledge of the
provisions of this article, and by applying for and accepting water from the city waterworks to have assented to
the provisions hereof. (1996 Code, sec. 11.417)
Sec. 13.05.018 Line extension and street cutting fees
(a) Generally. Water and wastewater taps will be made for the base tap fee provided the tap is made to a water
or wastewater line abutting or adjacent to the lot or parcel to be served (“standard location”). For the purposes of
this section, a tap made on a water or wastewater line located between the boundary line of the property to be
served and the right-of-way line of the street or alley abutting such lot, or a line located within the right-of-way
of such street between the property boundary line and the traveled, paved portions of the street, shall also
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/508
constitute a tap made at a “standard location.” A tap made at a “standard location” shall be a “standard
connection.” A “non-standard location” is any location for a tap to serve any lot, tract or parcel of land other
than at a standard location. A “non-standard connection” is any tap that requires work, construction or
extensions to be made for the tap, or that is made at other than a standard location. Additional charges and fees
will be assessed and collected as herein detailed for costs associated with line extensions and taps made to a nonstandard
location.
(b) Availability of service. The existence of mains, trunk lines or other lines near a property will not constitute
an obligation for the city to limit the tap fee or charge for making a water or wastewater service tap to such line,
where such lines must be tapped at other than a standard location, or are inaccessible due to necessary crossings
of streets, highways, drainage channels and similar barriers, or when cost must be incurred over and above the
cost for making a tap at a standard location. Taps at non-standard locations must be arranged with the director of
public works in advance of the desired service date, to permit necessary extensions, crossings or similar
construction.
(c) Installation of non-standard connection. Upon the approval of the city manager, the owner or developer of
a subdivision requiring a non-standard connection may contract with a qualified contractor for the installation,
construction and extension of any water or wastewater line necessary to make a non-standard connection or as
necessary for the location for the tap to become a standard location, and, in such event, such owner or developer
shall pay the reasonable costs and charges therefor directly to the contractor and obtain a receipt and release
from said contractor. The city shall otherwise, at the expense of the applicant for the tap, construct all line
extensions and perform all construction required to make a water or wastewater tap at a non-standard location.
The city engineer or department of public works shall inspect such construction and work to assure it is
completed in compliance with the applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state commission on
environmental quality.
(d) Payment of costs for non-standard connection. The reasonable costs and expenses for installing,
constructing and extending any water or wastewater line of the city to provide a tap at a non-standard location,
or to extend such lines to a standard location, shall be charged and collected by the city, if such costs are not paid
directly by an owner/developer pursuant to subsection (c) above. Such additional costs and expenses shall be
equal to the difference between the cost of making the tap at a standard location and the cost of making the tap at
the non-standard location, or, as the case may be, the difference between the cost of making the tap at a standard
location and the costs incurred for the work and construction to extend the lines to a point or location that is a
standard location for the tap.
(e) Right-of-way easement. A right-of-way easement may be required for installation or extension of lines.
Failure to provide an adequate easement for the installation or extension of a line may result in a denial of a
request for line extension or installation.
(f) Payment of line extension fee. When a water or wastewater line extension charge is required, the city may
at its option require the owner or developer being furnished the line to:
(1) Deposit, in advance, the estimated costs for construction of the water or wastewater line that
are estimated to be costs additional to a standard connection;
(2) Post a bond sufficient to cover the total estimated costs of line extension; or
(3) Provide a letter of credit sufficient to cover the total estimated costs of the line extension.
(g) Line extension fees outside city limits. The costs set out in this section shall apply for connections to
property both inside and outside the city limits.
(Ordinance 4-09-01, sec. 4, adopted 4/9/01)
Sec. 13.05.019 No reduced rates or free service
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/508
All customers receiving services from the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be
charged the rates established in this chapter, and no reduced rates or free service shall be furnished to any
customer. It is specifically provided, however, that this provision shall not prohibit the city, upon good cause
shown, from establishing reasonable classifications of customers for which rates differing from the rates stated
herein may be adopted, and nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent the city from furnishing water
services to special projects or other establishments at a bulk rate if deemed advisable by the city. (Ordinance 4-
09-01, sec. 5, adopted 4/9/01)
Sec. 13.05.020 Denial of service
An applicant for service may be denied service for any of the following reasons:
(1) Failure or refusal of the applicant to complete all required forms and pay all required fees and
charges;
(2) Failure or refusal of the applicant to comply with rules, regulations or ordinances of the city
concerning the requested service;
(3) Failure or refusal of the applicant to comply with the building regulations and plumbing codes
of the city;
(4) Existence of a hazardous condition at the property to be served which would jeopardize health,
safety or the general welfare upon connection or during construction;
(5) Failure or refusal of the applicant to build the facilities or structures necessary to connect to the
system; or
(6) Failure or refusal of the applicant to provide representatives or employees of the city water
department reasonable access to the property upon which service has been requested.
(Ordinance 4-09-01, sec. 6, adopted 4/9/01)
ARTICLE 13.06 DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS*
Sec. 13.06.001 Discharge of unpolluted water to sanitary sewer
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, downspouts, yard drains, yard fountains and ponds, lawn sprays, water from swimming pools or
unpolluted industrial water into any sanitary sewer in the system. (1996 Code, sec. 11.501)
Sec. 13.06.002 Prohibited substances
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any public sewer, any of the following described
substances, materials, waters, or wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature greater than 122° F (50° C).
(2) Any toxic, corrosive, flammable or explosive liquid, solid or gas, such as gasoline, kerosene,
phenols, benzene, naphtha, etc.
(3) Any water or wastes which contain wax, greases, oil, cleaning solvents, mineral oils or other
substances which will solidify at temperatures between 32° to 150° F.
(4) Any garbage that has not been properly comminuted or shredded. (The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4 hp or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the city manager.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/508
(5) Any solid or viscous substances, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, gravel, straw, tar, asphalt,
ceramic wastes, shavings, sawdust, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime
slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues, or bulk solids.
(6) Any heavy metals such as those listed below:
Antimony;
Arsenic;
Barium;
Beryllium;
Bismuth;
Boron;
Cadmium;
Chromium (Hexa);
Chromium (Tri);
Cobalt;
Copper;
Iron;
Lead;
Manganese;
Mercury;
Molybdenum;
Nickel;
Rhenium;
Selenium;
Silver;
Strontium;
Tellurium;
Tin;
Uranyl ion; and
Zinc.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/508
(7) Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration that exceeds limits
established by the U.S. Public Health Service for public drinking water standards.
(8) Any wastes or waters containing substances which are not amenable to treatment or reduction
by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having
jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.502)
Sec. 13.06.003 Restricted wastes
Discharge into the city sewer system shall consist only of domestic sewage, properly shredded garbage,
industrial wastes and other wastes which are free from the prohibited constituents listed above and limited in
BOD, suspended solids, dissolved sulfides, and pH as follows:
(1) Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) of such wastes delivered shall not exceed 250 ppm, as
determined by Standard Methods.
(2) Suspended solids delivered shall not exceed 250 ppm, as determined by Standard Methods.
(3) Hydrogen ion concentration (pH) of the sewage delivered shall be no lower than 6.0 nor higher
than 9.5 and any acid wastes shall not be discharged unless neutralized to a pH of 6.0 or more.
(4) Dissolved sulfides in the wastes delivered to the system shall not exceed 0.1 ppm.
(5) Alkalinity shall not exceed 400 ppm.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.503)
Sec. 13.06.004 Volume and rate of flow of wastes
The volume and rate of flow of wastes to the sewer system shall not be in excess of the capacity of the facility
provided, as determined and regulated by the city manager. (1996 Code, sec. 11.504)
Sec. 13.06.005 Discharge of industrial wastes
(a) Discharge of prohibited wastes. Any persons or owners discharging industrial wastes into the sewer system
which exhibit any of the prohibited wastes set out in section 13.06.002 shall pretreat or otherwise dispose of
such industrial waste as to make the remaining wastes meet the requirements of section 13.06.003 and be
acceptable to the city manager.
(b) Inspection chamber or control manhole. Any such person or owner shall provide and maintain, in a
suitable accessible position on his premises, an inspection chamber or control manhole near the outlet of such
sewer prior to the discharge into the city system. Every such chamber shall be of such design and construction
which will prevent infiltration of any water or foreign matter into the city system and shall be so maintained by
the person discharging wastes so that any authorized representative of the city may readily and safely measure
the volume and obtain samples of the flow at all times.
(c) Pretreatment. Where pretreatment or equalization of waste flows is practiced prior to discharge into the
city's sewer system, the design and installation of the plants and equipment of said pretreatment or equalization
facilities shall be subject to the review and approval of the city manager and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(d) Grease, oil and sand interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand, and other
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/508
harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the city manager and shall be located as to be
readily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious
materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial
construction, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers, which when bolted in place shall be
gastight and watertight.
(e) Arrangements for industrial waste of unusual character. No statement contained in this article shall be
construed as preventing any agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment
therefor by the industrial concern for any portion of the excess cost to the city of handling and treating such
industrial wastes, as may be established by the city council.
(f) Discharge into storm sewer prohibited. The discharge of industrial sewage wastes into the storm sewer
system or stormwater drainage system of the city is hereby prohibited.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.505)
Sec. 13.06.006 Rates for industrial users
Because industrial sewer waste is more costly and more difficult to handle by the sewage system of the city and
due to the injurious material and biochemical oxygen demand contained in said sewage, therefore, in order that
industrial sewage may pay its fair, reasonable and just cost for the use or rental of the sewer system furnished by
the city's municipal sewer system in line with the rental charges of other users, all persons, firms or corporations
using the sewer system or the sewer lines in the city and either discharging sewage waste into the system of lines
shall be charged the following rate:
(1) Standard schedule.
Industry Charge: Percent of
User's Monthly Water
Bill
Slaughterhouses, packing plants, poultry plants, milk
plants
100%
Laundries, washaterias, etc. 100%
Bottling works 100%
Rendering plants 200%
(1996 Code, sec. 11.506; Ordinance adopting Code)
(2) Other industrial users.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/508
(A) Other categories. Any industrial user of the city's municipal sewer system who does not
fall within any of the above categories of industrial users, said person, firm or corporation shall
be charged a sewer or rental charge based on the amount and strength of said sewage by the
mayor and city council, but in no instance will said charge or rental be less than fifty percent
(50%) of the user's monthly water bill.
(B) Users whose water is not supplied wholly by city. In the event any person, firm or
corporation who is an industrial user of the sewer system and sewer lines of the city and whose
water is not supplied wholly by the city, and where the bill for the water used thereon or therein
in this event would not clearly show the amount of sewage said industrial user was putting into
the city's municipal sewer system, then in such case the amount of water so used shall be
otherwise measured and determined by the city manager in order to determine the fair and
reasonable charge to be made for sewer services provided under this article and these users shall
be billed accordingly.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.506)
Sec. 13.06.007 Testing procedures
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in
this article shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of
Water and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works
Association, and the Water Environment Federation, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the
control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point
which said charge or rental shall be determined at which the building sewer is connected [sic]. Sampling shall be
carried out by customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four (24) hour composite of all outfalls of the premises is appropriate or whether a grab
sample or samples shall be taken.) All testing shall be done by a laboratory approved by the city, and the cost of
this testing shall be borne by the owner. (1996 Code, sec. 11.507)
Sec. 13.06.008 Right of entry
The city manager and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification
shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. (1996 Code, sec. 11.508)
Sec. 13.06.009 Notice of violation; correction of violation
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article shall be served by the city with written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. If the
offender continues violation after the expiration of the time stated, the city council may prohibit the further use
of the sewage system by the offender and may remove or close the offender's sewage and water connections.
(1996 Code, sec. 11.509)
Sec. 13.06.010 Liability for expense, loss or damage
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss, or
damage occasioned by the city by reason of such violation. (1996 Code, sec. 11.510)
ARTICLE 13.07 WATER CONSERVATION AND DROUGHT RESPONSE
Division 1. Generally
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/508
Secs. 13.07.001–13.07.030 Reserved
Division 2. Water Conservation Plan
Sec. 13.07.031 Goals
(a) The city will continue existing water conservation policies and increase its emphasis on water conservation
measures to accomplish the goals presented below. The city goals with respect to water conservation are to:
(1) Reduce unaccounted-for water to ten (10) percent through improved water use accounting and
leak detection and repair by the year 2015.
(2) Reduce the per capita per day consumption by ten (10) percent from a four-year average of 130
gpcd to 110 gpcd by the year 2015.
(3) Continue the meter testing, repair and replacement program as well as leak detection efforts in
order to reduce the unaccounted-for water to ten (10) percent as stated above.
(b) These goals are consistent with commonly accepted industry standards and with the “expected” water
conservation effects included in state water development board (TWDB) water demand projections for the city.
(Ordinance 2005-05-09 (5A), ex. A, sec. I, adopted 5/9/05)
Sec. 13.07.032 Water conservation program
The following actions will be taken by the city to accomplish the above-stated goals:
(1) Public education and awareness.
(A) Public education and awareness is an essential component of the city's water
conservation program. The objective is to communicate to the city's residents the need for and
benefits of water conservation and to provide useful consumer-oriented information on water
conservation practices and technologies. The city will obtain and disseminate such information
through a variety of avenues, including:
(i) Providing water conservation literature to new utility customers at the time they
apply for service, to utility customers reporting high water use, and at the utility sales
office on a continuing basis;
(ii) Providing publicity of the use of native plants and grasses to reduce lawn water
demands;
(iii) Providing consumer tips on water conservation in a newsletter to be posted at all
water offices and to be distributed at civic events; and
(iv) Presentation at schools and to civic organizations.
(B) The city will also obtain video and radio public service announcements on water
conservation from the TWDB and make these available to the local media. TWDB videos on
state water resources issues and water conservation will also be provided to the public access
channel.
(C) The city will also explore opportunities to implement the “Major Rivers” youth education
program. Major Rivers is a water education curriculum designed to teach 4th and 5th grade
students about the state's major water resources, how water is treated and delivered to their
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/508
homes and schools, how to care for their water resources, and how to use them wisely. The
program's host, Major Rivers (named for the major rivers of Texas), and his horse Aquifer
cover these topics in eight lessons that include a variety of activities in science, math, language
arts, social studies and other subjects. The Major Rivers teaching package includes a teacher's
guide with full-color overhead transparencies, an introductory video, and full-color student
workbooks and home information leaflets. The lesson objectives not only define important
knowledge and skills related to water, but they also support many of the state education
agency's TEKS and TAKS objectives for social studies, science, language arts and math. The
cost of the program is approximately $40.00 per 30-student classroom. The city will work with
the school district, businesses, and civic organizations to obtain funding to implement the
program.
(2) Plumbing fixture efficiency standards.
(A) Since 1992, state law has prohibited the sale of certain plumbing fixtures that do not
conform to specific water use efficiency standards. For example, water use by tank-type toilets
sold within the state is not to exceed 1.6 gallons per flush. Shower heads are limited to 2.5
gallons per minute flow rate. Similar water efficiency standards have been adopted by the
federal government. These state and federal water efficiency standards effectively supersede
and replace local standards and eliminate the need for enforcement of plumbing code standards
for water efficiency at the local level.
(B) In 1991, the state legislature passed legislation requiring that plumbing fixtures sold in
the state after January 1, 1992, meet the following standards:
(i) Shower heads: No more than 2.75 gallons per minute at 80 pounds per square inch
of pressure.
(ii) Laboratory/sink faucets and aerators: No more than 2.2 gallons per minute at 60
pounds per square inch of pressure.
(iii) Wall-mounted flushometer toilets: No more than 2.0 gallons per flush.
(iv) All other toilets: No more than 1.6 gallons per flush.
(v) Drinking water fountains: Must be self closing.
The above standards are enforced through requirements placed directly on the
manufacturers, importers, and supplies of new fixtures in the state.
(C) In addition, the city encourages the following water conservation measures:
(i) Hot water pipes: Hot water lines not in or under a concrete slab installed [shall] be
insulated.
(ii) Pressure reduction valves: Pressure reduction valves may be installed where system
pressures exceed 80 pounds per square inch.
(iii) Swimming pools: Swimming pools should have recirculating filtration equipment.
(iv) Automatic dishwashers: Automatic dishwashers installed in residential dwellings
should be a design that uses a maximum of six gallons of water per cycle.
(v) Automatic clothes washers: Automatic clothes washers installed in residential
dwellings should be a design that uses a maximum of 14 gallons of water per cycle.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/508
(D) New plumbing fixtures that replace or renovate existing plumbing fixtures should follow
the residential and commercial construction requirements.
(E) The use of water-efficient plumbing fixtures in new construction and as replacements in
existing construction is expected to significantly reduce per capita water use and wastewater
flows over time. Importantly, such savings will occur “passively” in that market penetration
will occur as a consequence of new development and as older inefficient plumbing fixtures
wear out and are replaced. Also, water savings associated with high-efficiency plumbing
fixtures are relatively predictable as the savings are not dependent on conscious effort by the
consumer to modify water use behaviors. The city's plumbing code encourages the use of
water-conserving plumbing fixtures for residential and commercial construction. The city has
adopted the 2000 International Plumbing Code.
(3) Plumbing fixture retrofit and replacement. The city will encourage the retrofit and/or
replacement of older, inefficient plumbing fixtures and appliances through the public education and
awareness activities described above. Particular emphasis will be placed on the expected cost savings
and payback periods through reduced water, wastewater, and energy costs. Also, as previously
indicated, retrofit kits will be provided through the “Major Rivers” program. In addition, the city will
investigate the costs and benefits of replacing inefficient plumbing fixtures in all city-owned
facilities.
(4) Water rate structure. The schedule of monthly rates or charges for water service furnished by
the city shall be, and such is hereby adopted and established, as set forth in the fee schedule in
appendix A of this code.
(Ordinance 2005-05-09 (5A), ex. A, sec. II, adopted 5/9/05)
(5) Metering and repair.
(A) Metering all water services is an effective means of improving and maintaining control
of water system operations and provides the basis for efficient and equitable cost recovery.
Metering provides a database for system performance monitoring, for planning future facilities,
and for assessing the effects of water conservation measures. Metering also improves
accountability for both water deliveries and for unaccounted-for water losses. The city meters
all water accounts, including those serving city facilities.
(B) The city meters the quantity of water that is delivered to each residential and commercial
customer, and to each public use, including city facilities. Meters are read and the quantities are
recorded once per month, with billings made monthly to residential and commercial customers.
Efforts are on the way to implement some type of automatic meter reading (AMR) to remove
the human factor in the reading of meters and thus reduce unaccounted for water (UFW).
(C) Periodic testing, repair and/or change-out of meters is essential to an effective metering
program. All meters larger than two (2) inches are tested by the city annually, and meters one
and one-half (1-1/2) inches and smaller are tested on a cycle of once every five (5) years.
Meters found to perform outside accepted parameters for accuracy will be repaired or replaced
as required.
(D) The city meters all water sales and public uses, and operates a meter replacement
program with the objective to replace 15 percent of residential meters per year, and a goal to
replace all residential meters every 7 to 8 years. All commercial meters are tested annually and
replaced as necessary. The city plans to continue this program.
(E) The city has instituted procedures to improve accounting for unmetered water losses
resulting from the flushing of water mains, firefighting, and main breaks. These procedures
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/508
allow the city to better estimate actual water losses due to leakage and will aid in evaluating the
cost and benefits associated with leak detection and the repair or replacement of main water
lines.
(6) Water-conserving landscaping. The city does not plan to require water-conserving landscaping.
However, the city does, through its education and awareness activities, encourage residents to adopt
water-efficient landscaping and landscape maintenance practices. Through its public information
program, the city encourages and supports the use of xeriscape landscaping techniques. Utilities staff
distribute xeriscape literature and provide presentations at public meetings on water-conserving
landscaping and lawn watering methods. Particular emphasis is placed on providing such information
in advance of and during the summer lawn water season.
(7) Reuse. The city does not reuse treated wastewater effluent.
(8) Pressure reduction. Pressure is the force which determines how much water can pass through a
given faucet, valve, pipe or hole in a given time. For example, test for one type of faucet showed that
flow rates through the faucet opened at a constant setting varied from 3.0 to 5.6 gallons per minute at
150 psi. From this example, it is obvious that pressure reduction will help save water by reducing the
amount of water that will flow through an opened valve or faucet in a given time period. Pressure
reduction also saves water by reducing excessive mechanical stress on plumbing fixtures and
appliances and on distribution systems. Faucet seats and washers will last longer, washing machine
and dishwasher valves will break less frequently, pipe joints will be less susceptible to failure, and
leaks in distribution systems will lose water more slowly at lower pressures. For these reasons, many
utility plumbing codes and regulations require pressure reduction for customer connections.
(9) Means of implementation and enforcement. The city's public works director will have the
primary responsibility for implementing the plan. Water conservation orders will be enforced by the
city police department, code enforcement officer, utility department personnel and municipal court,
as appropriate.
(Ordinance 2005-05-09 (5A), ex. A, sec. II, adopted 5/9/05; Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. 13.07.033 Reporting; annual review
(a) The service area of the city is located within the Brazos River Authority Regional Water Planning Group
(Brazos River Authority (G)), and the city has provided a copy of this plan to this entity.
(b) In the event the city requests loans from the TWDB, the city will be obligated to the TWDB (under rule 31
TAC 363.71) to submit an annual report to the executive administrator of the TWDB on the implementation and
status of the city's water conservation programs for three (3) years after the closing date for loans made by the
TWDB. The report will be in a form and will include all information required by TWDB staff to determine the
city's compliance with the water conservation and drought contingency plans.
(c) The annual review of the water conservation program will be completed by the city's public works
director. The city's public works director will be alert throughout the year to any changes in the water supply and
distribution system, or to any changes in population, which could affect the goals and objectives of the city's
water conservation plan. Periodic and in-depth reviews will be made to determine if such changes discussed
above might require an amendment or major changes in the plan.
(Ordinance 2005-05-09 (5A), ex. A, sec. III, adopted 5/9/05)
Secs. 13.07.034–13.07.060 Reserved
Division 3. Drought Contingency and Emergency Water Demand Management Plan*
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/508
Sec. 13.07.061 Declaration of policy, purpose, and intent
(a) In order to conserve the available water supply and protect the integrity of water supply facilities, with
particular regard for domestic water use, sanitation, and fire protection, and to protect and preserve public
health, welfare, and safety and minimize the adverse impacts of water supply shortage or other water supply
emergency conditions, the city hereby adopts the following regulations and restrictions on the delivery and
consumption of water.
(b) Water uses regulated or prohibited under this plan are considered to be non-essential, and continuation of
such uses during times of water shortage or other emergency water supply condition are deemed to constitute a
waste of water which subjects the offender(s) to penalties as defined in section 13.07.071 of this plan.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. I)
Sec. 13.07.062 Public involvement
Opportunity for the public to provide input into the preparation of the plan was provided by the city by means of
scheduling and providing public notice of public meetings to accept input on the plan. (Ordinance adopted
9/11/00, ex. A, sec. II)
Sec. 13.07.063 Public education
The city will periodically provide the public with information about the plan, including information about the
conditions under which each stage of the plan is to be initiated or terminated and the drought response measures
to be implemented in each stage. This information will be provided by means of press releases via radio
broadcasts on KRXT FM 98.5 and notices in the local weekly newspaper, the Rockdale Reporter. (Ordinance
adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. III)
Sec. 13.07.064 Coordination with regional water planning groups
The service area of the city is located within the Group G, Brazos Region, in Waco, Texas, and the city has
provided a copy of this plan to them. (Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. IV)
Sec. 13.07.065 Authority to implement plan
The city manager, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized and directed to implement the applicable provisions
of this plan upon determination that such implementation is necessary to protect public health, safety, and
welfare. The city manager, or his/her designee, shall have the authority to initiate or terminate drought or other
water supply emergency response measures as described in this plan. (Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. V)
Sec. 13.07.066 Applicability
The provisions of this plan shall apply to all persons, customers, and property utilizing water provided by the
city. The terms “person” and “customer” as used in the plan include individuals, corporations, partnerships,
associations, and all other legal entities. (Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. VI)
Sec. 13.07.067 Definitions
For the purposes of this plan, the following definitions shall apply:
Aesthetic water use. Water use for ornamental or decorative purposes such as fountains, reflecting pools, and
water gardens.
Commercial and institutional water use. Water use which is integral to the operations of commercial and
nonprofit establishments and governmental entities such as retail establishments, hotels and motels, restaurants,
and office buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/508
Conservation. Those practices, techniques, and technologies that reduce the consumption of water, reduce the
loss or waste of water, improve the efficiency in the use of water or increase the recycling and reuse of water so
that a supply is conserved and made available for future or alternative uses.
Customer. Any person, company, or organization using water supplied by the city.
Domestic water use. Water use for personal needs or for household or sanitary purposes such as drinking,
bathing, heating, cooking, or sanitation, or for cleaning a residence, business, industry, or institution.
Even-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 0, 2, 4, 6, or 8,
and locations without addresses.
Industrial water use. The use of water in processes designed to convert materials of lower value into forms
having greater usability and value.
Landscape irrigation use. Water used for the irrigation and maintenance of landscaped areas, whether publicly
or privately owned, including residential and commercial lawns, gardens, golf courses, parks, and rights-of-way
and medians.
Non-essential water use. Water uses that are not essential nor required for the protection of public, health, safety,
and welfare, including:
(1) Irrigation of landscape areas, including parks, athletic fields, and golf courses, except as
otherwise provided under this plan;
(2) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle;
(3) Use of water to wash down any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced area;
(4) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than immediate fire
protection;
(5) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
(6) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools or jacuzzi-type
pools;
(7) Use of water in a fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes except where necessary to
support aquatic life;
(8) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been given notice
directing the repair of such leak(s); and
(9) Use of water from hydrants for construction purposes or any other purposes other than
firefighting.
Odd-numbered address. Street addresses, box numbers, or rural postal route numbers ending in 1, 3, 5, 7, or 9.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. VII)
Sec. 13.07.068 Triggering criteria
(a) The city manager or his/her designee shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a weekly
basis and shall determine when conditions warrant initiation or termination of each stage of the plan, that is,
when the specified “triggers” are reached.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/508
(b) The triggering criteria described below are based on known system capacity limits.
(1) Stage 1 triggers - Mild water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be requested to voluntarily conserve water
and adhere to the prescribed restrictions on certain water uses, defined in section 13.07.067
(definitions), [and] other measures may be implemented when one or more of the following
conditions exist:
(i) Water consumption has reached 80 percent of daily maximum supply for three (3)
consecutive days.
(ii) There is an extended period (at least eight (8) weeks) of low rainfall.
(2) Stage 2 triggers - Moderate water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Stage 2 water allocation measures may be implemented
when one of the following conditions exists:
(i) Water consumption has reached 90 percent of the amount available for three
consecutive days.
(ii) The water level in any of the water storage tanks cannot be replenished for three (3)
consecutive days.
(3) Stage 3 triggers - Severe water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Stage 3 water allocation measures may be implemented
when one of the following conditions exists:
(i) Water consumption of 95 percent or more of the maximum available for three (3)
consecutive days.
(ii) Water consumption of 100 percent of the maximum available and the water storage
levels in the system drop during one 24-hour period.
(4) Stage 4 triggers - Emergency water shortage conditions.
(A) Requirements for initiation. Customers shall be required to comply with the requirements
and restrictions for Stage 4 of this plan when the city manager, or his/her designee, determines
that a water supply emergency exists based on:
(i) Major water line breaks, or pump or system failures occur, which cause
unprecedented loss of capability to provide water service;
(ii) Natural or man-made contamination of the water supply sources(s);
(iii) Failure of a major component of the system or an event which reduces the
minimum residual pressure in the system below 20 psi; or
(iv) Other unforeseen events which could cause imminent health or safety risks to the
public.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. VIII)
Sec. 13.07.069 Response to water shortage conditions
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/508
(a) The city manager, or his/her designee, shall monitor water supply and/or demand conditions on a daily
basis and, in accordance with the triggering criteria set forth in section 13.07.068 of this plan, shall determine
that a mild, moderate, severe, or emergency water shortage condition exists and shall implement the following
notification procedures:
(1) Notification of the public. The city manager or his/her designee shall notify the public by
means of:
(A) Publication in the local weekly newspaper (Rockdale Reporter).
(B) Public service announcements on local radio (KRXT, FM 98.5).
(2) Additional notification. The city manager or his/her designee shall notify directly, or cause to
be notified directly, the following individuals and entities:
(A) Mayor and members of the city council.
(B) Fire chief.
(C) County emergency management coordinator(s).
(D) TCEQ.
(E) Critical water users, i.e., hospitals, nursing home facilities and public schools.
(b) Stage 1 response - Mild water shortage conditions.
(1) Supply management measures. The city will reduce flushing of water mains.
(2) Voluntary water use restrictions.
(A) Water customers are requested to voluntarily limit the irrigation of landscaped areas.
(B) Water customers are requested to practice water conservation and to minimize or
discontinue water use for non-essential purposes.
(c) Stage 2 response - Moderate water shortage conditions.
(1) Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of water mains, and reduce
irrigation of public landscaped areas.
(2) Water use restrictions. Under threat of penalty for violation, the following water use restrictions
shall apply to all persons:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas with hose-end sprinklers or automatic irrigation systems
shall be limited to [even-numbered days for customers with street addresses ending with] evennumbers
(0, 2, 4, 6, or 8) and odd-numbered days for customers with street addresses ending
with odd numbers (1, 3, 5, 7 or 9). Irrigation of landscaped areas is permitted at any time if it is
by means of a hand-held hose, a faucet-filled bucket or watering can of five (5) gallons or less,
or a drip irrigation system.
(B) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle
is prohibited except on designated watering days. Such washing, when allowed, shall be done
with a hand-held bucket or a hand-held hose equipped with a positive shut-off nozzle for quick
rinses. Vehicle washing may be done at any time on the immediate premises of a commercial
carwash or commercial service station. Further, such washing may be exempted from these
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/508
regulations if the health, safety, and welfare of the public is contingent upon frequent vehicle
cleansing, such as garbage trucks and vehicles used to transport food and perishables.
(C) Use of water to fill, refill, or add to any indoor or outdoor swimming pools, wading
pools, or jacuzzi-type pools is prohibited except on designated watering days.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are
equipped with a recirculation system.
(E) Use of water from hydrants shall be limited to firefighting, related activities, or other
activities necessary to maintain public health, safety, and welfare.
(F) The following uses of water are defined as non-essential and are prohibited:
(i) Wash-down of any sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking lots, tennis courts, or
other hard-surfaced areas;
(ii) Use of water to wash down buildings or structures for purposes other than
immediate fire protection;
(iii) Use of water for dust control;
(iv) Flushing gutters or permitting water to run or accumulate in any gutter or street;
and
(v) Failure to repair a controllable leak(s) within a reasonable period after having been
given notice directing the repair of such leak(s).
(d) Stage 3 response - Severe water shortage conditions.
(1) Supply management measures. The city will discontinue flushing of water mains and irrigation
of public landscaped areas.
(2) Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stage 2 shall remain in effect during Stage 3 except:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas shall be limited to designated watering days between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 10:00 a.m. and between 8 p.m. and 12:00 midnight and shall be by
means of hand-held hoses, hand-held buckets, drip irrigation, or permanently installed
automatic sprinkler system only. The use of hose-end sprinklers is prohibited at all times.
(e) Stage 4 response - Emergency water shortage conditions.
(1) Water use restrictions. All requirements of Stage 2 and 3 shall remain in effect during Stage 4
except:
(A) Irrigation of landscaped areas is absolutely prohibited.
(B) Use of water to wash any motor vehicle, motorbike, boat, trailer, airplane or other vehicle
is absolutely prohibited.
(C) The filling, refilling or adding of water to swimming pools, wading pools, and jacuzzitype
pools is prohibited.
(D) Operation of any ornamental fountain or pond for aesthetic or scenic purposes is
prohibited except where necessary to support aquatic life or where such fountains or ponds are
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/508
equipped with a recirculation system.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. IX)
Sec. 13.07.070 Termination of restrictions
When the trigger condition no longer exists, then the responsible official may terminate the water restrictions
provided that such an action is based on sound judgment. Public notice of the end of the restrictions shall be
given to customers. (Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. X)
Sec. 13.07.071 Enforcement; penalties
(a) No person shall knowingly or intentionally allow the use of water from the city for residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, governmental, or any other purpose in a manner contrary to any provision of
this plan, or in an amount in excess of that permitted by the drought response state in effect at the time pursuant
to action taken by the city manager, or his/her designee, in accordance with provisions of this plan.
(b) First violation: The customer will be issued a written warning of their specific violation.
(c) Second violation: The customer water usage rate will be doubled for the monthly bill for the month when
the violation occurred for all excess water used above the existing water use average calculated for the sewer
rate.
(d) Subsequent violation: Shall be considered unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor and the penalty for
violation will be under the guidelines as prescribed by section 1.01.009 of the Code of Ordinances and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of this code or of any
ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(e) In the event violation notices are ignored, the city will discontinue water service for up to seven (7) days.
All fines, penalties and the reconnect fee shall be paid before water service is restored.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. XI)
Sec. 13.07.072 Variances
(a) The city manager, or his/her designee, may, in writing, grant temporary variance for existing water uses
otherwise prohibited under this plan if it is determined that failure to grant such variance would cause an
emergency condition adversely affecting the health, sanitation, or fire protection for the public or the person
requesting such variance and if one or more of the following conditions are met:
(1) Compliance with this plan cannot be technically accomplished during the duration of the water
supply shortage or other condition for which the plan is in effect.
(2) Alternative methods can be implemented which will achieve the same level of reduction in
water use.
(b) Persons requesting an exemption from the provisions of this division shall file a petition for variance with
the city within 5 days after the plan or a particular drought response stage has been invoked. All petitions for
variances shall be reviewed by the city manager, or his/her designee, and shall include the following:
(1) Name and address of the petitioner(s).
(2) Purpose of water use.
(3) Specific provision(s) of the plan from which the petitioner is requesting relief.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/508
(4) Detailed statement as to how the specific provision of the plan adversely affects the petitioner
or what damage or harm will occur to the petitioner or others if the petitioner complies with this
division.
(5) Description of the relief requested.
(6) Period of time for which the variance is sought.
(7) Alternative water use restrictions or other measures the petitioner is taking or proposes to take
to meet the intent of this plan and the compliance date.
(8) Other pertinent information.
(c) Variances granted by the city shall be subject to the following conditions, unless waived or modified by the
city manager or his/her designee:
(1) Variances granted shall include a timetable for compliance.
(2) Variances granted shall expire when the plan is no longer in effect, unless the petitioner has
failed to meet specified requirements.
(d) No variance shall be retroactive or otherwise justify any violation of this plan occurring prior to the
issuance of the variance.
(Ordinance adopted 9/11/00, ex. A, sec. XII)
CHAPTER 14
ZONING
ARTICLE 14.01 GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 14.01.001 Comprehensive city plan
The planning and zoning commission and the city council having taken inventory of the current existing uses
within the city finds that planning for the city's future to require development of properties within the city limits
to be consistent with adjacent and adjoining uses is important to the health, safety, morals and welfare of the city.
The planning and zoning commission has prepared and recommended a comprehensive city plan. The
comprehensive city plan attached to Ordinance 2018-04-09(8A) as exhibit “A” is hereby adopted and approved.
From time to time, the city council may amend, add or remove proposals from the plan, in accordance with the
procedure set forth in section 213.003 of the Texas Local Government Code. The plan shall be kept in the office
of the city secretary and shall be available for public inspection during normal office hours. (Ordinance 2018-04-
09(8A) adopted 4/9/18)
Charter reference–Comprehensive plan, sec. 10.02.
State law references–Municipal comprehensive plans, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, ch. 213; zoning regulations to be in
compliance with comprehensive plan, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.004.
ARTICLE 14.02 ZONING ORDINANCE†
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/508
Division 1. Generally
Sec. 14.02.001 Authority
This article is adopted pursuant to the police powers of the City of Rockdale and under the authority of the
constitution and general laws of the State of Texas, including particularly chapter 211 of the Texas Local
Government Code. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.101), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.002 General purpose and intent
(a) Purpose. The primary purposes of this article are to promote the public health, safety, morals and the
general welfare of the city and its present and future residents; provide reasonable regulations and requirements
to protect, preserve, improve and provide for the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the present
and future citizens of the city; and to establish a framework of zoning guidelines and criteria which will provide
for and support the development of a quality living and work environment by incorporating provisions requiring
all future development and redevelopment to provide a compatible plan for residential, commercial and
industrial uses, while providing reasonable protections for both the public and persons having an ownership
interest in property affected by these regulations. This article should be administered and applied to result in
development superior to that otherwise achievable and to promote the following purposes:
(1) Assist the safe, orderly, healthful and coordinated development of the city;
(2) Conserve existing and future neighborhoods;
(3) Protect and conserve the value of real property throughout the community;
(4) Conserve, develop, protect, and utilize natural resources, as appropriate and consistent with the
public interest, to enhance the preservation of the environment;
(5) Protect and preserve places and areas of historical and cultural importance and significance to
the community;
(6) Prevent the overcrowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population or land uses,
thereby encouraging high-quality development and innovative design;
(7) Lessen congestion in the streets and provide convenient, safe, and efficient circulation of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
(8) Facilitate the adequate and efficient provision of transportation, water, wastewater, schools,
parks, emergency and recreational facilities, and other public requirements;
(9) Promote economic development through an efficient and practical means by which
development will promote a prosperous economic environment;
(10) Promote compatible residential, commercial and industrial uses to harmoniously relate future
development and redevelopment to the existing community and facilitate the development of
adjoining properties;
(11) Standardize the procedure and requirements for zoning, building permits, and certificates of
occupancy to provide administrative efficiency and property owner rights; and
(12) Provide the context for the appropriate reconciliation of any differences of interest among
property owners, developers, neighborhoods and the city.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.102), adopted 9/19/05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/508
Sec. 14.02.003 Jurisdiction and intent
(a) The requirements of this article shall apply to all property within the city; provide for the implementation
of the site development regulations; provide a voluntary guide for the development of property within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction in order that such property may be developed in a manner consistent with
neighboring areas and existing or planned infrastructure; and be construed and applied in a manner to give effect
to the City of Rockdale comprehensive plan. This article has been made with reasonable consideration among
other things, for the character of the district and its peculiar suitability for the particular uses specified, and with
a view to conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city
consistent with the City of Rockdale comprehensive plan. Nothing herein shall be construed to grant a
“permanent” zoning.
(b) The intent of this article is to supplement the minimum standards for the development of land within the
city as contained in the city's subdivision ordinance, applicable building, plumbing and electrical codes, and city
standard details and specifications. If only the minimum standards are followed, as expressed by the various
ordinances regulating land development, a standardization of development will occur.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.103), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.004 Definitions
(a) The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to
them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words used in the present
tense include the future tense. Words used in the plural number include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural. The word “shall” is always mandatory. The word “herein” means in this article. The word
“regulations” means the provisions of any applicable ordinance, rule, regulation or policy. The word “person”
means any human being or legal entity and includes a corporation, a partnership, and an incorporated or
unincorporated association. The words “used or occupied” as applied to any land or building shall be construed
to include the words intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied. Any definition not expressly
prescribed herein shall, until such time as defined by ordinance, be construed in accordance with customary
usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
Access. A way of approaching or entering a property.
Accessory structure. In a residential district, a subordinate building, detached or an attached private garage, the
use of which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the main dwelling or to the main use on the
same lot such as a private garage for automobile storage, toolhouse, bath or greenhouse (no business), home
workshop, children's playhouse, storage house or garden shelter, but not involving the conduct of a business or
occupancy other than as servants' quarters.
Accessory use. A use that is customarily a part of the principal use, a use which is clearly incidental, subordinate
and secondary to the permitted use, and which does not change the character of the permitted primary use. See:
Accessory structure.
Adjacent. Abutting and directly connected to or bordering.
Alcoholic beverages - mixed drinks. The typical use listing which will allow the serving of alcoholic beverages
for on-premise consumption as an incidental use where the gross revenue from the on-premise sales of alcoholic
beverages is less than 75% of total gross revenue.
Alcoholic beverages - off-premises. The standard use listing for a convenience store or similar facility where the
sale of beer for off-premises consumption is an allowed use according to zoning standards.
Alcoholic beverages - on-premises. The standard use listing which will solely allow the serving of beer for onpremise
consumption.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/508
Alley. A minor right-of-way, dedicated to public use, which gives a secondary means of vehicular access to the
back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street and which may be used for public utility purposes.
All-weather surface. An area surfaced with asphalt, concrete or similar pavement. Gravel or similar material is
not an acceptable all-weather surface.
Amortization. A method of eliminating nonconforming uses by requiring the termination of the nonconforming
use after a specified period of time.
Amusement (indoor). An amusement enterprise wholly enclosed in a building which is treated acoustically so
that noise generated by the enterprise is not perceptible at the bounding property line, including a bowling alley,
billiard parlor, and similar activities.
Amusement (outdoor). Any amusement enterprise offering entertainment or games of skill to the general public
for a fee or charge wherein any portion of the activity takes place in the open, including a golf driving range,
archery range, miniature golf course and similar activities.
Animal(s). Any animate being that is not a human.
Annexation. The incorporation of land area into the city with a resulting change in the boundaries of the city.
Antique shop. A business that sells items whose value is greater than the original purchase price because of age
or intrinsic value.
Apartment. A room or group of rooms used as a dwelling for one (1) family unit that includes full kitchen
facilities for the preparation of meals and cooking therein.
Apartment hotel. A building used or intended to be used as a home for twelve (12) or more families, who are
permanent residents, living independently of each other, in which building may be located on the first floor
living units for transient guests, and/or retail sales and service.
Apartment house or apartment building or apartments. A building or portion thereof used or intended to be used
as a home for five (5) or more families or households living independently of each other and equipped for
preparation of food.
Applicant. A person applying for zoning approval under this article.
Approval. The final approval in a series of required actions. For instance, the approval date of a planned unit
development zoning application is the date of council approval of the final site plan.
Art studio or gallery. A building where objects of art are created or displayed for the public enrichment or where
said art objects are displayed for sale, including the teaching of painting and/or sculpting.
Assisted-retirement living. A use providing 24-hour supervision and assisted living for more than four (4)
residents not requiring regular medical attention. This classification includes personal care homes for the
physically impaired and/or persons 60 years of age or older.
Attendant building. A building used to house the workplace of the manager or attendant of a public or private
parking lot.
Attendant documents. Materials needed to address the specific requirements of this article which the applicant
feels necessary to explain the submittal.
Auto repair (major). A business specializing in major repair of motor vehicles entirely within an enclosed
building, including any use listing below, as well as any use not listed as minor vehicle servicing.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/508
(1) Auto glass, seat cover and muffler shop;
(2) Auto painting or body rebuilding shop;
(3) Tire retreading and capping;
(4) Body, fender, clutch, transmission, differential, axle, spring and frame repairs;
(5) Major overhauling of engines requiring removal therefrom of cylinder head or crankcase pan
and any associated engine rebuilding;
(6) Repair of radiator requiring removal from the vehicle;
(7) Repair of truck, trailer, farm or industrial equipment, or other machinery/supplies;
(8) Brake work, other than minor maintenance such as disc pad replacement and minor brake
adjustment.
Auto repair (minor). A business specializing in minor, routine, periodic, preventive maintenance of a motor
vehicle conducted entirely within an enclosed building, including the following.
(1) Servicing of spark plug, batteries, distributors and distributor parts and including minor engine
tune-ups;
(2) Tire servicing and flat repair but not recapping or regrooving;
(3) Radiator cleaning and flushing (on vehicle);
(4) Fuel pump, oil pump, and related maintenance;
(5) Minor servicing of carburetors;
(6) Emergency wiring repairs;
(7) Minor motor adjustment not involving removal of head or crankcase;
(8) Quick oil and filter change;
(9) Servicing hoses, fan belts, brake fluid, lightbulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat belts, windshield
wipers, mirrors, and installation of vehicle accessories such as radios; accessories such as ratios [sic];
(10) Lubrication, greasing, and washing;
(11) Disc pad replacement and minor brake adjustment.
Auto sales facility. One or more buildings and an open, dust-free, all-weather surface other than a street, alley, or
other public place, used for the display, wholesale or retail sale, with repair and renovation authorized entirely
within an enclosed building, and temporary storage of vehicles for repairs or renovation not to exceed ninety
(90) days.
Auto sales (outdoor). An open, dust-free, all-weather area, other than a street, alley or other public place, used
for the display and sales of new or used automobiles. Where no repair work, except those actions normally
associated with vehicle operator service, is done on the cars to be displayed and sold on the premises. A sales
office is normally located on the premises and such shall be limited to an area less than 10% of the total sales lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/508
Bar. Any business establishment required to have a state license for the sale of alcoholic beverages other than
beer or wine, for on-premises consumption.
Bed and breakfast. An establishment engaged in providing rooms or groups of rooms in a dwelling unit for
temporary lodging for overnight guests on a paying basis.
Billboard. A sign advertising products not made, sold, used or served on the premises.
Block. An area enclosed by streets, normally to be divided into lots to be occupied by or intended for buildings;
or if the same word is used as a term of measurement, it shall mean the distance along one side of a street
between the nearest two streets which intersect said street on said side.
Board. The board of adjustments of the City of Rockdale, Texas.
Board of adjustments. A committee appointed by the council to consider appeals from certain administrative
actions pursuant to section 211.008 of the Texas Local Government Code and that is given the authority set forth
in this article and in section 211.009 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Boarding house. A building other than a hotel, occupied as a single housekeeping unit where lodging or meals
are provided for three (3) or more persons for compensation, pursuant to previous arrangements for definite
periods, but not to the general public or transients.
Buffer. An area within a property or site, generally adjacent to and parallel with the property line, either
consisting of existing natural vegetation or created by the use of trees, shrubs, berms and/or fences, and designed
to limit views and sound from the site to adjacent properties and vice versa.
Building. Any structure designed or built for the support, enclosure, shelter, or protection of persons, animals,
chattels or property of any kind. When subdivided in a manner sufficient to prevent the spread of fire, each
portion so subdivided may be deemed a separate building.
Building area. The gross area covered by a structure when placed on the lot.
Building ordinance. The building codes and related ordinances of the city providing standards, requirements and
regulations for site development and the construction and erection of buildings and structures within the city,
including, but not limited to, the electrical code, plumbing code, building code, and minimum housing code,
adopted by the city council from time to time.
Building permit. A permit issued by the city which is required prior to commencing construction or
reconstruction of any structure.
Building plot. The land, lot, lots or tract of land upon which a building or buildings are located, or upon which
they are to be constructed, including yards.
Building setback line. A line or lines designating the interior limit of the area of a lot within which structures
may be erected. The building lines generally provide the boundaries of the buildable area of any given lot and no
structure or building may be erected between a building and the corresponding lot line.
Cafe or cafeteria. A commercial establishment where snacks or meals are vended for consumption indoors or on
the premises.
Caliper. The trunk diameter of a tree at three (3) feet above natural grade.
Carport. An accessory structure with one or more sides, covered with a roof and constructed specifically for the
storage of one or more motor vehicles, being not more than 1,000 square feet. A carport is not an accessory
structure if built as an integral part of the original primary structure having an indistinguishable, continuous roof
structure.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/508
Cemetery. Land used or intended to be used for the interment of human remains and dedicated for cemetery
purposes, including crematories, mausoleums, columbariums and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with
and within the boundary of such cemetery.
Centerline of a waterway. The centerline of the waterway and refers to existing topographically defined
channels. If not readily discernible, the centerline shall be determined by (first) the low flow line, or (second) the
center of the two (2) year floodplain.
Child care center (intermediate). A facility (including nonresidential structures) which provides custodial care
and supervision for less than 24 hours a day for between seven (7) and twelve (12) children, excluding foster and
group homes. The facility must contain a minimum 150 square feet of floor area for each child.
Child care center (large). A facility where over twelve (12) children receive custodial care and supervision for
less than 24 hours a day, excluding foster and group homes.
Child care center (small). A private residence where the occupant provides custodial care and supervision during
daylight hours, for a maximum [of] six (6) children at any one time. The maximum of six (6) children includes
the family's natural or adopted children under the age of fourteen (14). The residence must contain a minimum
150 square feet of floor area for each child. This use shall exclude a family/group home.
Child care or child development facilities. Any children's home, orphanage, institution, private home, residence
or other place, whether public, parochial or private, operated for profit or not, which keeps, cares for, has
custody of or is attended by four (4) or more children under sixteen years of age at any one time, who are not
members of the immediate family or [of] any natural person operating any such place, during any part or all of
the twenty-four hours in a day. Also, any institution, home or other place, whether public, parochial or private,
conducted for profit or not, which keeps, cares for, has custody of or is attended by any number of children,
under sixteen years of age, who are not members of the immediate family of any natural person operating such a
place, who are mentally or physically handicapped, under medical or social supervision, and not within a
hospital, twenty-four hours a day.
Church or rectory. A place of worship and religious training of recognized religions including on-site housing of
ministers, rabbis, priests, nuns and similar staff personnel.
City. The City of Rockdale, Texas.
City building official or building official. The designated building official for the city or his or her designated
representative.
City council or council. The city council of the city.
City engineer. The city engineer for the city or his or her designated representative.
City limits or within the city. The, or within the, incorporated boundaries of the city.
City manager. The chief administrative officer designated by ordinance, or his or her designated representative.
City staff. The officers, employees and agents of the city assigned and designated from time to time by the city
manager and/or council, including but not limited to the city planner or city engineer, to review, comment and/or
report on zoning applications.
City standard details and specifications. A library of city-approved drawings and technical data representing
typical drainage, transportation, erosion and sedimentation control, and utility appurtenances to be constructed
for city acceptance.
Cleaning or laundry self-service shop. An establishment providing customers with self-service laundry and/or
dry cleaning facilities, and does not a include a commercial laundry or cleaning plant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/508
Cleaning shop or laundry (small). A custom cleaning shop not exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet of floor area.
Clinic. A public or private station or establishment for the examination and treatment of outpatients by an
individual or group of doctors, dentists, opticians, veterinarians, or other similar medical professionals.
Clothing manufacture. Cutting, sewing and forming garments, millinery and accessories, when no noise, dust,
vibration, odor or other undesirable or obnoxious condition is created to affect adjacent property.
Club. See: Social club.
Cold storage plant. A commercial establishment where food or other commodities are stored either in lockers,
rented or leased, or in vaults in bulk for distribution to the home or to commercial businesses. No slaughtering of
animals or fowl is allowed on the premises.
College or university. An academic institution of higher learning, accredited or recognized by the state and
offering a program or series of programs of academic study.
Commercial amusement (indoors). An enterprise conducted solely within one or more buildings or permanently
enclosed area whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an amusing or entertaining activity,
where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gate for the activity, including the following activities and activities
of the same or closely similar nature. Commercial amusements (indoors) include zoos, carnivals, expositions,
miniature golf courses, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic contests, rodeos, children's rides, skating rinks, ice
rinks, traveling shows, bowling alleys, and pool parlors, and similar enterprises.
Commercial amusement (outdoors). Any enterprise whose main purpose is to provide the general public with an
amusing or entertaining activity, where tickets are sold or fees collected at the gate for the activity, including the
following activities and activities of the same or closely similar nature. Commercial amusements (outdoors)
include zoos, carnivals, expositions, miniature golf courses, driving ranges, arcades, fairs, exhibitions, athletic
contests, rodeos, tent shows, Ferris wheels, children's rides, roller coasters, skating rinks, ice rinks, traveling
shows and similar enterprises.
Commission. The planning and zoning commission of the city.
Common area. Privately owned land and improvements within a townhouse, condominium, planned
development, or community unit development including buildings, common open space, central services and
utilities, streets, walks, parking areas, fencing and screening walls, landscaping, and any other elements and
facilities under common ownership and available for the use of all owners or tenants.
Common open space. That portion of the common area which is designated for outdoor recreation area, private
park, play lot, plaza, athletic court, swimming pool, fountain, stream or pond, ornamental landscaping or natural
vegetation offering visual amenity, and which is open to general view and conveniently accessible to pedestrians
within the project.
Communication services. An establishment engaged in providing broadcasting and other information relay
services accomplished through the use of electronic and telephonic mechanisms, and photocopy and
reproduction mechanisms (excludes broadcast towers).
Community center (private). A recreational facility, including both indoor and outdoor facilities, for use by
residents and guests of a particular residential community development, subdivision, planned unit development,
or membership group.
Community center (public). A building and grounds owned or leased and operated by a governmental body for
the social, recreational, health or welfare of the community served.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/508
Compounding or fabrication (light). The making of jewelry, compounding of perfume, small instruments or
pharmaceuticals, and similar work or processes.
Comprehensive or master plan. The comprehensive plan of the city and adjoining areas adopted by the
commission and approved by the city council, including all its revisions as defined by chapter 219 of the Texas
Local Government Code. The plan may indicate the general locations recommended for various land uses,
transportation routes, public and private buildings, streets, parks, and other public and private developments and
improvements, to include detailed plans for water and sewer facilities. Such plan is the overall development plan
for the community adopted to provide long-range development policies and may include all specified individual
elements thereof among which are the plans for land intensities; land subdivision; circulation; and community
facilities, utilities and services. The comprehensive or master plan does not constitute zoning regulations or
establish zoning district boundaries.
Conditional use. An additional use, which may be permitted in a district, subject to meeting certain conditions or
procedures established by the city council. No conditional use shall be permitted in any location where it will be
inconsistent with the existing adjacent and nearby uses.
Condominium. A building or group of buildings in which dwelling units are owned individually, while the
structure, common areas and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional or individual basis.
Construction plans. The maps, drawings, plans and specifications indicating the proposed location and design of
improvements to be installed as part of a development and sealed by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
Contiguous. Adjacent property whose property lines are separated by only a street, alley, easement, right-of-way
or buffer.
Convalescent home. Any structure used or occupied by three (3) or more persons recovering from illness or
being provided geriatric care for compensation.
Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of and abutting on two (2) or more streets.
Country club. An area of twenty (20) acres or more containing a golf course and a clubhouse and available only
to private specific membership, such a club may contain adjunct facilities such as private club, dining room,
swimming pool, tennis courts and similar recreational or service facilities.
County. Milam County, Texas.
County appraisal district. The Milam County Appraisal District.
Court. An open, unoccupied space, bounded on more than two sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is
a court entirely surrounded by the exterior walls of a building. An outer court is a court having one side open to
a street, alley, yard or other open space.
Critical root zone. A circular area around a significant tree equal to one (1) foot in radius for each one (1) inch
caliper, and the center of the circular area located at the trunk.
Cultural services. A library, museum, or similar registered nonprofit organizational use displaying, preserving,
and exhibiting objects of community and cultural interest in one or more of the arts and sciences.
Day camp. A facility arranged and conducted for the organized recreation and instruction of children including
outdoor activities on a daytime basis.
Developed area. That portion of a lot, easement, or parcel upon which a building, structure, pavement or other
improvements have been placed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/508
Developer. The legal owner of land to be improved and/or subdivided or his/her authorized representative.
Development. The construction or placement of any buildings, utilities, access, roads or other structures,
excavation, mining, dredging, grading, filling, clearing or removing vegetation, or the deposit of refuse, waste or
fill. Lawn and yard care, including mowing of tall weeds and grass, gardening, tree care and maintenance,
removal of trees or other vegetation damaged by natural forces, and ranching and farming shall not constitute
development. Utility, drainage, and street repair, and any construction maintenance and installation, which does
not require land disturbance or result in additional impervious cover, shall also not constitute development.
District. A zoned section or sections of the city for which regulations governing the use of buildings and
premises, the height of buildings, the size of yards, and the intensity of use are uniform.
Dormitory. Any structure specifically designed to house student tenants associated with a university, college or
school.
Double frontage lot. See: Reverse frontage lot.
Drainageway. See: Waterway.
Drive approach. A paved surface connecting the street to a lot line.
Drive-in eating establishment. Any structure and premises specifically designed for the preparation and
dispensing of food and meals for consumption either indoors or in a vehicle parked on the premises, or to be
taken away for consumption at other places.
Driveway. The surface connecting a drive approach with a parking space, parking lot, loading dock or garage.
Dwelling. Any building or portion thereof built on-site which is designed for or used exclusively for residential
purposes, including single-family, two (2) family, three (3) family, four (4) family and multifamily dwellings,
but not including hotels, motels, manufactured housing, campers, trailers or other structures without a permanent
foundation.
Dwelling (four-family) or fourplex. A detached building designed and constructed with four (4) separate living
units under a single roof for occupancy by four (4) families.
Dwelling (multiple-family). Any building or portion thereof, which is designed, built, rented, leased or let to be
occupied as five (5) or more dwelling units or apartments or which is occupied as a home or residence of five (5)
or more families.
Dwelling (single-family). A detached building having accommodations for occupancy by not more than one
family intending to occupy the dwelling for a period of time in excess of thirty days.
Dwelling (three-family) or triplex. A detached building designed and constructed with three (3) separate living
units under a single roof for occupancy by three (3) families.
Dwelling (two-family) or duplex. A detached building designed and constructed with two (2) separate living
units under a single roof for occupancy by two families.
Dwelling unit. A building or portion of a building arranged, occupied or intended to be occupied as residential
unit designed to accommodate one (1) household for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
Easement. A grant by the property owner of the use of a strip of land for stated purposes.
Environment. The aggregate of social and physical conditions that influence the life of the individual and/or
community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/508
Exterior side yard. A yard which faces and is parallel to a side street.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction or ETJ. That geographic area outside the corporate boundaries of the city as
established pursuant to sections 42.021 and 42.022 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Family. Any number of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit, in which not more than three
(3) individuals are unrelated by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, and occupying a dwelling unit.
Family home. A facility that regularly provides care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six (6)
children under 14 years of age, excluding the caretaker's own children, and that provides care after school hours
for not more than six (6) additional elementary school siblings of the other children given care, but the total
number of children, including the caretaker's own, does not exceed twelve 12 at any given time.
Family home or group home. A dwelling unit used as a single housekeeping unit where not more than six (6)
physically or mentally impaired or handicapped persons are provided room and board, as well as supervised care
and rehabilitation provided by not more than two persons. “Family home” means a community-based residential
home operated in accordance with the Community Homes for Disabled Persons Location Act and its
amendments.
Farm accessory building. A structure, other than a dwelling, on a farm as herein defined, for the housing,
protection or storage of the usual farm equipment, animals and crops.
Farm, ranch, garden or orchard. An area of three (3) acres or more which is used for the primary purpose of
growing of vegetables, fruits, trees, hay, livestock feed and/or grain, and/or for the raising thereon of poultry and
farm animals such as horses, cattle and sheep and including the necessary accessory uses for raising, treating and
storing products raised on the premises, but not including the commercial feeding of offal and garbage to swine
and other animals and not including any type of agriculture or husbandry specifically prohibited by ordinance or
law.
Filing date. With respect to zoning applications, the date of the first public hearing before the commission
regarding such zoning application.
Filling or retail service station. An establishment where gasoline, oil and grease, or automobile accessories are
sold, supplied, or dispensed to the motor vehicle trade or where motor vehicles receive limited repair, or where
electric storage batteries are charged and cared for, or a place where any two (2) or more such activities are
carried on or conducted as the principal use of the establishment.
Financial services. Services provided by an establishment primarily engaged in financial and banking activities.
Typical uses may include banks, savings and loan institutions, stock and bond brokers, loan and lending
activities, and similar services.
Floodplain. That land which [is] lying within a stream channel or adjacent to a stream channel within which
flooding frequently occurs, the elevation above sea level of which shall be as established by the city and made of
record. It is land which is required to be kept open and non-urbanized in order to maintain upstream floodplain
characteristics and insure continued adequate drainage of adjacent land.
Floor area. The total square feet of floor space within the outside dimensions of a building, including each floor
level, but excluding cellars, carports or garages.
Food and beverage sales store. A retail establishment of greater than 2,500 square feet of total floor area, selling
a variety of consumables, notions and/or similar items, usually serving a significant market area. The sale of
beer for off-premises consumption is allowed, if not otherwise prohibited.
Food and beverage sales store or convenience store. A retail establishment of less than 2,500 square feet of total
floor area selling a variety of consumables, notions and/or similar items, usually serving as a convenient outlet to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/508
a neighborhood. This activity can include the retail sale and self-service dispensing of gasoline or other fuels in
appropriate zoning districts. The sale of beer for off-premises consumption is allowed in specific districts.
Food sales. An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of food or household products for home
consumption. Typical uses include grocery stores, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries, and candy shops.
Fraternity, sorority or group student housing. A building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students
affiliated with an academic or vocational institution.
Front yard. A space extending the full width of the lot between any building setback line and the front lot line,
and measured perpendicular to the building at the closest point to the front lot line.
Frontage. That side of a lot, parcel or tract of land abutting a street right-of-way and ordinarily regarded as the
frontal orientation of the lot.
Frontage block. All the property on one side of a street between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating), measured along the line of the street, or if the street is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting
on one side between an intersecting street and the dead-end of the street.
Garage - commercial. Any premises and structure used for housing more than five (5) motor vehicles or where
any vehicles are repaired for operation or kept for remuneration, hire or sale, and where a retail service station
may be maintained as a secondary use.
Gasoline station (full service). A place where gasoline, other fuels, oil and grease and/or accessories are sold and
dispensed to the retail motor vehicle trade, and where one or more of the following activities are conducted:
motor vehicles are serviced and repaired; stored batteries are recharged and cared for; or vehicle tires are stored,
serviced or exchanged.
Gasoline station (limited service). A place where the services provided are limited to the retail sale, either selfservice
or attendant dispensed, of gasoline, other fuels and petroleum products for the motor vehicle trade.
Golf course (commercial). A golf course or driving range privately owned but open to the public for a fee and
operated as a commercial venture.
Governing body. The city council of the city.
Grade. The slope of a road, street, other public way or utility line specified in terms of percent (%); the
topographic relief of a parcel of land; the average elevation at ground level of the buildable area of a lot or parcel
of land.
Grading. Any stripping, cutting, filling or stockpiling of earth or land, including the land in its cut or filled
condition.
Half story. A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two (2)
opposite exterior walls are not more than five (5) feet above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes, other than by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be deemed a
full story.
Halfway house. A dwelling unit used as a single housekeeping unit for not more than six (6) persons who have
demonstrated a tendency towards alcoholism, drug abuse, anti-social or criminal conduct, together with not more
than two (2) persons providing supervision and other services to such persons.
Height. The vertical distance from the highest point on a structure to the average ground elevation where the
foundation meets ground.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/508
Heliport. Landing facility for rotary wing aircraft subject to regularly scheduled use and may include fueling or
servicing facilities for such craft.
Helistop. A landing pad for occasional and infrequent use by rotary wing aircraft not exceeding a gross weight
of 6,000 pounds.
Home for aged. A home where elderly people are provided with lodging and meals without nursing care.
Home occupation. A commercial use customarily carried on in the home by members of the occupant family
without structural alterations in the principal building or any of its rooms, without the installation of machinery
or additional equipment other than that customary to normal household operations, without the employment of
additional persons, and which does not cause the generation of other than normal noise, pedestrian and vehicular
traffic. It is an accessory to a residential use subject to the following limitations:
(1) The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within a dwelling unit which is the bona fide
residence of the practitioner(s);
(2) The residential character of the lot and dwelling shall be maintained; the exterior of the
dwelling shall not be structurally altered; and no additional buildings shall be added on the property
to accommodate the home occupation;
(3) The occupation shall not produce external noise, vibration, smoke, odor, fumes, electrical
interference or waste runoff outside the dwelling unit or on the property surrounding the dwelling
unit; and
(4) No vehicle used in connection with the home occupation which requires a commercial driver's
license to operate shall be parked on any street adjacent to the property.
Homeowners' or unit owners' association. Any association or organization of co-owners within a condominium
or townhouse project, including the council of co-owners or a condominium or townhouse management
association, or the owners of lots within a subdivision; organized for the primary purpose of managing and
maintaining the common areas and common open space in any such project, or otherwise owned by the
association. An organization, association, or other entity formed and controlled by the developer, project owner
or general partner for this purpose will be included in this definition.
Hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, hospice. A building or portion thereof used or designated for the housing or
treatment of the sick, aged, mentally ill, injured, convalescent or infirm persons; provided that this definition
shall not include rooms in any residential dwelling, hotel or apartment hotel not ordinarily intended to be
occupied by said persons.
Hospital (acute care). An institution with facilities and equipment for conducting major medical examinations
and tests, and providing full hospital services, with rooms for occupancy by ill or injured persons where sick or
injured patients are given medical or surgical treatment intended to restore them to health and an active life.
Hospital (chronic care). An institution where persons suffering from illness, injury, deformity or deficiency of
age are given care and treatment on a prolonged or permanent basis.
Hospital services. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons on an
inpatient basis and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostics services,
training, administration, research, and services to patients, employees or visitors.
Hotel. A building in which lodging is provided and offered to individual transient guests, but not excluding
permanent guests, and may include a cafe, drugstore, clothes pressing shop, barbershop or other service facilities
for guests for compensation, and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms is made through and inside a
lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradiction to
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/508
a boarding house, a lodging house, or an apartment. To be classified as a hotel an establishment shall contain a
minimum of six (6) individual guest rooms or units and shall furnish customary hotel services such as linen,
maid service, telephone, and the use and upkeep of furniture. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home,
tourist house, tourist court, lodging house, inn, rooming house, or bed and breakfast. The term does not include a
hospital, sanitarium, nursing home, or a dormitory as defined in section 156.001, Tex. Tax Code.
Impervious cover. Roads, parking areas, buildings, swimming pools, rooftop landscapes and other construction
limiting the absorption of water by covering the natural land surface; this shall include, but not be limited to, all
streets, concrete and pavement within the development.
Improvements. Any street, alley, roadway, barricade, sidewalk, bikeway, pedestrian way, water line system,
wastewater system, storm drainage network, public park land, landscaping, or other facility or portion thereof for
which the local government may ultimately assume responsibility for maintenance and operation or which may
affect an improvement for which local government responsibility is established.
Incinerator. A furnace or apparatus for burning waste materials such as trash wood and other flammable items
for the purpose of reducing their weight and bulk.
Institution for the care of substance dependent persons. An institution offering resident or outpatient treatment to
alcoholic or narcotic patients.
Interior lot. A lot other than a corner lot and, bounded by a street on only one (1) side.
Kennel. A place in which five (5) or more dogs or cats at least six (6) months of age are kept, boarded or trained,
by the owners of the dogs or cats or by persons providing facilities and care with or without compensation.
Kindergarten or pre-school. Any private school, operated for profit or not, attended by four (4) or more children
at any one time during part of a twenty-four-hour day, which provides a program of instruction for children
below the first grade level in which constructive endeavors, object lessons and helpful games are prominent
features of the curriculum.
Laundry services. An establishment engaged in providing laundering, dry cleaning, or dyeing services. Typical
uses shall include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, and linen supply services.
Legal lot. A lot recorded in the official county records pursuant to and in compliance with the subdivision
regulations and/or state law in effect at the time of the creation of the lot.
Light manufacturing. An establishment engaged in the manufacture of finished products or parts, including
packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, but excluding uses
that are not traditionally classified as light industrial or manufacturing. Uses defined as traditional light
industrial and manufacturing are set forth in this article.
Livestock auction. Barns, pens and sheds for the temporary holding and sale of livestock.
Loading space. An off-street space for the parking of a vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or
materials from commercial or industrial vehicles.
Local health district. The Milam County Health District.
Local utility line. The facilities provided by a municipality or a franchised utility company for the distribution or
collection of gas, water, surface drainage water, sewage, electric power, telephone or cable service, including
pad- and pole-mounted transformers.
Lot. A separate parcel of land, created by the division or subdivision of a block or other parcel, intended as a unit
for transfer of ownership, or for development, or for occupancy and/or use, platted in compliance with state law.
See also: Legal lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/508
Lot depth. The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines.
Lot lines. The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
Lot width. The average horizontal distance at the front building setback line of a lot.
Manufactured home. A complete living unit, manufactured at a location away from the lot on which it will be
located, as defined in article 5221f of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes.
Manufactured home park. A unified development for manufactured housing spaces arranged on a tract of land in
compliance with the subdivision ordinance and this article, with the individual lots or parcels being held under a
common ownership and rented or leased to the occupants.
Manufactured home subdivision. A unified development for manufactured housing spaces arranged on a tract of
land in compliance with the subdivision ordinance and this article, with the individual lots or parcels being
developed and sold to occupant owners.
Manufactured housing. See: Manufactured home.
Master plan. The overall development plan for the community which has been officially adopted to provide
long-range development policies including all specified individual elements thereof among which are the plans
for means land intensities; land subdivision; circulation; and community facilities, utilities and services. See:
Comprehensive plan.
Mini-storage warehouse. A building or group of buildings consisting of individualized shelters of various sizes
for rent or lease for the purpose of providing protection of commodities stored therein. The size of each
individual storage unit of a mini-storage warehouse shall be limited to 2,000 cubic feet.
Mobile home. A movable or portable structure constructed prior to June 15, 1976 that is eight feet (8'), or more,
in width and forty feet (40'), or more, in length constructed to be towed on its own integral chassis, as defined in
article 5221f of the Texas Revised Civil Statutes.
Modular component. A structure or building module as defined in article 5221f-1 of the Texas Revised Civil
Statutes that is inspected and permitted by and under the jurisdiction and control of the Texas Department of
Licensing and Regulations, that is transportable in one or more sections and designed to be used on a permanent
foundation system. The term includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained in
the component. The term does not include a mobile home or a manufactured home.
Motel. A building or group of detached, semi-detached or attached buildings containing guest rooms or
apartments with automobile storage space provided in connection therewith, which building or group is
designed, intended or used primarily for the accommodation of automobile travelers, including groups
designated as auto cabins, motor courts, motels and similar designations.
Multifamily dwelling. A single structure designed to accommodate five (5) or more households.
Multiple building complex. More than one principal building on a building plot or lot.
Natural channel. The topography of a waterway prior to construction, [or] installation of improvements thereof.
Natural drainage. A stormwater runoff conveyance system not altered by development.
Natural state. Substantially the same conditions of the land that existed prior to its development, including but
not limited to the same type, quality, quantity and distribution of soils, ground cover, vegetation and topographic
features.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/508
Neighborhood. The area of the city characterized by residential land uses which is bounded by physical (such as
river, major street, lack of access, buffer) and/or political features (such as voting districts, subdivision
boundaries).
Neighborhood automobile service station. An establishment primarily engaged in automotive-related service.
The following are permitted automotive-related services within such definition: automobile washing, minor
automotive repair services, service stations, the sale of fuel, lubricants (including oil change facilities), parts and
accessories, or any incidental minor repair services to motor vehicles.
Neighborhood park. A publicly owned parcel of land, within a subdivision, dedicated solely for recreational uses
and maintained by the city or under authority granted by the city.
Nightclub. An establishment required to have a state permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages and in which fifty
percent (50%) or more of the monthly gross revenues are from the sale of alcoholic beverages; or any business
or commercial establishment in which alcoholic beverages are consumed and live entertainment is provided.
Nonconforming lot. A lot, the area, dimensions, or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or
amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to
conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
Nonconforming structure or building. A structure or building the size dimensions or location of which was
lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance, but which fails by reason of such
adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district.
Nonconforming use. Any building, structure or land lawfully occupied by a use or lawfully existing at the time
of passage of this article or amendments thereto, which does not, by reason of design or use, conform after the
passage of this article or amendments with the regulations of the article or amendment.
Occupancy. The use or intended use of land or a building by any person.
Occupant car ratio (OCR). The minimum number of parking spaces without parking time limits required for
each living unit, establishment or use.
Official county records. The official records of Milam County, Texas.
Off-site improvements. Any required improvement that lies outside of the property being developed.
Off-street parking as expansion of retail or commercial use. An off-street parking lot located adjacent or
contiguous to a retail, commercial or office district.
Off-street parking space. An area of privately owned land not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen and one-half
(18-1/2) feet not on a public street or alley, with an all-weather surface. A public street shall not be classified as
such, nor shall head-in parking adjacent to a public street and dependent upon such street for maneuvering
space; provided that not more than 25% of any required off-street parking spaces may be compact parking
spaces of not less than one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet exclusive of the driveways connecting said
space with the street or alley.
One hundred (100) year floodplain. See: Regulatory 100-year floodplain.
Open or outdoor storage. The keeping, in an unroofed area, of any goods, junk, material, [or] merchandise, in
the same place for more than twenty-four (24) hours.
Open space. An area included in any side, rear or front yard or any unoccupied space on the lot that is open and
unobstructed to the sky except for the ordinary projections of cornices, eaves, porches, and plant material.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/508
Overland drainage. Stormwater runoff which is not confined by any natural or man-made channel such as a
creek, drainage ditch, storm sewer, or the like.
Park or playground. An open recreation facility or park owned and operated by a public agency such as the city
or the school district and available to the general public for neighborhood use, but not involving lighted athletic
fields for nighttime play.
Parking lot. A parking area to accommodate the vehicles which utilize any multiple-family, retail, commercial,
office, business or industrial property.
Parking space. An area that is not a street, alley or public right-of-way that is used or designed to be used for
motor vehicle parking, that is not less than nine (9) feet by eighteen and one-half (18-1/2) feet, exclusive of the
driveways connecting said space with a street or alley. Said parking space and connecting driveway shall be
durably surfaced and so arranged to permit satisfactory ingress and egress of an automobile. Compact parking
spaces shall be one hundred twenty-eight (128) square feet exclusive of the driveways connecting said space
with the street or alley.
Parking structure or garage. A structure devoted to the parking or storage of automobiles for a fee and may
include a facility for servicing of automobiles provided such facility is primarily an internal function for use only
by automobiles occupying the structure and creates no special problems of ingress or egress.
Pasturage. Land used primarily for the grazing of animal stock.
Performance standard. A set of criteria or limits relating to nuisance elements which a particular use or process
may not exceed.
Permit issuing authority. The building official or other city officer, employee or agent designated by lawful
authority to issue the applicable permit.
Permitted use. A use specifically allowed in the applicable zoning districts without the necessity of obtaining a
conditional use permit.
Personal care facility. A facility that provides supervised living arrangements for persons with physical or
mental disability, which by reason of federal or state law, is not subject to limitations set forth in deed
restrictions or single-family zoning districts. This definition includes a community-based residential home
operated by (i) the Texas Department of Mental Health and Mental Retardation, (ii) a community center
operated under section 3.01, Texas Mental Health and Mental Retardation Act (article 5547-203 VATCS), which
provides services to disabled persons; (iii) a nonprofit corporation, or (iv) any entity certified by the Texas
Department of Human Resources as a provider under the intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded
program. This definition includes homes for the handicapped as defined in 42 U.S.C. section 3602(h).
Personal services. An establishment engaged in providing services of a personal nature. Typical uses shall
include beauty and barber shops, tailor, and shoe repair services.
Personal service shop. An establishment for the purpose of supplying limited personal services such as, but not
limited to, barber, shoe, boot, or beauty shops.
Pharmacy. A use where medicines are compounded or dispensed under the supervision of a licensed pharmacist.
Planned unit development. A zoning district which permits development of three (3) acres or more, under single
or multiple ownership pursuant to a master plan and which requires specific approval by the city council. It is a
development of land under unified control, planned and developed as a whole in a single development operation
or a programmed phasing of developments, including streets, utilities, lots or building sites, structures, open
spaces and other improvements. This district may permit mixed uses of land (e.g. industrial, commercial,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/508
residential) within a single or multiple subdivisions as part of or pursuant to a master plan, which seeks to
minimize adverse impacts when development occurs to protect the environment and nearby neighborhoods.
Planting area. Any area designed for landscape planting having a minimum of ten (10) square feet of actual
plantable area and a minimum inside dimension on any side of eighteen (18) inches.
Playfield or stadium. An athletic field or stadium owned and operated by a public agency for the general public
including a baseball field, golf course, football field or stadium which may be lighted for nighttime play.
POA neighborhood park. A privately owned parcel of land, within a subdivision, dedicated solely for
recreational use by persons in such subdivision and their guests, and maintained by the residents of said
subdivision.
Portable storage building. Any accessory structure of 100 square feet or less designed to be transported from
one location on a specific site to another location either on the same lot or on a separate lot.
Postal facilities. Postal services, including post office, bulk mail processing, or sorting centers operated by the
United States Postal Service or a private postal service.
Primary structure or main building. A structure in which the principal use of the lot is conducted. For example,
for single-family residential lots, the house is the primary structure or main building.
Privacy fence. An opaque fence or screen at least six (6) feet in height. A fence shall be considered opaque if it
is made of opaque materials and constructed so those gaps in the fence do not exceed one-half (1/2) inch. Fences
using boards placed on alternating sides of fence runners shall be considered opaque if the boards overlap at
least one-half (1/2) inch.
Private club. An establishment required to have a state-issued alcoholic beverage permit for the sale, storage or
vending of alcoholic beverages to its members.
Private garage. An accessory building housing vehicles owned and used by occupants of the main building.
Product development services (general). Development and testing of non-hazardous products related to research
services. See: Research services (general).
Product development services (hazard). Development and testing of products related to research services, which
products could pose a health or safety risk outside of the structure in which the services are provided. See:
Research services (hazard).
Professional office. A use providing professional or consulting services in the fields of law, architecture, design,
engineering, accounting, and similar professions licensed by the state.
Property owners' association (POA). An incorporated, nonprofit organization operating under recorded land
agreements through which:
(1) Each lot and/or homeowner in a subdivision or planned unit development or PUD is
automatically a member;
(2) Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share of the expenses for the
organization's activities, such as maintaining common property; and
(3) The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
Public. With respect to land and interests in land within the city limits, the city; with respect to land and interests
in land within the ETJ limits, the general public; and, with respect to the provision of any services or products by
a business establishment, the general public.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/508
Public grounds or building. A facility such as office buildings, and maintenance yards and shops required by
branches of local, state or federal government for service to an area such as highway department yard or a city,
county or school service center.
Public use. Places of noncommercial public assembly or administrative functions where the primary activity is
contained within a building(s), including but not limited to churches, schools and government buildings.
Radio, television, microwave and similar towers. Structures supporting antennae for transmitting or receiving
any portion of the radio spectrum, but excluding noncommercial antennae installation for home use of radio or
television.
Railroad spur or siding. A siding for spotting and unloading or loading boxcars or other railroad cars and which
area is connected to a public street by a drive for access.
Railroad tracts [tracks]. The right-of-way for railroad tracts [tracks], and includes siding, spurs, loading
facilities, docks, yards or maintenance areas, and does not include passenger stations.
Rear yard. A space extending across the full width of the lot between the principal building and the rear lot line,
and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the rear lot line.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.104), adopted 9/19/05)
Recreational vehicle. A portable home designed as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational and vacation
uses. This term applies whether or not the wheels, rollers, skids or other rolling equipment have been removed,
and whether or not any addition thereto has been built on the ground; and shall also include pick-up campers,
travel trailers, camping trailers, motor homes, converted buses, self-powered motor homes, tent trailers, tents
and analogous temporary portable housing and accessory buildings.
Recreational vehicle park. A contiguous parcel of land used in whole or in part, with or without charges, for the
parking of recreational vehicles occupied or intended to be occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes for any
length of time.
(Ordinance 2012-08-15(5B), sec. 2, adopted 8/15/12)
Recyclable materials. Materials including, but not limited to, scrap steel, aluminum cans, appliances, paper,
batteries, glass bottles, motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, and machinery that have no economic value except
as composition or salvage material.
Recycling collection use. Use of property as a location where glass, paper, plastics and/or aluminum cans only
are deposited in containers, with no sorting or processing on-site, and usually occurring as an accessory use on
the property.
Recycling operation. The collection, buying, storage, or processing of recyclable materials such as glass, paper,
plastics, liquids, wood or metals, which are then sorted or processed for use or shipment for the purpose of reuse
and manufacture, excluding smelters and refining operations.
Recycling operations (indoor). A recycling operation which is fully enclosed within permanent walls and roof of
a building or, if windows and doors are present, which is capable of enclosure to insure compliance with the
required performance standards in the LI or HI districts as appropriate. The outside storage of recyclable
materials in conjunction with the recycling operation inside a building is prohibited in an LI district. A dust
collection system may be located outside the main building.
Recycling operations (outdoor). A recycling operation which occurs in the open, or partially within a building
and partially in the open.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/508
Regulatory 100-year floodplain. The one hundred (100) year floodplain as defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Act (FEMA).
Religious assembly. A use (located in a permanent or temporary building) providing regular organized religious
worship and religious education incidental thereto.
Replacement trees. New landscape trees to be planted by the developer to replace significant trees removed
during the development of property. A list of approved replacement trees can be obtained at the office of the city.
Required yard. The open space between a lot line and the buildable area within which no structure shall be
located except as provided for herein.
Research services (general). Establishments engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature not
involving or requiring the use of any biological, chemical or other agent that could cause a hazard to adjacent
property. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, and development and testing of computer
software packages.
Research services (hazard). Establishments engaged in research of an industrial or scientific nature involving or
requiring the use of biological, chemical or other agents capable of causing a hazard to property or persons
outside the structure in which conducted.
Reserve strip. A narrow strip of property usually separating a parcel of land from a roadway or utility line
easement, that is characterized by limited depth which will not support development and which is intended to
prevent access to the roadway or utility easement from adjacent property and which are prohibited by these
regulations unless their control is given to the city.
Restaurant. An establishment engaged in the preparation and retail sale of food and beverages for on-premises
consumption. Typical uses include diners, dinner-houses, but not a drive-in or fast-food restaurant.
Retail food store. A retail establishment selling meats, fruits, vegetables, bakery products, dairy products, light
hardware and other similar items which are purchased for use and/or consumption off the premises (may be a
drive-in or supermarket).
Retail sales. The sale or rental of commonly used goods and merchandise for personal or household use. Typical
uses may include department stores, furniture stores, or establishments providing the following products or
services: home furnishings and appliances, household cleaning and maintenance products; drugs, cards,
stationery, notions, books, tobacco products, cosmetics, or specialty items; apparel, jewelry, fabrics, and like
items; cameras or photography services; household electronic equipment, records, sporting equipment, kitchen
utensils, small home appliances, art supplies and framing, arts and antiques, paint, interior decorating services,
or office supplies; bicycles, wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, or automotive parts and accessories
(excluding service and installation).
Reverse frontage lot. A double frontage lot which is to be developed with the rear yard abutting a major street
and with the primary means of ingress and egress provided on a minor street.
Right-of-way. A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by street, crosswalk, railroad, road, electric
transmission line, or oil or gas pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, or for other similar purpose or
use. The usage of the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on the final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such rightof-
way and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right-of-way intended for
streets, crosswalks, water mains, wastewater lines, storm drains, or any other use, involving maintenance by a
public agency shall be dedicated to the public by the maker of the plat, where such right-of-way is established.
Roofline. The height of the roof excluding any peaks representing less than ten percent of the profile of the roof.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/508
Safety services. A facility to conduct public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection
services and emergency medical and ambulance services.
Sale or conveyance. The transfer of legal rights from one person or entity to another in the form of any type of
deed, contract for deed, lease-purchase, or other transfer of legal rights that can be enforced by specific
performance against the conveyor. The transfer of property through an estate or by testament shall not constitute
a sale or conveyance.
Salvage processing. The method or action to enhance recyclable materials for reuse, including, but not limited
to, separating, baling, flattening, shredding, crushing, cleaning, or cutting for the purpose of preparing recyclable
materials for reuse, excluding a smelter operation.
Same ownership. Ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated
association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations
in which a stockholder, partner, or associate or a member of his or her family owns an interest in each
corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association.
School (business). A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a service
or art such as secretarial school, barber college, beauty school or commercial art school, but not including a
commercial trade school.
School (commercial trade). A business organized to operate for a profit and offering instruction and training in a
trade such as welding, brick laying, machinery operation, mechanics and similar trades.
School (public or denominational). A school under the sponsorship of a public or religious agency having a
curriculum generally equivalent to public elementary or secondary schools, but not including trade or
commercial schools.
Servants' quarters. An accessory building or portion of a main building located on the same lot as the main
building and used as living quarters for servants employed on the premises and not rented or otherwise used as a
separate domicile.
Setback line or building setback line. A line that marks the setback distance from the property line, and
establishes the minimum required front, side or rear yard space of a building plot.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center or other
commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of service or the selling, renting, or
exhibiting of devices or any other items intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the
customer. See section 14.02.126 for related definitions and development standards pertaining to sexually
oriented businesses.
Shopping center. A composite arrangement of shops and stores which provides a variety of goods and services
to the general public, when developed as an integral unit.
Shrub. Any self-supporting woody evergreen and/or deciduous species.
Side yard. A space extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the setback line and the side lot line
measured perpendicular from the side lot line to the closest point of the setback line.
Sign. Any device or surface on which letters, illustrations, designs, figures, or symbols are painted, printed,
stamped, raised, projected, illuminated, or in any manner outlined or attached and used for advertising purposes.
Significant tree. A living tree that the city desires to preserve to the greatest extent possible. A list of significant
trees can be provided by the city staff.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/508
Single-family attached. The use of a series of sites for two or more dwelling units, constructed with common or
abutting walls and each located on a separate lot within the total development site.
Single-family detached. The use of a lot for only one dwelling unit.
Single-family dwelling. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by one (1) household. See: Singlefamily
detached.
Site plan. A plan showing the use of the land, to include locations of buildings, drives, sidewalks, parking
facilities and other structures to be constructed.
Slope. The vertical change in grade divided by the horizontal distance over which that vertical change occurred.
The slope is usually given as a percentage.
Social club. A building or portion thereof or premises used or operated for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Square foot or square feet. The square footage computed from the outside dimensions of the dwelling or
structure, excluding attached garages, attics, basements, open or screened porches.
Stable. An accessory building for quartering horses when the stable building is set back from all adjacent
property lines at least fifty feet (50'), is at least one hundred feet (100') from any adjacent residence and when
the site contains minimum area of one (1) acre.
State health department. The Texas Department of State Health Services or the Texas Commission on
Environmental Quality (TCEQ), as applicable.
Storage and distribution. An establishment offering wholesaling, storage, and warehousing services of nonhazardous
materials in enclosed structures.
Storage garage. Any premises and structure used exclusively for the storage of more than five (5) automobiles.
Story. That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of
the floor next above it or, if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next
above it.
Street. Any public or private right-of-way which affords the primary means of vehicular access to abutting
property.
Street line. That line limiting the right-of-way of the street and being identical with the property line of persons
owning property fronting on the streets.
Street side yard. An area between any required building setback line and the side property line abutting a public
right-of-way, and measured perpendicular to the building to the closest point of the side property line abutting
the right-of-way.
Structural alterations. Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as loadbearing walls or
partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete rebuilding of the roof or the exterior walls.
Structural integrity. The ability of a structure to maintain stability against normal forces experienced by said
structure.
Structure. Any building or anything constructed or erected on the ground or which is attached to something
located on the ground. Structures include buildings, telecommunications towers, sheds, parking lots that are the
primary use of a parcel and permanent signs. Sidewalks and paving shall not be considered structures unless
located within a public utility or drainage easement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/508
Structure, principal. The principal structure which fulfills the purpose for which the building plot is intended.
Subdivision. The division or re-division of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, sites or parcels for the purpose
of development, laying out any addition to the city, or for laying out any subdivision or building lots, or any lot,
street, alley, access easement, public utility easement, park or other portion intended for use by the public, or for
the use of any owner, purchaser, occupant, person or entity.
Swimming pool (commercial). A swimming pool with accessory facilities that is not a part of the municipal or
public recreational system or a private swim club and that is available to the general public for a fee.
Swimming pool (private). A swimming pool constructed for the exclusive use of the residents of a single-family,
duplex, multi-plex or multifamily dwelling, or other residential dwelling, located and fenced in accordance with
city regulations and not operated as a business or maintained in a manner to be hazardous or obnoxious to
adjacent property owners.
Tavern. An establishment required to have a state permit for the sale and on-premises consumption of beer
and/or wine, that is not licensed or permitted to sell any other alcoholic beverage.
Telephone exchange. Switching relay and transmitting equipment, but not including public business facilities,
storage or repair facilities.
Temporary field or construction office. A structure or shelter used in connection with a development or building
project, for housing on-site the temporary administrative and supervisory functions, and for sheltering
employees and equipment, related to the development.
Tourist home. A building other than a hotel where lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation
for not more than twenty (20) individuals and open to transient guests.
Townhouse. A structure on an individual lot, which is one of a series of three (3) or more dwelling units designed
for single-family occupancy, which dwelling units are structurally connected, immediately adjacent to and
abutting each other between individual dwelling units. A condominium apartment (as defined in section 81, Tex.
Prop. Code) in a condominium structure may be considered a townhouse if no other dwelling unit or use of any
kind exists immediately above or below it. Any project including three or more such condominiums or
townhouses shall be considered a “townhouse project.”
Traffic impact analysis (TIA). A study of the impacts of a development on the city's transportation system.
Trailer camp or park. An area designed, arranged or used for the parking or storing of one or more auto trailers,
which are occupied or intended for occupancy as temporary living quarters by individuals or families.
Transportation services. A facility for loading, unloading, and interchange of passengers and baggage, between
modes of transportation, including bus terminals, railroad stations and public transit facilities utilizing park and
ride stations.
Tree. Any self-supporting woody plant species which normally grows to an overall minimum height of fifteen
(15) feet.
Tree survey. A scaled drawing accurately showing the location, caliper and critical root zone of significant trees
in relation to the property boundaries.
Two (2) family dwelling. A building designed for or occupied exclusively by two (2) families.
Upholstery shop. A business establishment engaged in the installation of soft covering material such as fabric
and underlayment for furniture and other objects. Except, however, with respect to motor vehicles, it shall only
include interior upholstering. In no event shall an upholstery shop include the manufacture or building of
furniture or other objects.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/508
Urbanization. The process of constructing public improvements required to support suburban or urban land use.
Utilities other than listed. Any utility requiring a franchise, such as closed circuit television, distribution of
steam, hot or chilled water or similar service requiring the use of public streets or easements.
Variance. An adjustment in the application of the specific regulations of this article to a particular parcel of
property that, because of special conditions or circumstances peculiar to the particular parcel, is necessary to
prevent the property from being deprived of rights and privileges enjoyed by other parcels in the same vicinity
and zoning district.
Variety store. A retail commercial establishment, which supplies a variety of household goods, toys, limited light
hardware items, candy, some clothing and other general merchandise.
Veterinary hospital. An establishment offering veterinary services and clinics for pets, small and/or large
animals. Typical uses include pet clinics, care, treatment and temporary housing of livestock and large animals,
with temporary housing of large animals permitted in an attached or adjacent roofed building, with three (3) or
more sides having walls or a solid fence extending from the foundation to at least 3/4 of the distance to the roof
line.
Veterinary services. An establishment offering veterinary services and clinics for pets and small domestic
animals, with all activities and work indoors.
Video rental store. An establishment engaged in the sale or rental of motion pictures or games.
Vines. Any woody or herbaceous plants, which may cling by twining, by means of aerial rootlets or by means of
tendrils or which, may simply sprawl over the ground or other plants.
Warehouse. An establishment engaged in the storage of merchandise or commodities in an enclosed structure.
Watershed. Area from which stormwater drains into a given basin, river or creek.
Waterway. Any natural or man-made channel conducting stormwater from a two (2) year storm event at a depth
of eight (8) inches or more and at a rate of fifteen (15) cubic feet per second or more. Street pavement shall in no
instance be considered a waterway.
Wood yard. A tract of property used for the storage of wood either for use as firewood or as a building material,
containing a fence for safety and security.
Working days. Monday through Friday exclusive of city-recognized holidays.
Wrecking yard. Any lot, tract, or building or structure upon which used automobiles or parts of used automobiles
or other motor vehicles are stored for the primary purpose of obtaining parts for resale as an automotive or motor
vehicle part.
Yard. An open space at grade between the principal and accessory buildings and the adjoining lot lines,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward, except as otherwise
provided herein.
Yard depth. The shortest distance between a lot line and a yard line.
Yard, front. A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side lot lines, and being the minimum
horizontal distance between the street easement line and the main building or any projections thereof other than
the projections of the usual steps, balconies or bays, or un-air-conditioned porch. On corner lots the front yard
shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the yard has its least dimension.
Yard line. A line drawn parallel to a lot line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the required yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/508
Yard, rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot and being the required minimum horizontal distance
between the rear lot line and the rear of the main building or any projections thereof other than the projections of
steps, balconies or bays, or un-air-conditioned porches, accessory dwellings or detached garages.
Yard, side. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the required front
yard to the required rear yard, and being the minimum horizontal distance between a side lot line and the side of
any building on the lot, or any projections thereof.
Zero-lot-line lot. A single-family lot that has a side wall along or near one of the lot lines so that a usable yard of
a minimum of ten (10) feet from the side lot line to the building line is created on the other side of the lot.
Zoning. The division of a municipality into districts in an effort to achieve compatible land use relationships, and
the associated establishment of regulations governing the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings
in order to achieve that compatibility as defined in chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code.
Zoning map. The official certified map showing the division of the city into districts, which is a part of this
zoning ordinance.
Zoning (spot). The zoning or rezoning of a lot or parcel of land to benefit an owner for a use incompatible with
surrounding uses and not for the purpose or effect of furthering the comprehensive plan.
Zoning (strip). Typically, commercial and/or retail zoning proposed to accommodate commercial or retail
development, fronting a portion of a major street, usually one lot deep.
Zoo (private). A facility housing and displaying live animals, reptiles or birds, privately owned and operated for
a fee or for the promotion of some other enterprise.
Zoo (public). A publicly owned zoo or similar facility owned and operated by a governmental entity or nonprofit
zoological society where live animals, birds and reptiles are domiciled and displayed.
(b) Any definition not expressly prescribed herein shall, until such time as defined by ordinance, be construed
in accordance with customary usage in municipal planning and engineering practices.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.104), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.005 Application
The provisions of this article shall, except as specifically provided otherwise in this article, apply to all land
within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.105), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.006 Exemptions
The provisions of this article shall not:
(1) Prohibit the continuation of plans, construction or designed use of a building for which a
building permit was lawfully issued and which (i) is completed in its entirety within one (1) year
from the effective date of this article; and (ii) for which construction shall have been started within
ninety (90) days after the effective date of this article; provided that any such building, construction
or use that is not in compliance with this article shall be a nonconforming use; or
(2) Apply to permits or commitments given by the city with reference to construction of public
utility buildings prior to the passage of this article.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.106), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.007 Enforcement of regulations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/508
(a) No building permit, certificate of occupancy, plumbing permit, electrical permit, or utility tap shall be
issued by the city for or with respect to any lot, tract or parcel of land within the city limits that is developed, or
proposed to be developed, after the effective date of this article, until all then-applicable requirements of this
article have been satisfied and accepted by the city.
(b) This article may be further enforced by injunction and other judicial proceedings, either at law or in
equity; and, in lieu of or in addition to any other authorized enforcement or action taken, any person who
violates any term or provision of this article, with respect to any land or development within the city, [shall be
punishable] by fine and penalties as provided herein.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.107), adopted 9/19/05)
Secs. 14.02.008–14.02.050 Reserved
Division 2. Zoning Districts and Regulations
Sec. 14.02.051 General requirements and limitations
(a) Conformity to zoning district required. No building shall be erected and no existing buildings shall be
moved, structurally altered, added to or enlarged, nor shall any land, building or premises be used, or designated
for use for any purpose or in any manner other than provided for hereinafter in the district in which the building,
land or premises is located; provided, however, that necessary structural repairs may be made where health and
safety are endangered. Furthermore, no open space surrounding any building shall be encroached upon by a
structure or reduced in any manner, unless the same shall conform to the regulations hereinafter designated for
the district in which such building or open space is located.
(b) Signs and billboards. No sign or billboard shall be erected, moved, altered, added to, enlarged, painted, or
modified unless it shall conform to the provisions of this article and all applicable city ordinances governing the
placement, location, permitting, construction and maintenance of signs. Except as otherwise expressly
authorized by ordinance, all off-premises signs and billboards are expressly prohibited.
(c) Structures and buildings. No building, structure or accessory structure shall be erected, converted or
enlarged, nor shall any such existing building or structure be structurally altered or rebuilt, nor shall any open
space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, unless the same shall be done and
completed in a manner to comply with all applicable city codes and ordinances, and such work and structure
shall:
(1) Conform to the setback, building site area, building location and land use regulations
hereinafter designated for the district in which such building or open space is located.
(2) Not exceed the height limit herein established for the district in which such building is located,
except as specifically authorized as follows:
(A) The height limits prescribed herein shall not apply to television and radio towers, church
spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, stage towers, scenery lofts, cooling
towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, smokestacks, necessary
public or private utilities, conveyors, flagpoles, and necessary mechanical appurtenances. The
height limits and other applicable regulations for television, radio and communications towers
and antennas may be established by separate ordinance.
(B) Public or semi-public service buildings, hospitals, institutions or schools, where
permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet.
(d) Accessory structures and uses. Accessory structures designed, constructed and located for a use permitted
in the district, in compliance with this article and all other applicable city ordinances, are permitted in each
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/508
zoning district.
(e) Conformity to construction plan requirements. No structure or building shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or structurally altered unless construction plans meeting the requirements of this article
have been approved by the city engineer and/or city building official.
(f) Conformity to parking and loading space requirements. No structure or building shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless it shall conform to the off-street parking and
loading requirements of this article.
(g) Conformity to landscaping and screening requirements. No building or structure shall be erected,
converted, enlarged, reconstructed, or structurally altered unless it shall conform to the landscaping and
screening requirements of the this article.
(h) Conformity to building setback requirements. No yard or other open space provided around any structure
or building for the purpose of complying with provisions of this section shall be considered as providing a yard
or open space for a building on any other lot.
(i) Outdoor lighting. All outdoor lighting shall be installed and maintained in compliance with all applicable
city ordinances. Such lighting shall be located and maintained in a manner as to not be directed onto any public
street or adjacent property; provided that such lighting may be directed directly down upon a public street as
provided for streetlights.
(1) Multifamily and business. Outdoor lighting for multifamily, general retail, commercial and
office will be in accordance with the provisions of this article and the city building codes. A lighting
plan shall be included with the site plan submitted for a building permit.
(2) Residential. Outdoor lighting on residential property will be installed in accordance with
applicable city ordinances. It will be located so as not to be directed directly upon adjoining property
or create a nuisance for adjoining property owners. Lighting used for security purposes, which will be
operated during night hours will be located as close as is practicable to main dwellings.
(j) Height and placement requirements. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, no building
shall be erected or maintained within the required building setbacks set forth herein, or which exceeds the eave
height limits specified in the following chart 1.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.111), adopted 9/19/05)
CHART 1
Zoning
District
Min. Lot
SF Area
Min. Lot
Width
Front
Setback
Side Setback Street Side
Setback
Rear
Setback
Eave
Height
Limit
Impervious
Cover
R-1 8,400 70 ft. 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
R-1C 8,400 70 ft. 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
R-1E 1 acre 200 ft. 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/508
R-2 4,200 per
dwelling
35 ft. per
dwelling
unit
25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
R-3 2,000 per
dwelling
80 ft. 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
M-1 7,500 70 ft. 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
M-2 4,200 per
dwelling
unit and
100' open
space
35 ft. per
dwelling
unit
25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
C-1 6,000 60 25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 70%
C-2 10,000 60 ft. single
tenant
100 ft. multi
tenant
25 ft. 9 ft. against
commercial
25 ft. against
residential
25 ft. 25 ft.
70%
GOV
25 ft. 9 ft. 15 ft. 15 ft. 35 ft. 40%
CA 3,125 25 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 0 ft. 35 ft. 100%
I 10,000 200 25 ft. against
industrial 50
ft. against
residential
25 ft. against
industrial 50
ft. against
residential
25 ft. against
industrial 50
ft. against
residential
25 ft. against
industrial 50
ft. against
residential
35 ft. 80%
A 2 acres 500 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 25 ft. 35 ft. 40%
PUD N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.111), adopted 9/19/05; Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 2(A), adopted
8/9/10))
(1) The conditions and limitations, setbacks and lot requirements set forth in chart 1 applicable to
the district governing the proposed base use of the property shall apply within this district, i.e. if the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/508
proposed use of property within the district is a use provided for in the C-1 district the conditions and
limitations applicable to the C-1 district shall apply to the property.
(k) Parking. Automotive vehicles or trailers not bearing current license plates and state motor vehicle
inspection stickers, excluding racing cars, antique cars, and cars belonging to members of armed forces who are
on active duty, shall be parked or stored on any residential area only in completely enclosed buildings.
(1) Parking regulations. Where any structure is erected, reconstructed or converted for any of the
business or commercial uses permitted in this article, designated on-street and off-street parking
spaces shall be provided in a number not less than as provided in chart 2 set forth hereinafter.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.111), adopted 9/19/05)
(2) Handicap parking. Nonresidential handicap parking requirements are a minimum of one space
for under twenty-five parking spaces, then one additional space for every twenty-five parking spaces
up to one hundred spaces, and then one space per fifty spaces up to two hundred, and then one space
for every one hundred spaces up to five hundred. Over five hundred it is one percent of total parking
spaces. Dimensional requirements are twelve-foot (12') width and eighteen-foot (18') depth per
handicap space. The location and design of handicapped parking spaces shall be as required by
ordinance. (Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 2(B), adopted 8/9/10)
(3) Maximum parking. The maximum number of parking spaces for a commercial or industrial use
area shall not exceed 150% of the parking required pursuant to chart 2.
(4) Reduction of parking. The total number of required motor vehicle parking spaces for a
nonresidential use may be reduced by 5% for each of the activities listed below provided by the
owners or operators, up to a maximum 10% reduction in the total number of motor vehicle spaces:
(A) Participate in an area-wide carpool/vanpool ride matching program for employees;
designating at least 10% of the employee motor vehicle parking spaces as carpool/vanpool
parking and placing such spaces closer to the building than other employee parking;
(B) Providing showers and lockers for employees who commute by bicycle;
(C) Providing covered, secured bicycle parking racks or facilities.
(5) Development and maintenance standards for parking areas. Every parcel of land hereafter used
as a public or private parking area, including commercial parking lots, shall be developed as follows:
(A) Off-street parking areas for more than five vehicles shall be effectively screened by a
sight-obscuring fence, hedge or planting, on each side which adjoins a residential zoned
property.
(B) Except for parking to serve residential uses, parking and loading areas adjacent to or
within residential zones or adjacent to residential uses shall be designed to minimize
disturbance of residents.
(C) Access aisles shall be of sufficient width for vehicular turning and maneuvering.
(6) Council determination. Off-street and on-street parking for all uses not within the categories
above shall be adequate to meet the anticipated needs and shall be determined by the city council
using standards outlined for special exception and with a view towards providing adequate parking
and carrying out the general scheme of the parking requirements herein set out.
(7) Special exception. The city council may grant a special exception to allow two or more users to
share parking spaces upon a showing that the particular user in question will require parking at
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/508
different times. Any spaces the council allows to be shared count toward the number of spaces each
user must provide.
CHART 2
Use Number of Parking Spaces
Residential dwellings, single- to multifamily,
and manufactured homes
Two spaces minimum for each living unit,
and one-half (1/2) space for each additional
bedroom above four.
Warehouses, manufacturing plants and other
similar commercial establishments not
catering to the general public
One space per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor space.
Hotels, motels and similar transient
accommodations
One space per bedroom and one space for
each two employees
Rest homes, hospitals, nursing homes,
convalescent homes, sanitariums, and
similar uses
One space for each two employees, and one
space for each four patient beds
Bars, cafes, restaurants, taverns, nightclubs,
and similar uses
One space for every four seats provided for
customer services
Banks, offices, financial lending
institutions, gasoline stations, personal
service shops, retail establishments,
shopping centers and similar uses catering
to the general public
One space for each 250 square feet of gross
floor space
(l) Uses non-cumulative. Uses within each district are restricted solely to those uses expressly permitted in
each district, and are not cumulative unless so stated.
(m) Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the approval of a comprehensive zero lot line residential
development or other innovative housing development in compliance with the other terms and provisions of this
article.
(n) Mandated exceptions. To the extent required by state or federal law, a personal care facility is an additional
permitted use in any zoning district; provided that:
(1) Homes and residential units not designated and constructed in compliance with the ordinance
and code requirements applicable to multiple-occupancy residential buildings and nursing homes,
shall meet the following requirements:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/508
(A) The structure shall comply with provisions of the fire code, electrical code and building
code that are applicable to nursing homes;
(B) There shall be two (2) parking spaces, plus one additional space for each three residents;
(C) There shall be not less than fifty square feet of living space within a sleeping room for
each occupant assigned to such room;
(D) There shall be not less than 175 square feet of living area in the structure for each
occupant/resident of the structure, and attendant on duty; and
(E) The structure and operations shall comply with the standards established by the Texas
Department of Human Services as licensing standards for personal care facilities for a type B
facility;
(2) The home must meet all applicable state licensing requirements;
(3) A personal care facility must have at least one paid staff member on duty 24 hours per day, and
one supervisor for each six (6) residents during waking hours;
(4) A personal care facility may not have more than fifteen (15) residents.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.111), adopted 9/19/05)
(o) Recreational vehicles.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator of a recreational vehicle to park or place a
recreational vehicle within the city for a period longer than seventy-two (72) hours per six-month
period.
(2) The provisions of this article shall not, however, apply to:
(A) Locations where recreational vehicles are manufactured and/or sold or stored by a
commercial enterprise in a C-2 Commercial-Intense or I Industrial zone;
(B) Temporary offices or display units as approved by the city manager after written request;
(C) Recreational vehicles stored on lots in residential zones of the city provided:
(i) The owner of the recreational vehicle shall reside in the residence on the same lot or
adjoining lot and the recreational vehicle does not encroach in any way into a public rightof-
way, alley, or easement; or
(ii) A recreational vehicle owned by visitors or house guests of the subject property is
not parked for more than seven (7) days.
(D) A recreational vehicle located on a space in a recreational vehicle park;
(E) A recreational vehicle which is customary with travelling circuses or carnivals; or
(F) Locations where the city manager has granted a request to temporarily place recreational
vehicle(s) based on a showing of sufficient necessity. The request shall be in written form
signed by the property owner requesting a specified period of time for the recreational vehicle
to be present; it shall also address how utilities will be supplied to the recreational vehicle, if
applicable. With the request, there shall also be provided a site plan showing the proposed
location of the recreational vehicle(s) and any other structures on the property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/508
(3) It shall be unlawful for the driver, owner, or operator of a recreational vehicle to park or permit
to be parked, stand, or remain motionless on any street, public right-of-way, or parkway unless the
vehicle is:
(A) Being actively loaded or unloaded; or
(B) For more than twelve (12) hours.
(4) It shall be unlawful for any person to live in a recreational vehicle at any time in other than a
recreational vehicle park.
(5) Recreational vehicle parks may be located only in an area zoned C-2 Commercial-Intense or IIndustrial.
(6) Recreational vehicles repurposed for commercial use may be located only in an area zoned C-1
Commercial-Light, C-2 Commercial-Intense or I-Industrial.
(Ordinance 2012-08-15(5B), sec. 3, adopted 8/15/12)
Sec. 14.02.052 Establishment of zoning districts
(a) The city is hereby divided into fourteen (14) zoning districts, the use, height and area regulations as set out
herein shall be uniform in each district. The fourteen (14) districts established shall be known as:
Abbreviated
Designation
Zoning District Name
A Agricultural - District A
R-1 Single-Family Residential 1 - District R-1
R-1C Residential 1 Commercial - District R-1C
Abbreviated
Designation
Zoning District Name
R-1E Residential 1 Estate - District R-1E
R-2 Residential Multifamily - District R-2
R-3 Residential Multi-Plex - District R-3
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/508
M-1 Manufactured Home Subdivision - District M-1
M-2 Manufactured Home Park - District M-2
CA Central Area - District CA
C-1 Commercial-Light - District C-1
C-2 Commercial-Intense - District C-2
I Industrial - District I
PUD Planned Unit Development - District PUD
GOV Governmental - District GOV
(b) Zoning map. The location and boundaries of the districts herein established are shown upon the zoning
map, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article; provided that such uses as listed but not
shown on the zoning map are provided for future growth and use upon amendment of the comprehensive plan.
The city building official maintains the zoning map together with all notations, references, and other information
shown thereon and all amendments thereto.
(c) District boundaries. Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the established districts as
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(1) Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or
highways, street lines or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
(2) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot
lines shall be construed to be said boundaries.
(3) Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the
centerlines or street lines of streets, or the centerlines of [or] right-of-way lines of highways such
district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as
indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use
of the scale on said zoning map.
(4) In subdivided property, the district boundary lines on the zoning map shall be determined by
use of the scale appearing on the map.
(5) If a district boundary line divides a property into two (2) parts, the district boundary line shall
be construed to be the property line nearest the district line as shown.
(6) Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by the city council, the zoning district
shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all area included in the vacation
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/508
shall then and henceforth be subject to all regulations of the districts as extended.
(7) Where the streets on the ground differ from the streets shown on the zoning map, those on the
ground shall control.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.112), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.053 Zoning of annexed areas
(a) Interim zoning district. All territory hereafter annexed to the city shall be automatically classified as
Residential District “R1”, pending subsequent action by the commission and council for permanent zoning;
provided that upon application, by either the city or the property owner of the land being annexed, for zoning
other than R1, notice may be given and hearings held in compliance with chapter 211 of the Texas Local
Government Code and, upon annexation, such property may be permanently zoned as determined by the city
council after considering the commission's recommendation.
(b) Permits in interim zoned areas. In an area temporarily classified as Residential District “R1”, no permits
for the construction of a building or use of land other than uses allowed in said district under this article shall be
issued by the city building official.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.113), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.054 Agricultural District - District “A”
(a) Allows farming, ranching, pasturage, detached single-family residences and related accessory structures,
on a minimum two-acre tract. Parks, playgrounds, greenbelts and other public recreational facilities, owned
and/or operated by the municipality or other public agency are permitted.
(b) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.114), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.055 Single-Family Residential 1 - District “R-1”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Permits detached single-family dwellings with a minimum of 1,000 square
feet of living area, and related accessory structures, on a minimum lot size of 8,400 square feet.
(b) Additional permitted uses. [none listed]
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(3) A billboard, signboard, or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use; provided
that the placing of an unilluminated “For Sale” or “For Rent” sign not more than eight (8) square feet
in area may be permitted as an accessory use, and churches and other institutions may display signs
showing names, activities and services therein provided, and that during construction of a structure or
building one (1) unilluminated sign advertising contractors or architects on such premises shall be
permitted provided that such sign shall not be more than eight (8) square feet in area and shall be set
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/508
back of the established or customary building line, and such sign shall be removed immediately upon
completion of the building.
(4) All paved driveways shall be single use. No paving shall be allowed in the side setbacks of
interior lots.
(d) Accessory structures and uses. Accessory structures and accessory uses customarily incident to the singlefamily
residential use permitted in the district, that are located on the same lot with the primary residential
structure, that are designed, constructed and located for a use permitted in the one-family district, and that are in
compliance with this article and all other applicable city ordinances, are permitted in the district; provided the
same do not involve the conduct of any business or commercial enterprise and comply with each of the
following requirements:
(1) A private garage may have a capacity for not more than (3) standard size automobiles, plus one
hundred forty-four (144) square feet of storage space for goods and materials. Where the residential
structure is two stories or greater, the private garage may have a second story containing an apartment
or storage for use of the family constructed as an integral part of the main building and shall be
subject to the regulations affecting the main building.
(2) Accessory structures that are one hundred forty-four (144) square feet and smaller shall not
have a wall height greater than eight (8) feet. No building permit will be required.
(3) All accessory structures larger than one hundred forty-four (144) square feet must:
(A) Have a roof line that is not greater in height than the roof line of the single-family
dwelling; and
(B) Have walls that are of a height no greater than the majority wall height of the primary
structure; and
(C) Have a roof constructed of substantially the same color, slope and pitch as the roof of the
single-family dwelling; and
(D) Meet the setback requirements for the City of Rockdale; and
(E) Not cause the total lot coverage square feet to exceed the percentage specified earlier in
this article; and
(F) Exteriors of brick, stone, masonry, wood, masonite, hardy-plank and metal siding with a
baked-on enamel finish are permitted. Corrugated metal siding is not permitted; and
(G) When the primary structure exterior is brick or stone or other masonry, the accessory
structure exterior must be:
(i) At least forty (40) percent wainscot of the same material and design as the primary
structure, or
(ii) The full front of structure must be of the same material and design as the primary
structure; and
(H) Exterior sides must be of substantially the same color, or color matched with the primary
structure; and
(I) Be compatible by architectural design and appearance with the single-family dwelling or
adjacent single-family dwellings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/508
(4) Except for the single-family dwelling, not more than one private garage, one carport, and one
other accessory structure may be constructed on a single-family lot.
(5) A carport may be constructed on a single-family lot provided that it is color matched to the
house, does not have a plate and roof height greater than the single-family dwelling, meets the side
setback requirements of this article and, is at least 5 feet from the property line at the entrance to the
carport.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.115), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.056 Residential Commercial - District “R-1C”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Permits detached single-family dwellings with a minimum of 1,000 square
feet of living area, and related accessory structures, on a minimum lot size of 8,400 square feet in which a light
commercial use including professional services, personal services and sales of nontoxic or nonhazardous
materials may occur similar to home occupations however may occur in a stand-alone building. No use in R-1C
shall have more than two employees.
(b) Additional permitted uses.
(1) Light commercial uses similar to home occupations.
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(3) A billboard, signboard, or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use; provided
that the placing of an unilluminated “For Sale” or “For Rent” sign not more than eight (8) square feet
in area may be permitted as an accessory use, and churches and other institutions may display signs
showing names, activities and services therein provided, and that during construction of a structure or
building one (1) unilluminated sign advertising contractors or architects on such premises shall be
permitted provided that such sign shall not be more than eight (8) square feet in area and shall be set
back of the established or customary building line, and such sign shall be removed immediately upon
completion of the building.
(4) All paved driveways shall be single use. No paving shall be allowed in the side setbacks of
interior lots.
(d) Accessory structures. See section 14.02.055(d).
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.116), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.057 Residential 1 Estate - District “R-1E”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Permits detached single-family dwellings with a minimum of 1,000 square
feet of living area, and related accessory structures, on a minimum lot size of one acre. Residential development
may occur without the need for sidewalks, curb and gutter and central wastewater.
(b) Additional permitted uses. [none listed]
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/508
(2) See chart 2.
(3) A billboard, signboard, or advertising sign shall not be permitted as an accessory use; provided
that the placing of an unilluminated “For Sale” or “For Rent” sign not more than eight (8) square feet
in area may be permitted as an accessory use, and churches and other institutions may display signs
showing names, activities and services therein provided, and that during construction of a structure or
building one (1) unilluminated sign advertising contractors or architects on such premises shall be
permitted provided that such sign shall not be more than eight (8) square feet in area and shall be set
back of the established or customary building line, and such sign shall be removed immediately upon
completion of the building.
(4) All paved driveways shall be single use. No paving shall be allowed in the side setbacks of
interior lots.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.117), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.058 Residential Multifamily - District “R-2” Duplex, Triplex and Fourplex
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Allows single-family dwellings, two-, three- and four-unit dwellings and any
other use permitted in R-1. The dwellings shall have a minimum of 600 feet of living space on a minimum lot
size of 4,200 feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Additional permitted uses. [none listed]
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(3) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each living unit. All offstreet
parking and driveways shall be improved with all-weather asphalt, concrete, or paving stones,
and curb and gutter.
(d) Accessory structures. See section 14.02.055(d).
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.118), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.059 Residential Multi-Plex - District “R-3”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Allows any use permitted in District R-2; and more than five dwelling units
with a minimum living space of 600 feet on a minimum lot size of 2,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
(b) Additional permitted uses. [none listed]
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(3) A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for each living unit. All offstreet
parking and driveways shall be improved with all-weather asphalt, concrete, or paving stones,
and curb and gutter.
(d) Accessory structures. See section 14.02.055(d).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/508
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.119), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.060 Manufactured Home Subdivision - District “M-1”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Property and areas of the city zoned “M-1” may be planned, used, approved,
platted and occupied as a manufactured home subdivision with lots sold and conveyed to individual lot owners.
Land and areas of the city zoned “M-1” and having an approved subdivision plat may be used for manufactured
homes having a minimum of 600 square feet of living area.
(b) Additional permitted uses. [none listed]
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) Manufactured homes must have a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet of living area.
(2) Manufactured homes must be skirted within ninety (90) days from date installed.
(3) Manufactured homes must be tied down securely and in compliance with applicable regulations
prior to occupancy.
(4) See chart 1.
(5) See chart 2.
(d) Authorized in specified areas. No manufactured home may be located in any district other than “M-1” or
“M-2” district only.
(e) Standards. The installation, occupancy and maintenance of manufactured homes in the “M-1” district shall
be subject to the following provisions.
(1) No outside horizontal dimension shall be less than 14 feet, except for original extensions or
subsequent additions containing less than 50 percent of the total enclosed floor area.
(2) The exterior siding material, excluding skirting, shall be nonmetallic.
(3) The structures shall be of adequate quality and safe design, as certified by a label stating that
the unit is constructed in conformance with the federal Mobile Home Construction and Safety
Standards in effect on the date of manufacture, or other such applicable standards as required by state
or federal law. Any such structure without such certification, but meeting all other requirements, may
be accepted as safe and quality construction provided it meets the following criteria:
(A) All electrical material, devices, appliances, and equipment are in sound and safe
condition. Aluminum conductors are not acceptable.
(B) All mechanical systems including space and water heating, are in sound and safe
condition.
(C) All plumbing, gas piping, and wastewater systems are in sound and safe condition.
(D) The unit is in sound and safe structural condition. Uncompressed finish floorings greater
than 1/8 inch in thickness beneath loadbearing walls that are fastened to the floor structure are
not acceptable. Any such structure that shows signs of fire damage will not be acceptable.
(E) The determination of the foregoing acceptance of any non-certified unit shall be made by
the building official and/or the fire marshal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/508
(4) Manufactured homes shall be installed in accordance with the following criteria:
(A) By a person licensed by the State of Texas in compliance with state law, or the frame
shall be supported by, and tied to, a foundation system capable of safely supporting the loads
imposed as determined from the character of the soil. The minimum acceptable foundation
design shall be a series of eight-inch grout-filled concrete block piers spaced no more than eight
feet on center and bearing on 12" x 12" solid concrete footings. A tie-down and anchoring
system separate and apart from the foundation ties shall be provided as recommended by the
manufacturer, if different from the foundation ties.
(B) Axle and hitch assemblies shall be removed at the time of placement on the foundation.
(C) Each manufactured home shall be totally skirted with metal, masonry, pressure-treated
wood, or other non-degradable material, which is compatible with the design and exterior
materials of the primary structure.
(D) Electrical power supply shall be from a meter installation on the manufactured home, or
from a permanent meter pedestal.
(E) Driveways and off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements
for single-family dwellings.
(F) Garage and carport additions are permitted, provided they cover a paved parking area and
are connected to a street by a paved drive, meet the minimum building setback requirements,
and have roof and siding material compatible with the primary structure.
(G) Patio and porch covers are permitted, provided they cover an improved patio, deck, or
porch, and meet the minimum building setback requirements.
(H) Living area additions are permitted, provided they meet the minimum building setback
requirements, have roof and siding material that is compatible with the primary structure, and
comply with the same structural standards as the primary structure.
(I) All accessory structures and additions shall comply with all applicable city ordinances.
(f) Site development regulations. The minimum lot width shall be 70 [feet].
(g) Accessory structures. See section 14.02.055(d).
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.120), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.061 Manufactured Home Park - District “M-2”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. Property and areas of the city zoned “M-2” may be planned, used, approved,
platted and occupied as a manufactured home park with lots held under common ownership and rented or leased
to individual tenant occupants. Land and areas of the city zoned “M-2” and having an approved subdivision plat
may be used for manufactured homes having a minimum of 600 square feet of living area.
(b) Additional permitted uses.
(1) One manufactured home on each approved space or lot.
(2) Accessory buildings located on a lot for use by the owner or occupant of a structure that is
located on such lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/508
(3) Recreational, civic and/or commercial facilities designed for exclusive use of the occupants of
the manufactured home park.
(4) Accessory buildings for use by the owner or manager of the manufactured home park.
(5) One single-family dwelling unit on a 6,000 square foot or larger lot for use as the owner's or
manager's residence.
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(3) Design requirements. A development designed as a manufactured home park shall meet all
requirements of the manufactured home park ordinance of the city and all requirements of the city
subdivision ordinance. The development shall include amenities and be designed for the explicit
purpose of renting or leasing of sites and shall not be construed to permit the sale of such spaces or
lots.
(4) Conversion. At no time may a manufactured home park be converted to a manufactured home
subdivision without first complying with all requirements of the city subdivision ordinance then in
effect, receiving approval by the city council, and being rezoned to M-1.
(5) Through traffic. No through traffic shall be permitted in a manufactured home park.
(6) Perimeter fence. A perimeter fence shall be required, unless otherwise approved by the
commission.
(d) Standards. The installation, occupancy and maintenance of manufactured homes in the “M-2” district shall
be subject to the following provisions: See section 14.02.060; provided that the addition of garages, carports and
additional living area is not permitted.
(e) Site development regulations. See section 14.02.060(e).
(f) Accessory structures. See section 14.02.055(d).
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.121), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.062 Central Area - District “CA”
(a) Permitted uses. This district principally addresses development in the original town and central area of the
city, allowing a mix of uses including, retail, office, light commercial, and residential uses.
(1) Uses as determined by the commission and the council which are closely related and similar to
those listed and that are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke,
odor, glare, or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from
listed uses permitted, such permitted uses being generally retail trade, service industries that sell,
store, distribute and/or repair goods, vehicles, equipment and materials, and are in general dependent
on products and materials produced elsewhere.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.122), adopted 9/19/05)
(2) The Central Area District “CA” shall apply to the following plats, tracts or parcels of land
within the City of Rockdale:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 445/508
(A) Original Town–Rockdale Blocks 1 to 8.
(B) Original Town–Rockdale Blocks 29 to 32.
(C) A0720, William Allen Survey, 0.67 acres, ID 73281.
(D) A0720, William Allen Survey, 0.842 acres, ID 75487.
(E) A0720, William Allen Survey, platted property south of Milam Avenue, north of railroad
tracks, west of A0720, William Allen Survey, 0.842 acres, ID 75487 and east bordered by the
intersection of a line extended south from Rice Street western boundary.
(Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 3(A), adopted 8/9/10)
(b) Conditions and limitations.
(1) That all business activities be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for
delivery, gasoline sales, nurseries, and garden centers. (Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 3(B),
adopted 8/9/10)
(2) That required yards and outdoor areas not be used for display, sale [of] vehicles, equipment,
containers or waste material, save and except for screened dumpster collection areas.
(3) That gasoline and alcoholic beverage sales are not permitted without a conditional use permit
first being obtained.
(4) That the use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration
or similar nuisance; and that, excluding that caused [by] customer and employee vehicles, such odors,
smoke, dust, noise or vibration be generally contained within the property.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.122), adopted 9/19/05)
(5) Signs (advertising) must be on the same lot as the business establishments to which they refer
and shall not be placed within any required yard nor within twenty-five (25) feet of any residential
district. Signs may be illuminated but must be stationary and non-flashing. All signs shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city. Not more
than one (1) sign per exterior building elevation may be erected and attached to or suspended from
any building facade, canopy or awning. No freestanding signs shall be allowed. Sign size shall adhere
to projection signs and marquee or wall signs as provided for in section 14.02.123 of this chapter.
(Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 3(C), adopted 8/9/10)
(6) The conditions and limitations and permitted uses applicable to the district governing the
proposed use of the property shall apply within the Central Area District, i.e. if the proposed use of
property within the CA district is a use provided for in the C-1 district the conditions, limitations and
permitted uses applicable to the C-1 district shall apply to the property within the CA district.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.122), adopted 9/19/05)
(7) See chart 1. (Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 3(D), adopted 8/9/10)
(8) Parking.
(A) Parking in the Central Area - District “CA” shall not be governed by the parking
requirements in section 14.02.051(k) and any parking requirements set forth in site plan
regulations. Parking in the Central Area - District “CA” shall be governed by this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 446/508
(B) “Parking fund” means a special fund established by the city to retain monies paid by
developers in accordance with the payment in lieu of parking space dedication provisions of
these regulations and to be used for the purchase of land for the development of parking lots
and/or spaces in the vicinity of the developed property for which funds have been collected.
(C) A negotiated fee in lieu of parking lots and/or spaces shall be paid to the city by the
developer to be combined with other funds in the parking fund dedicated for the acquisition of
parking lots and spaces. At its option, the city council may accept land dedicated for parking
lots and spaces by the developer in lieu of parking fees, if such land conforms to the
comprehensive master plan of the city. The city reserves the right to refuse property within the
100-year frequency floodplain and determine the appropriateness of the location of the
proposed parking land in conjunction with the uses proposed on the property.
(Ordinance 2010-08-09 (8A), sec. 3(E), adopted 8/9/10)
(c) Site plan regulations. The site plan regulations applicable to the district governing the proposed use of the
property shall apply within the Central Area District, i.e. if the proposed use of property within the CA district is
a use provided for in the C-1 district the site plan regulations applicable to the C-1 district shall apply to the
property within the CA district.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.122), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.063 Commercial-Light - District “C-1”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. This district allows the retail sale of goods and products to which value has
been added on-site, including sales of goods and services outside of the primary structure as customary with the
uses specifically listed.
(1) Uses as determined by the commission and the council which are closely related and similar to
those listed and that are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke,
odor, glare, or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from
listed uses permitted, such permitted uses being generally retail trade, service industries that sell,
store, distribute and/or repair goods, vehicles, equipment and materials, and are in general dependent
on products and materials produced elsewhere.
(b) Conditions and limitations.
(1) That it be conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except for delivery, gasoline sales,
nurseries and garden centers.
(2) That required yards and outdoor areas not be used for display, sale [of] vehicles, equipment,
containers or waste material, save and except for screened dumpster collection areas.
(3) That all merchandise be new, first-hand and be sold on the premises, save and except for
delivery only including catering.
(4) That the use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration
or similar nuisance; and that, excluding that caused customer and employee vehicles, such odors,
smoke, dust, noise or vibration be generally contained within the property.
(5) Signs (advertising) must be on the same lot as the business establishments to which they refer
and shall not be placed within any required yard nor within twenty-five (25) feet of any residential
district. Signs may be illuminated but must be stationary and non-flashing. All signs shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 447/508
(6) Establishments located on property that is within 300' of any property zoned for a residential
use when the commercial use is first established may not to be open to the general public before 5:00
a.m. and must be closed to the general public by 10:00 p.m.
(7) See chart 1.
(8) See chart 2.
(c) Site development regulations.
(1) Development of any use permitted in the “C-1” district shall conform with the site development
regulations established for that district.
(2) Paved sidewalks, driveways and parking areas are required.
(3) Screening of loading and storage facilities is required.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.123), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.064 Commercial-Intense - District “C-2”
(a) Purpose and permitted uses. This district is intended to provide for commercial uses including the more
intense commercial land uses not requiring an industrial zoning category, provided that such use shall when
established be compatible with adjacent and neighboring residential areas and not create unreasonable traffic or
land use conflicts. All uses permitted in the C-1 district are additional permitted uses.
(1) Uses as determined by the commission and the council which are closely related and similar to
those listed and that are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke,
odor, glare, or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from
listed uses permitted, such permitted uses being generally retail trade, service industries that sell,
store, distribute and/or repair goods, vehicles, equipment and materials, and are in general dependent
on products and materials produced elsewhere.
(b) Conditions and limitations.
(1) That it be conducted within a building and/or outdoor area that is improved with concrete,
asphalt pavement or other all-weather surface and that is suitably landscaped, screened or fenced.
(2) That the use not be objectionable because of odor, excessive light, smoke, dust, noise, vibration
or similar nuisance.
(3) Signs (advertising) must be on the same lot as the business establishments to which they refer
and shall not be placed within twenty-five (25) feet of any residential district. Signs may be
illuminated but must be stationary and non-flashing. All signs shall comply with all applicable
provisions of this article and any other applicable ordinance of the city.
(4) See chart 1.
(5) See chart 2.
(c) Site development regulations.
(1) Development of any use permitted in the “C-1” or “C-2” district shall conform with the site
development regulations established for that district.
(2) Paved sidewalks, driveways and parking areas are required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 448/508
(3) Screening of loading and storage facilities is required.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.124), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.065 Industrial - District “I”
(a) Permitted uses. Allows assembly, packaging, treatment, processing and manufacture of products that do
not pose any materially potential hazard to persons and property outside the boundaries of the property, and the
following specifically listed uses to the extent such uses are contained or included within property as to not pose
a potential hazard outside of the property on which such use is conducted:
(1) Uses as determined by the commission and the council which are closely related and similar to
those listed and that are not likely to create any more offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke,
odor, glare, or other objectionable influences than the minimum amount normally resulting from
listed uses permitted, such permitted uses being generally retail trade, service industries that sell,
store, distribute and/or repair goods, vehicles, equipment and materials, and are in general dependent
on products and materials produced elsewhere.
(b) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(c) Site development regulations. Development of any use permitted in the “I” district shall conform with the
site development regulations established for that district.
(d) Performance standards - Industrial District. All uses in the I (Industrial) district, District “I”, shall conform
in operation, location and construction to the minimum performance standards herein specified for noise,
odorous matter, toxic and noxious matter, glare, smoke, particulate matter and other air contaminants, fire and
explosive or hazardous matter, vibration, open storage and glare.
(1) Noise. At no point at the bounding property line of any use in an I district may the sound
pressure level of any operation or plant exceed the decibel limits specified in the octave band groups
designated in the following table.
(A) Maximum permissible daytime* octave band-decibel limits, at the bounding property
line**, in an I district;
Octave band (CPS) 37
75
75
150
150
300
300
600
600
1200
1200
2400
2400
4800
4800
9600
A Scale
Decibel band limit
(dB re 0.0002
microbar)
86 76 70 65 63 58 55 53 65
Note: A-scale level is provided for monitoring purposes only and is not applicable to detailed sound analysis.
* Daytime shall refer to the hours between sunrise and sunset on any given day.
** The building official will interpret the bounding property line as being at the nearest side of the right-of-way or property line of any
street, alley, stream or other permanently dedicated open space to the noise source when such open space exists between the property
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 449/508
line of the noise source and adjacent property. When no such open space exists, the common line between two parcels of property shall
be interpreted as the bounding property line.
(B) The following corrections will be made to the table of octave band-decibel limits in
determining compliance with the noise level standards in an I district.
(i) When noise is present at nighttime (anytime other than daytime), subtract 7 decibels.
When noise contains strong, pure tone components or is impulsive, that is when meter
changes at 10 decibels or more per second, subtract 7 decibels. Add ten decibels when
noise is present for not more than:
a. 1/2 minute in any 1/2-hour period;
b. 1 minute in any 1-hour period;
c. 10 minutes in any 2-hour period; or
d. 20 minutes in any 3-hour period.
(C) Measurement of noise is made with a sound level meter or octave band analyzer, meeting
the standards prescribed by the American Standards Association.
(2) Smoke and particulate matter. No operation or use in an I district shall cause, create or allow
the emission of air contaminants which violate state or federal environmental law, as referenced
herein: Texas Health and Safety Code Ann. chapters 381 and 382; Air Pollution Prevention and
Control, 42 U.S.C.A. 7401 et seq. Open storage and open processing operations including on-site
transportation on [or] movements which are a source of wind- or air-borne dust or other particulate
matter are subject to the standards and regulations specified herein.
(3) Odorous matter. No use may be located or operated in an I district which involves the emission
of odorous matter from a source of operation where the odorous matter exceeds a concentration at the
bounding property line or any point the tract on which such use or operation is located which, when
diluted with an equal volume of odor-free air, exceeds the odor threshold (2 odor units). The odor
threshold as herein set forth is determined by observation by the city staff. In any case where
uncertainty may arise or where the operator or owner of an odor-emitting use may disagree with the
enforcing officer or where specific measurement of odor concentration is required, the method and
procedures as specified by American Society for Testing Materials, ASTMD 1391-57, entitled
“Standard Method for Measurement of Odor in Atmospheres” will be used and a copy of the
ASTMD 1391-57 is hereby incorporated by reference.
(4) Flammable and hazardous materials. No use involving the manufacture or storage of
compounds or products which decompose by detonation is permitted in an I district except that
chlorate, nitrates, perchlorates, phosphorous and similar substances and compounds in small
quantities for use by industry, school laboratories, druggists or wholesalers may be permitted when
approved by the fire marshal of the city as not presenting a fire or explosion hazard. The storage and
use of all flammable liquids and materials, such as pyroxylin plastics, nitrocellulose film, solvents
and petroleum products is permitted only when such storage or use conforms to the standards and
regulations of established by city ordinance.
(5) Toxic and noxious matter. No operation or use permitted in an I (Industrial) district may emit a
concentration across the bounding property line of the tract on which such operation or use [is
located] violating state or federal environmental laws, as referenced herein: Texas Health and Safety
Code, chapters 381 and 382; Air Pollution Prevention and Control, 42 U.S.C.A. 7401 et seq. Open
storage and open processing operations, including on-site transportation movements which are a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 450/508
source of wind- or air-borne dust or other particulate matter, are subject to the standards and
regulations specified herein.
(6) Vibrations. No operation or use in an I district may at any time create earthborne vibration
which, when measured at the bounding property line of the source of operation, exceeds the limit of
displacement set forth in the following table in the frequency ranges specified.
Frequency
Cycles per Second
Displacement in
Inches
0 to 10 .0020
10 to 20 .0016
20 to 30 .0010
30 to 40 .0006
40 to 50 .0005
(7) Glare. No use or operation in an I district may be located or conducted so as to produce intense
glare or direct illumination across the bounding property line from a visible source of illumination
nor may any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use and
enjoyment of adjacent property.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.125), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.066 Planned Unit Development - District “PUD”
(a) Purpose and objectives. The purpose and intent of the planned unit development district is to provide a
flexible, alternative procedure to encourage imaginative and innovative designs for the unified development of
property in the city consistent with this article and accepted urban planning, with overall mixed-use regulations
as set forth below and in accordance with the city's comprehensive plan. The PUD rules are designed: (i) to
allow development which is harmonious with nearby areas; (ii) to enhance and preserve areas which are unique
or have outstanding scenic, environmental, cultural or historic significance; (iii) to provide an alternative for
more efficient use of land, resulting in smaller utility networks, safer streets, more open space, and lower
construction and maintenance costs; (iv) to encourage harmonious and coordinated development, considering
natural features, community facilities, circulation patterns and surrounding properties and neighborhoods; (v) to
facilitate the analysis of the effect of development upon the tax base, the local economy, population, public
facilities and the environment; (vi) to provide and result in an enhanced residential and/or work environment for
those persons living and/or working within the district; and (vii) to require the application of professional
planning and design techniques to achieve overall coordinated mixed-use developments and avoid the negative
effects of piecemeal, segregated, or unplanned development. Toward these ends, rezoning of land and
development under this district will be permitted only in accordance with the intent and purpose of the city's
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 451/508
comprehensive plan and this article, and to that end the PUD plan must be prepared and approved in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
(b) Mixed use development. The PUD district shall include and allow for compatible mixed uses such as
compatible residential, commercial and/or industrial, within a single project within the boundaries of a an
approved plan area, in order to provide the flexibility required for a well-designed and innovative development
that will conserve, develop, protect and utilize to their best use the natural resources of the area in a manner that
ensures the safe, orderly and healthy development and expansion of the city. In order to promote such
development, the PUD may be comprised of a combination of all the other zoning districts provided for in this
article. The outer boundary of the each such PUD zoning district shall be shown on a map. Said map will include
a descriptive legend, the specific boundaries of the area proposed for use authorized for in any other zoning
district, and percentage of the total area of such PUD which will comprise each such separate use, and all
notations, references, and other information shown thereon, shall be adopted by ordinance.
(c) Flexible planning. When considering a PUD, the unique nature of each proposal for a PUD may require,
under proper circumstances, the departure from the strict enforcement of certain present codes and ordinances,
e.g., without limitation, the width and surfacing of streets and highways, lot size, parking standards, setbacks,
alleyways for public utilities, signage requirements, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and streetlights, public parks and
playgrounds, drainage, school sites, storm drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, sewage
collection and treatment, single use districts, etc. Final approval of a PUD by the city council shall constitute
authority and approval for such flexible planning to the extent that the PUD as approved, departs from existing
codes and ordinances. The flexibility permitted for a PUD does not imply that any standard or requirement will
be varied or decreased.
(d) Rules applicable. The city council, after public hearing and proper notice to all parties affected and after
recommendation from the commission, may attach a planned unit development district designation to any tract
of land equal to or greater than three (3) acres. Under the planned development designation the following rules
apply:
(1) The approval of any proposed PUD or combination of uses proposed therein shall be subject to
the discretion of the city council, and no such approval will be inferred or implied.
(2) Permitted uses are those listed under the applicable zoning district(s) for the base zoning to be
applied to the PUD (for example, the permitted uses in a PUD proposed to be developed as a retail,
commercial and office development are the respective uses listed for the General Retail, Commercial
and Office districts). In addition, a planned unit development district may be established where the
principal purpose is to serve as a transitional district, or as an extension of an existing district
whereby the provision of off-street parking, screening walls, fences, open space and/or planting
would create a protective transition between a lesser and more restrictive district. In approving a
planned unit development, additional uses may be permitted, and specific permitted uses may be
prohibited from the base district.
(3) Standards required by the base zoning apply in a planned unit development except that the
following regulations and standards may be varied in the adoption of the planned unit development;
provided that the plan is consistent with sound urban planning and good engineering practices.
(A) Front, side and rear setbacks.
(B) Maximum height.
(C) Maximum lot coverage.
(D) Floor area ratio.
(E) Off-street parking requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 452/508
(F) Special district requirements pertaining to the base zoning.
(G) Number of dwelling units per acre.
(H) Accessory building regulations.
(I) Sign standards.
(4) In approving a planned unit development, no standards may be modified unless such
modification is expressly permitted by this article, and in no case may standards be modified when
such modifications are prohibited by this article.
(5) In approving a planned unit development, the city council may require additional standards
deemed necessary to create a reasonable transition to, and protection of, adjacent property and public
areas, including but not limited to, light and air, orientation, type and manner of construction,
setbacks, lighting, landscaping, management associations, open space, and screening.
(6) The commission and city council, in approving modifications to standards and regulations,
shall be guided by the purpose intended by the base zoning and general intent of this article.
(e) Preliminary site plan. A preliminary site plan of the entire property within the planned unit development
will be considered by the commission prior to any recommendation to, or consideration by, the city council of
the planned unit development district ordinance.
(1) A preliminary site plan may be approved for a portion of a planned unit development district
where the district is divided by a major thoroughfare, and the preliminary site plan includes all the
property located on one side of the street.
(2) Approval of a preliminary site plan will determine the location and mix of proposed uses,
proposed points of ingress and egress, parking spaces, building locations and height, lot coverage,
yards and open spaces, landscaping, screening walls or fences, topography, and other development
and protective requirements, considered necessary to create a reasonable transition to, and protection
of, the adjacent property.
(3) The commission and/or city council may approve, conditionally approve, request
modifications, or deny approval of the preliminary site plan based on evaluation of details with
respect to:
(A) The plan's compliance with all provisions of this article and other ordinances of the city.
(B) The environmental impact of the development relating to the preservation of existing
natural resources on the site and the impact on the natural resources of the surrounding
properties and neighborhood.
(C) The relationship of the development to adjacent uses in terms of harmonious use and
design, setbacks, maintenance of property values, and negative impacts.
(D) The provision of a safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation system.
(E) The design and location of off-street parking and loading facilities to ensure that all such
spaces are usable and are safely and conveniently arranged.
(F) The sufficient width and suitable grade and location of streets designed to accommodate
prospective traffic and to provide access for firefighting and emergency equipment to buildings.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 453/508
(G) The coordination of streets so as to compose a convenient system consistent with the
thoroughfare plan of the city.
(H) The use of landscaping and screening:
(i) To provide adequate buffers to shield lights, noise, movement or activities from
adjacent properties when necessary; and
(ii) To complement the design and location of buildings and be integrated into the
overall site design.
(I) The location, size and configuration of open space areas to ensure that such areas are
suitable for intended recreation and conservation uses.
(J) The adequacy of water, drainage, sewerage facilities, garbage disposal and other utilities
necessary for essential services to residents and occupants.
(f) Final site plan. Following approval of the preliminary site plan, or simultaneously if detailed information is
available, a final site plan for any portion of the planned unit development may be approved. The preliminary
site plan establishes the general development standards according to a base district. The final site plan providing
all the detail required for development, subdivision, zoning and enforcement of the special conditions and
regulations must be approved by ordinance prior to the zoning being in effect and construction being authorized.
(g) Amendments. Consideration of amendments to a planned unit development will take into consideration the
effect of the proposed development on the remainder of the property, adjacent properties and the neighboring
communities. Amendments to the final site plan or any planned development conditions which are substantive
shall require public hearings in the manner required for any other zoning change.
(h) Expiration. If development equal to at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the cost of installing streets,
utilities and drainage in the PUD, or, if the PUD is approved to be developed in sections or phases, if
development equal to at least fifty (50%) percent of the cost of installing streets, utilities and drainage in the first
section or phase of the PUD has not occurred, on a planned unit development tract or lot within two (2) years
after the date of approval, such approval shall expire; and may only be renewed after application is made
therefor, notice is given and public hearings are held by the commission and city council to evaluate the
appropriateness of the previously authorized planned development approval. Any such application for renewal
or extension shall be considered in the same manner, and under the same rules, regulations and ordinances then
in effect, as a new application for zoning.
(i) Ordinance amendment. Every planned unit development district approved under the provisions of this
article is considered an amendment of this article as to the property involved, and to the master plan. All planned
unit development districts will be referenced on the zoning district map, and a list of such planned unit
development districts shall be maintained as an appendix to this article.
(j) Certificate of occupancy. All planned unit development district conditions and special regulations must be
complied with in the PUD, or in the separate section or phase, before a certificate of occupancy is issued for the
use of land or any structure which is part of a planned unit development district, or, if applicable, the separate
section or phase being developed.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.126), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.067 Governmental - District “GOV”
(a) Purpose. This district is intended to provide appropriate areas for uses that provide important community
services. An appropriate site should contain adequate space for required off-street parking and buffering.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 454/508
Facilities owned and operated by the federal government, the state or political subdivisions thereof, including
public grounds;
(b) Additional permitted uses. Uses as determined by the commission and the council, which are closely
related and similar to those listed above.
(c) Conditions and limitations.
(1) See chart 1.
(2) See chart 2.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.127), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.068 Overlays
(a) Purpose. The purpose of overlays is to permit mixed use and redevelopment in areas that otherwise would
not normally be able to develop or to preserve some feature unique to that area.
(b) The city hereby establishes the following overlay districts which shall be governed by all of the uniform
use and area requirements of this article. Within these overlay districts, additional requirements are imposed on
certain properties within one or more underlying general or conditional zoning districts. The overlay districts
established by this article, including the symbol for each type of district is as follows:
IR - Infill Redevelopment Overlay
(1) IR - Infill Redevelopment Overlay. Where there is an existing lot that otherwise conforms to
the restrictions applicable [to] zoning located in the geographic area in the IR Overlay, the city may
waive setback, parking, impervious cover, lot size and land use compatibility requirements and grant
a building permit. Zero lot lines are permitted in the IR Overlay.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.128), adopted 9/19/05)
Secs. 14.02.069–14.02.120 Reserved
Division 3. Plan Requirements and Special Provisions
Sec. 14.02.121 Construction plans
(a) Purpose and applicability. Construction plans provide detailed graphic information and associated text
indicating property boundaries, easements, land use, street access, utilities, drainage, off-street parking, lighting,
signage, landscaping, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, open spaces, and general conformance with the master
plan and ordinances of the city. Construction plan approval by the city engineer shall be required for any
development or improvement of land subject to this article, and not otherwise required by city's subdivision
ordinance.
(b) Format. Construction plans shall be drawn on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch (24" x 36") sheets at a
generally accepted engineering scale, and sufficient to thoroughly meet the informational requirements herein.
(c) Content. Construction plans shall include all of the land proposed to be developed or improved, and any
off-site improvements required to accommodate the project. Construction plans shall contain, or have attached
thereto:
(1) A cover sheet, showing:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 455/508
(A) Names, addresses and phone numbers as applicable of the record owner and developer, if
any, and all authorized agents including the architect, engineer, landscape architect, and
surveyor.
(B) The proposed name of the project.
(C) A location map showing the relation of the project to streets and other prominent features
in all directions for a radius of at least one (1) mile using a scale of one inch equals two
thousand feet (1" = 2,000'). The latest edition of the USGS 7.5 minute quadrangle map is
recommended.
(D) Certification, revision and signature blocks as required by the city.
(E) The total acreage of the property to be developed.
(F) Current zoning district as defined by this article.
(2) An existing conditions plan, showing as follows:
(A) Boundary of existing zoning districts, if applicable.
(B) The existing property lines, including bearings and distances, of the land being developed
or improved. Property lines shall be drawn sufficiently wide to provide easy identification.
(C) The location of existing structures and improvements, if applicable.
(D) The accurate location, caliper and critical root zone of significant trees 8-inch caliper and
larger, in relation to the property boundary and, if applicable, within the limits of the proposed
off-site improvements.
(E) Centerline of watercourses, creeks, existing drainage structures and other pertinent data
shall be shown.
(F) Lines delineating the regulatory one hundred (100) year floodplain, if applicable.
(G) Topographic data indicating one (1) foot contour intervals. The contoured area shall
extend outward from the property boundary for a distance equal to twenty-five percent (25%) of
the distance across the tract, but not fewer than fifty (50) feet nor more than two hundred (200)
feet.
(H) The locations, sizes and descriptions of all existing utilities, including but not limited to
sewer lines, lift stations, sewer and storm sewer manholes, water lines, water storage tanks, and
wells within the property, and/or adjacent thereto. Existing overhead and underground electric
utilities shall also be shown.
(I) The location, dimensions, names and descriptions of all existing or recorded streets,
alleys, reservations, railroads, easements, building setbacks or other public rights-of-way within
the property, intersecting or contiguous with its boundaries or forming such boundaries, as
determined from existing deed and plat records. The existing right-of-way width of any
boundary street to the property shall also be shown.
(J) Location of city limit lines and/or outer border of the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, as
depicted on the city's most recent base map, if either traverses or is contiguous to the property
boundary.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan, showing as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 456/508
(A) Proposed fill or other structure-elevating techniques, levees, channel modifications and
detention facilities.
(B) Existing and proposed topographic conditions with vertical intervals not greater than one
(1) feet referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey
benchmark or monument.
(C) The location, size, and character of all temporary and permanent erosion and sediment
controls with specifications detailing all on-site erosion control measures which will be
established and maintained during all periods of development and construction.
(D) Contractor staging areas, vehicle access areas, temporary and permanent spoils storage
areas.
(E) A plan for restoration and for the mitigation of erosion in all areas disturbed during
construction.
(4) A site plan, showing all visible improvements to the land, including the following:
(A) The location, dimensions, square footage, height, and intended use of existing and
proposed buildings on the site.
(B) Location, number and dimensions of existing and proposed parking spaces,
distinguishing between standard, handicap and van handicap spaces, and calculation of
applicable minimum requirements in accordance with this article.
(C) The location, type and dimensions of proposed driveways, signs and traffic-control
devices.
(D) Compliance with the city's master plan.
(5) A grading and drainage plan, showing as follows:
(A) A drainage area map delineating areas to be served by proposed drainage improvements.
(B) Detailed design of all drainage facilities, including typical channel or paving section,
storm sewers, detention ponds and other stormwater control facilities.
(C) Accurate cross-sections, plan and profiles of every drainage improvement proposed in a
public utility easement and/or public right-of-way.
(D) Existing and proposed topographic conditions with vertical intervals not greater than one
(1) foot referenced to a United States Geological Survey or Coastal and Geodetic Survey
benchmark or monument.
(E) Attendant documents containing design computations and any additional information
required to evaluate the proposed drainage improvements.
(F) Compliance with the city's drainage policies provided in the city's subdivision ordinance.
(6) A utility plan, showing as follows:
(A) The layout, size and specific location of proposed water mains and other related
structures and in accordance with all current city standards, specifications, and criteria for
construction of water mains.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 457/508
(B) The location of proposed fire hydrants, valves, meters, pipe fittings and other
appurtenances.
(C) Design details showing the connection with the existing city water system.
(D) The layout, size and specific location of the proposed wastewater lines, lift stations, and
other related structures, and in accordance with all current city standards, specifications, and
criteria for construction of wastewater systems.
(E) Plan and profile drawings for each line in public right-of-way or public utility easements,
showing existing ground level elevation at centerline of pipe, pipe size and flow line elevation
at all bends, drops, turns, station numbers at fifty (50) foot intervals.
(F) Detailed design for lift stations, special wastewater appurtenances, if applicable.
(G) Utility demand data, and other attendant documents, to evaluate the adequacy of
proposed utility improvements, and the demand on existing city utilities.
(H) Compliance with the city's utility policies provided in the city's subdivision ordinance.
(7) A building plan, including floor, building, foundation, and roof plans, and elevations.
(8) A landscape plan, showing as follows:
(A) Dimensions, types of materials, size and spacing of proposed vegetative materials,
planting details and irrigation appurtenances in relation to proposed structures or other
significant improvements.
(B) The following maintenance note: The developer and subsequent owners of the
landscaped property, or the manager or agent of the owner, shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all landscape areas. Said areas shall be maintained so as to present a healthy,
neat and orderly appearance at all times and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. All planted
areas shall be provided with a readily available water supply and watered as necessary to ensure
continuous healthy growth and development. Maintenance shall include the replacement of all
dead plant material if that material was used to meet the requirements of the subdivision
regulations.
(C) Compliance with the city's landscaping and screening requirements of this article. See
section 14.02.122.
(9) Construction details, showing (when applicable) showing as follows:
(A) Structural retaining walls and/or detention outlet structures.
(B) Storm sewer manhole and covers, typical channel sections, inlets, safety end treatments
and headwalls.
(C) Wastewater manholes and covers, cleanouts, grease traps, pipe bedding and backfill.
(D) Water valves, water meters, fire hydrants, thrust blocks, backflow prevention and
concrete encasement.
(E) Driveways, curb and gutter, sidewalks, curb ramps, pavement sections and pavement
repair.
(F) Silt fence, rock berms, stabilized construction entrance, inlet protection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 458/508
(G) Traffic controls when working in public right-of-way.
(H) Applicable city standard details and specifications.
(d) Procedure. Construction plans for the development or improvement of land in the city limits, not otherwise
governed by the city's subdivision ordinance, shall be submitted to the city for approval prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
(1) Three (3) complete sets of construction plans shall be submitted to city staff for review by the
city engineer at any time prior to the issuance of a building permit, along with the following:
(A) Completed application forms and the payment of all applicable fees.
(B) A letter requesting any variances from the provisions of this article.
(C) Any attendant documents needed to supplement the information provided on the
construction plans.
(2) City staff shall review all construction plan submittals for completeness at the time of
application. If, in the judgment of city staff, the construction plan submittal substantially fails to meet
the minimal informational requirements as outlined above, it will not be accepted for review.
(3) The city engineer shall review the construction plans to insure compliance with this article, and
other applicable city ordinances, codes, standards and specifications, and good engineering practices.
(4) Construction plans may be rejected at any time subsequent to submittal and prior to final
approval for failure to meet the minimum informational requirements of this article.
(5) Applicable fees pursuant to city ordinance shall be paid, including, but not limited to, all
professional fees, engineer, and attorney fees incurred by the city for or with respect to the review,
processing and approval of the application for the approval of the building permit.
(e) Approval. Within thirty (30) days of the date on which all required information has been accepted for
review, the city engineer shall either approve or disapprove the construction plans. If the construction plans are
disapproved, the city engineer shall notify the applicant, in writing, of disapproval and indicate the requirements
for bringing the construction plans into compliance. If construction plans are approved, then the city engineer
shall sign the cover sheet of the construction plans, returning one (1) signed copy to the applicant and retaining
the other signed copy for city records.
(1) Specific approvals required from other agencies shall be obtained by the owner.
(2) All improvements shown in the approved construction plans shall be constructed pursuant to
and in compliance with the approved plans, except as otherwise specifically approved.
(3) It shall be the right of the applicant seeking construction plan approval, to appeal a decision of
the city engineer to the commission and have a final decision rendered by the commission.
(f) Revision. Where necessary, due to unforeseen circumstances, for corrections to be made to construction
plans for which approval has already been obtained, the city engineer shall have the authority to approve such
corrections when, in his/her opinion, such changes are warranted and also in conformance with city
requirements. Approval of such changes agreed to between the developer and city engineer shall be noted by
initialing and dating by both parties on the two (2) original signed copies of the construction plans.
(g) Responsibility. Notwithstanding the approval of any construction plans [by] the city engineer or the
commission, the developer and the engineer that prepares and submits such plans and specifications shall be and
remain responsible for the adequacy of the design of all such improvements; and nothing in this article shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 459/508
deemed or construed to relieve or waive the responsibility of the developer and his/her engineer for or with
respect to any design, plans and specifications submitted.
(h) Expiration. Unless a longer time shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, construction
plan approval shall expire twelve (12) months following the date on which such approval became effective,
unless prior to the expiration, a building permit is issued and construction is commenced and diligently pursued
toward completion.
(i) Extension. Construction plan approval may be extended if the developer submits a written request for
extension and continuance of the plan as approved by the city prior to expiration. Approval of any such
extension request shall be automatic one (1) time only for a period of twelve (12) months.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.141), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.122 Landscaping and screening requirements
(a) Purpose. The purpose of this section is, in conjunction with the other requirements of this article, to
promote and support the orderly, safe, attractive and healthful development of land located within the
community, and to promote the general welfare of the community by preserving and enhancing ecological,
environmental and aesthetic qualities, through established requirements for the installation and maintenance of
landscaping elements and other means of site improvements in developed properties. The following are
additional factors considered in establishing the requirements of this section:
(1) Paved surfaces, automobiles, buildings and other improvements produce increases in air
temperatures, a problem especially noticeable in this southern region, whereas plants have the
opposite effect through transpiration and the creation of shade. Likewise, impervious surfaces created
by development generate greater water runoff causing problems from contamination, erosion and
flooding. Preserving and improving the natural environment and maintaining a working ecological
balance are of increasing concern. The fact that the use of landscape elements can contribute to the
processes of air purification, oxygen regeneration, water absorption, water purification, and noise,
glare and heat abatement as well as the preservation of the community's aesthetic qualities indicates
that the use of landscape elements is of benefit to the health, welfare and general well-being of the
community and, therefore, it is proper that the use of such elements be required.
(2) The city encourages the use of drought-resistant vegetation that does not consume large
quantities of water.
(b) Installation and plan. All landscape materials shall be installed according to American Association of
Nurserymen (AAN) standards. An approved landscape plan shall be required for all new development in any
zoning district, save and except for A, R-1E, R-1C and R-1 districts.
(c) Maintenance. The owner of the landscaped property shall be responsible for the maintenance of all
landscape areas. Said areas shall be maintained so as to present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance at all
times and shall be kept free of refuse and debris. All planted areas shall be provided with a readily available
water supply and watered as necessary to ensure continuous healthy growth and development. Maintenance shall
include the replacement of all dead plant material if that material was used to meet the requirements of this
section.
(d) Planting criteria.
(1) Trees. Trees shall be a minimum of two (2) inches in caliper measured three (3) feet above
finished grade immediately after planting. A list of recommended landscape trees may be obtained
from the city. If the developer chooses to substitute trees not included on the recommended list, those
trees shall have an average mature crown greater than fifteen (15) feet in diameter to meet the
requirements of this section. Trees having an average mature crown less than fifteen (15) feet in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 460/508
diameter may be substituted by grouping trees so as to create at maturity the equivalent of a fifteenfoot
(15) diameter crown if the drip line area is maintained. A minimum area three (3) feet in radius
is required around the trunks of all existing and proposed trees.
(2) Shrubs and ground cover. Shrubs, vines and ground cover planted pursuant to this section shall
be good, healthy nursery stock. Shrubs must be, at a minimum, a one (1) gallon container size.
(3) Lawn grass. It is recommended that grass areas be planted with drought-resistant species
normally grown as permanent lawns, such as Bermuda, Zoysia, St. Augustine or Buffalo. Grass areas
may be sodded, plugged, sprigged or seeded except that solid sod shall be used in areas subject to
erosion.
(4) Synthetic plants. Synthetic or artificial lawns or plants shall not be used in lieu of plant
requirements in this section.
(5) Architectural planters. The use of architectural planters may be permitted in fulfillment of
landscape requirements.
(6) Other. Any approved decorative aggregate or pervious brick pavers shall qualify for
landscaping credit if contained in planting areas, but no credit shall be given for concrete or other
impervious surfaces.
(e) Landscaping requirements. A minimum percentage of the total lot area shall be devoted to landscape
development in accordance with the following schedule.
Zoning or Use Percentage
(1) Multifamily 20%
(2) Residential *Note
(3) Office, general retail and commercial
uses
15%
(4) Industrial - light and heavy 10%
(5) Agricultural None
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 461/508
* Note. Minimum landscape requirements for each lot on which a single-family, dwelling, or a manufactured
home, is constructed or installed after the date of this article shall be a minimum of two (2) two-inch trees and
lawn grass from the front property line to the front two (2) corners of the structure. Residential structures on
reverse frontage lots shall also be required to screen the rear of the structure from the abutting highway, access
road, or other public rights-of-way.
(f) Exceptions. Exceptions to these provisions may be granted by the commission and/or council to require a
lesser amount of landscaping if the aesthetic, buffering and environmental intent of this article is met, and the
reduction of the landscape area results in the preservation of natural features having comparable value to the
reduced landscape requirements.
(g) Placement. Landscaping shall be placed upon that portion of a tract or lot that is being developed. Fifty
percent (50%) of the required landscaped area and required plantings shall be installed between the front
property lines and the building being constructed. Undeveloped portions of a tract or lot shall not be considered
landscaped, except as specifically approved by the commission. Landscaping placed within public rights-of-way
shall not be credited to the minimum landscape requirements by this section.
(h) Credit. The building official and/or city planner shall, with respect to the issuance of a building permit or
approval of a construction or site development plan, give a credit against the requirements of this section for
trees preserved on the site. Provided that, in order to reward the preservation of significant trees, a credit may be
given for such preservation only if no more than fifty percent (50%) of the critical root zone is disturbed or
distressed with impervious cover; and provided further that the remaining critical root zone must consist of at
least one hundred (100) square feet.
(i) Additional required plantings. For every six hundred (600) square feet of landscape area required by this
section, two (2) trees and four (4) shrubs shall be planted. To reduce the thermal impact of unshaded parking
lots, additional trees shall be planted, if necessary, so that no parking space is more than 50 feet away from the
trunk of a tree, unless otherwise approved by the commission. This subsection (i) shall not apply to any property
included in any of the following zoning categories: A, and R-1.
(j) Replacement of required trees. Upon the death or removal of a tree planted pursuant to the terms of this
section, a replacement tree of equal size and type shall be required to be planted. A smaller tree that will have a
mature crown similar to the tree removed may be substituted if the planting area or pervious cover provided for
the larger tree in this section is retained.
(k) Screening. The following requirements shall be in addition to the foregoing landscaping and planting
requirements.
(1) On reverse frontage lots, all loading spaces and docks, outside storage areas, satellite dishes
larger than 18 inches in diameter, antennas, mechanical equipment, and the rear of structures, must be
screened from view from the street or public rights-of-way.
(2) Approved screening techniques include privacy fences, evergreen vegetative screens, landscape
berms, existing vegetation or any combination thereof.
(3) Privacy fences.
(A) All fences required by this section and along a common property boundary shall be six
(6) feet in height.
(B) Fences up to eight (8) feet in height, but not less than six (6) feet, shall be allowed for
impeding access to hazardous facilities including, but not limited to, electrical substations,
swimming pools and chemical or equipment storage yards, where the slope of a line drawn
perpendicular to the fence line averages twenty percent (20%) or more on either side of the
fence over a distance no less than fifteen (15) feet, or where the fence forms a continuous
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 462/508
perimeter around a subdivision and the design of said perimeter fence is approved by the
commission.
(C) Fences less than or equal to three (3) feet in height shall be allowed in front yards.
(D) No fence or other structure more than thirty percent (30%) solid or more than three (3)
feet high shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of the intersection of any rights-of-way.
(E) All fences shall be constructed to maintain structural integrity against natural forces such
as wind, rain and temperature variations.
(F) The finished side of all fences built to comply with these regulations shall face away from
the screened object.
(4) Evergreen vegetative screens. Evergreen plant materials shall be shrubs, at least thirty (30)
inches in height and at a minimum spacing of 48 inches at the time of installation. Shrubs may be
used in combination with landscape trees to fulfill the requirements of this section.
(5) Landscape berms. Landscape berms may be used in combination with shrubs and trees to fulfill
the screening requirements of this section if the berm is at least three (3) feet in height and has a
maximum side slope of four (4) feet of horizontal run for every one (1) foot in vertical rise.
(6) Native vegetation. Existing vegetation, demonstrating significant visual screening capabilities
and as approved by the commission may fulfill the requirements of this section.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.142), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.123 Sign requirements
(a) All signs shall be designed, placed, located, erected, constructed and maintained in accordance with the
this section and all applicable city ordinances.
(b) Purpose. The objectives of this section are to promote the health, safety, welfare, convenience,
communication and the landscape quality of the public. The sections, provisions and regulations set forth in this
article shall apply to the control, use, installation, regulation, licensing and permitting of signs within the city
and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). It is the intent of this article to provide comprehensive regulations
applicable to signs placed, installed or maintained within the city and its ETJ; provided that this article shall not
be construed, applied, interpreted nor enforced in a manner to violate the first amendment rights of any person,
and the building official shall seek the advice and recommendation of the city attorney prior to taking any action
to enforce any provision of this article with respect to any noncommercial sign or speech by any person. This
section shall further be interpreted and applied to accomplish the following purposes:
(1) Safety. A purpose of this section is to provide for the public safety by requiring that:
(A) No hazard is created due to collapse, wind, fire, collision, decay or abandonment;
(B) No obstruction is created to firefighting and police surveillance; and
(C) No traffic hazard is created by confusing or distracting motorists, or by impairing the
driver's ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, or other vehicles, or to read the traffic signs.
(2) Communications. A purpose of this section is to promote the efficient transfer of information in
sign message by providing that:
(A) Businesses and services may identify themselves;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 463/508
(B) Customers and other persons may locate a business or service; and
(C) Persons exposed to signs are not overwhelmed by the number of messages presented, and
are able to exercise freedom of choice to observe or ignore said messages, according to the
observer's purpose.
(3) Landscape quality and preservation. A purpose of this article is to enhance the appearance and
economic value of the landscape, by providing signs that:
(A) Do not interfere with scenic views;
(B) Do not create a nuisance to persons using the public rights-of-way;
(C) Do not constitute a nuisance to occupancy of adjacent and contiguous property by their
brightness, size, height, or movement;
(D) Are not detrimental to land or property value; and
(E) Contribute to the special character of particular areas or districts within the city, helping
the observer to understand the city and orient oneself within it.
(c) General provisions. All signs erected or maintained pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be
erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations, the
building code, electrical code and other applicable ordinances of the city. In the event of conflict between this
article and other laws, the most restrictive standard applies.
(d) Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meaning indicated below unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
Erect. To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix.
Face or surface. The surface of the sign upon, against, or through which the message is displayed or illustrated
on the sign.
Gross surface area of the sign. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing the extreme limits
of each sign. A sign having two (2) surfaces shall be considered a single sign if both the surfaces are located
back to back. In the event two (2) or more signs share a single structure, i.e., directory signs, or signs on Vshaped
structures, each sign or panel shall be considered separately for square footage purposes, provided that
the combined area of such signs cannot exceed the total square footage allowed on a single sign.
Height. The distance from common ground level to the highest point.
Illuminated sign. Any sign illuminated by electric lights.
Incombustible material. Any material which will not ignite at 1200 degrees F or below, nor shall it continue to
burn or glow at that temperature.
License. An official document issued by the city that gives permission to operate a sign installation business.
Logo. Design or insignia commonly used to identify a company or product.
Off-site. The sign refers to goods, products or services provided at a location other than that which the sign
occupies.
On-site. The sign refers to goods, products, or services provided at a location which the sign occupies.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 464/508
Permanent. Any sign intended to be used for six (6) months or longer.
Permit. An official document issued by the city that allows for sign installation.
Person. An individual, partnership, firm, company, association or corporation of any kind.
Portable sign. A sign easily moved from one location to another, including signs which are mounted on skids,
trailers, wheels, legs or stakes.
Setback. The minimum distance from the property line to the nearest part of a building. No sign requiring a
permit may encroach, project, or be constructed on or past this line.
Sign. A structure, display, light device, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard or other thing that is
designed, intended or used to advertise, inform, or attract the attention of persons not on that premise, excluding
those lights and landscape features which display words or symbols as temporary holiday decorations.
Sign, abandoned. Any sign without a valid current permit, or one which is deserted, surrendered or forsaken,
unused, given up or relinquished with intention of never resuming a right of interest therein.
Sign, advertising. Any sign which promotes or advertises commodities or services not offered on the premises
where such signs are located.
Signs, agricultural. Any sign identifying the farm or ranch on which it is placed and advertises the produce,
crops, animals, or poultry raised or quartered thereon.
Signs, apartment. Any sign identifying an apartment building or complex of apartments.
Signs, construction. Any temporary sign identifying the property owner, architect, contractor, engineer,
landscape architect, decorator, or finances engaged in the design, construction or improvement of the premises
on which the sign is located.
Sign, developmental. Any temporary sign pertaining to the development of land.
Sign, directional. Any temporary sign which exclusively communicates the location or route to a premise or
occupancy.
Sign, identification. Any sign used to identify shopping centers, industrial and commercial parks, and retail
districts. These signs are not intended to identify individual businesses or activities within the center or district.
Sign, institution. Any sign used to identify a school, church, hospital or similar public or quasi-public institution.
Sign, marquee. Any sign erected on a marquee or fixed awning.
Sign, model home. Any temporary sign used to advertise a particular structure represented by a model or show
home.
Sign, monument. Any permanent low-profile sign on a monument base.
Sign, political. A sign advertising a political candidate or party for elective office.
Sign, projection. Any sign which projects, either horizontally or vertically, from a building and which has one
end attached to that building or other permanent structure.
Sign, real estate. A sign used to advertise the sale, or lease of a piece of real property.
Sign, residential subdivision. A sign used to identify a specific residential subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 465/508
Sign, traffic. A sign used for traffic-control purposes.
Sign, wall. Any sign attached to the face of a building or incorporated thereon, including windows and doors, to
advertise businesses in that building.
(e) On-site signs permitted. A freestanding or attached sign may be erected and maintained upon any
commercial or industrial zoned property, unless otherwise prohibited or restricted herein; provided that not more
than one (1) freestanding sign shall be erected or maintained upon any premise. Additionally, not more than four
(4) attached signs may be attached to or suspended from any building facade, canopy or awning. Such signs
shall pertain only to the identification of a building, business, product(s), or service(s) manufactured, sold or
offered on the premises where the signs are located.
(1) Single-tenant freestanding signs. The maximum size of any freestanding sign for any use that
does not share a common line or lot shall not exceed 150 square feet nor have a luminance greater
than 200 footlamberts. A minimum setback of a least five (5) feet from any building line is required.
No freestanding sign shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height. Any freestanding sign located in such a
manner as to allow the passage of vehicular traffic beneath it shall have a minimum clearance of
fourteen (14) feet. Any sign located in such a manner to allow the passage of pedestrian traffic
beneath it shall have a minimum clearance of eight (8) feet. Any freestanding sign that does not meet
the size, height and setback restrictions will require a variance from the city council.
(2) Multi-tenant freestanding signs. The maximum size of any freestanding sign for any use that
shares a common line or a common lot shall not exceed 300 square feet nor have a luminance greater
than 200 footlamberts. A minimum setback of at least ten (10) feet from any building line is required.
No multi-tenant freestanding sign shall exceed thirty (30) feet in height. No multi-tenant freestanding
sign shall be located in such a manner as to allow the passage of vehicular traffic beneath it. Any sign
located in such a manner to allow passage of pedestrian traffic beneath it shall have a minimum
clearance of eight (8) feet. Any freestanding sign that does not meet the size, height and setback
restrictions will require a variance from the city council.
(3) Projection signs. The maximum size of any projection sign shall be forty (40) square feet. The
height of any projection sign shall not exceed the height of the roofline of the structure to which the
sign is attached. No projection sign shall project over eighteen (18) inches from the face of any
building to which affixed nor shall any sign have a luminance greater than 200 footlamberts. Where a
projection sign is placed in such a manner as to project a distance greater than two (2) inches into a
private driveway or other private area likely to be used by vehicular traffic or where such sign is
placed in such a manner as to allow the passage of vehicular traffic beneath it, the sign shall have a
minimum clearance of fourteen (14) feet. Where a projection sign is placed in such a manner as to
allow the passage of pedestrian traffic beneath it, the sign shall have a minimum clearance of eight
(8) feet.
(4) Construction standards. All on-site signs shall be designed and constructed to withstand a wind
pressure of not less than thirty (30) pounds per square foot of area; and shall be constructed to receive
dead loads as required in the building code of the city.
(5) Marquee or wall signs. Such sign faces shall not exceed five (5) square feet per one (1) linear
foot of building frontage up to one hundred fifty (150) square feet.
(6) Balloons, floating devices, banners or searchlights. All balloons, floating devices, streamers or
searchlights shall be sufficiently anchored and shall meet all applicable regulations. Such signs shall
be subject to proper maintenance and safety standards. Should such signs be significantly damaged,
worn or distracting the city staff may deem the sign unmaintained and order its removal.
(f) Permit fees for new permanent signs. The fee for permits shall be based on the square footage of said sign
in the following manner:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 466/508
Square Feet Fee
Up to 40 square feet $25.00
41 sq. ft. to 60 sq. ft. $50.00
61 sq. ft. and larger $1.00/sq. ft.
If any work is started or proceeded without a permit first being obtained, the above-specified permit fee shall be
doubled and paid for the required permit.
(g) Engineer certification. Applications for a freestanding sign permit that exceeds thirty-six (36) square feet
or exceeds a height of eighteen (18) feet shall require scale drawings showing a site plan location and design of
the sign. For all other signs, a design and street location plan, containing the necessary information, shall be
submitted to the building official to determine that such sign complies with all the applicable codes and
regulations. Wind pressure and dead loads shall be shown where deemed appropriate, and the building official
may require structural drawings designed and sealed by a civil engineer registered by the State of Texas when it
cannot otherwise be determined that the sign will be structurally sound.
(h) Signs exempt from permitting procedures. Permits and required setbacks shall not be required for the
following signs, provided, however, that such signs shall otherwise comply with all other applicable sections of
this article.
(1) Temporary political signs.
(2) Temporary special event signs not exceeding fifty (50) square feet in area and limited to a
maximum time period of no more than fourteen (14) consecutive days, with a limit of four (4) events
each calendar year, or a maximum time period of no more than forty-five (45) consecutive days with
a limit of one (1) event each calendar year. For thirty (30) days following an event, no new temporary
special event sign shall be allowed. The location of temporary special event signs must be approved
by the building official for safety and setback purposes and, if the adjacent property owners make
objections to the sign, the adjacent property owners may appeal any such application to the city
council. All such signs must be removed within ten (10) days after the maximum time period
allowed.
(3) Occupational signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and denoting only the name and
profession, or occupation, in a commercial or public institutional building.
(4) On-site traffic-control signs not exceeding eight (8) square feet and used primarily to denote
entrances and exits, shall not contain advertising or be used for such purpose, and shall not exceed
three (3) feet in height.
(5) Residential real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of an individual residential structure
and not exceeding eight (8) square feet.
(6) Business/industry real estate signs advertising the sale or lease of business/industrial property
and not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 467/508
(7) Temporary window signs and banners not exceeding the surface area of the window within
which it is placed.
(i) Signs not regulated. The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permitting provisions of this
article. However, regulations regarding sign location in a public right-of-way or public access easement shall
apply. It is further specifically provided that the building official may, based upon the size, materials used in
construction and other relevant factors, require the owner of any sign to show evidence of structural soundness
and compliance with the safety requirements of this article.
(1) Governmental signs. Signs erected or maintained pursuant to the discharge of any
governmental function; required by law, ordinance, or governmental regulation; or located on
property owned, leased or under control of the federal or state government.
(2) Railway signs. Signs within or on railway property and placed or maintained in reference to the
operation of such railway.
(3) Utility signs. Signs marking utility or underground communication or transmission lines.
(4) Vehicle signs. Signs displayed or used upon vehicles, trailers or aircraft, unless such vehicle,
trailer, or aircraft on which such sign is displayed is permanently stationed for a period of seventytwo
(72) continuous hours or more, or regularly used at a fixed location to serve the same or similar
purpose of a permanent or portable sign not affixed to a vehicle, trailer or aircraft.
(5) Signs not visible from street. Signs where no part of such sign is visible from any public street.
(6) Holiday signs. Temporary signs containing only holiday messages and no commercial
advertising.
(7) Signs on persons. Hand-held signs or signs, symbols or displays on persons or animals.
(8) Unused signs. Signs being manufactured or transported, and/or properly and safely stored, and
not being used, in any manner or form, for purposes of advertising.
(9) Plaques. Commemorative plaques of recognized historical societies and organizations.
(10) Private traffic control. On-site signs which direct the movement of traffic on private property
or warn of obstacles, overhead clearances or control parking. The sign must be less than ten (10) feet
in width, less than six (6) feet in height, and be placed where it will not interfere with the safe
movement of vehicles or pedestrians.
(11) Mailboxes and newspaper racks. Signs located on mailboxes, newspaper vending machines
and curbside residential newspaper holders which identify the owner and address of the premises or
the name of the newspaper sold or subscribed to; provided that such devices are not placed so as to
interfere with the safe movement of pedestrians or vehicular traffic.
(12) Signs on outdoor machines, devices and equipment. Signs located on outdoor machines,
devices, or equipment which display the trademark, trade name, manufacturer, cost of operating or
service instructions or similar information, but do not advertise the business where located. This
exemption includes, but is not limited to signs on coin-operated vending machines, fuel dispensing
pumps, telephone facilities, automatic teller machines, automatic vacuum cleaners, amusement rides
and similar machines, devices or equipment.
(13) Athletic fields. Signs located on the field side of scoreboards and fences of athletic fields.
(14) Historic signs. Any historic designation signs not primarily advertising a commercial use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 468/508
(j) Permit required; application and issuance.
(1) Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or relocate any sign within the city
without first obtaining a sign permit from the building official unless such sign is exempted by this
article.
(2) Permit application. Application for permits shall contain or have attached thereto the following
information:
(A) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant.
(B) Location of the building, structure, or lot on which the sign is to be attached or erected.
(C) Two (2) sets of plans shall be submitted showing the sign location in relation to nearby
buildings or structures, signs, property lines, driveways, public streets, fences, and sidewalks.
(D) Two (2) blueprints or ink drawings of the plans and specifications showing method of
construction, attachment to the building or ground, size, type, height, construction materials,
and such other materials, and such other information as the building official may require. The
building official may require plans to be prepared by a registered professional engineer who is
registered by the State of Texas or an architect licensed by the State of Texas.
(E) Copy of stress sheets and calculations showing the structure as designed for dead load
and wind pressure in any direction in the amount required by this article, and all other laws and
codes of the city.
(F) Name of person, firm, corporation, or association erecting structure.
(G) Any electrical permit required and issued for said sign.
(H) Zoning classification carried by the property.
(I) Estimated value of the sign.
(J) Such other information as the building official shall require to show full compliance with
this article and all other laws and codes of the city.
(3) Permit issuance. It shall be the duty of the building official, upon the filing of an application for
a sign permit, to examine such plans and specifications and other data and the premises upon which it
is proposed to erect a sign. If it appears that the proposed structure is in compliance with all the
requirements of this section, the building code, and all other laws and ordinances of the city, the
building official shall then issue the sign permit. If the work authorized under a sign permit has not
been completed within sixty (60) days after issuance, the said permit shall become null and void.
(k) Illuminated signs. The electrical inspector may only approve an application for an illuminated sign if the
sign is to be installed on property zoned commercial or higher. The application for a permit for erection of a sign
in which electrical wiring and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the electrical inspector. The
electrical inspector shall examine the plans and specifications respecting all wiring and connections to determine
if the same complies with the electrical code of the city. In addition, all illuminated signs shall bear the
Underwriters' Laboratory label or be built to comply with the Underwriters' requirements. The electrical
inspector shall approve said permit if the plans and specifications therefor comply with the requirements of this
article, and shall disapprove the application if noncompliance is found. Approval by the electrical inspector must
be obtained prior to the approval and issuance of any sign permit by the building official.
(l) Maintenance and removal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 469/508
(1) Maintenance required. All signs shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition, shall
be painted on all exterior parts, unless coated or made of rust-resistant material, and shall be
maintained in good condition and appearance. Any owner failing to maintain, repair, or remove any
such sign after due notice has been given shall upon conviction be guilty of a misdemeanor.
(2) Inspection of signs. The building official shall be notified by permittee when erection of the
sign is complete, and the official shall make an inspection to determine if the sign conforms to the
permit. The building official at such times as he/she deems necessary, shall inspect each sign
regulated by this section for the purpose of ascertaining whether the same is secure or insecure,
whether it still serves a useful purpose and whether it is in need of removal or repair.
(3) Removal of unsafe and unlawful signs. If the building official shall find that any sign regulated
herein is unsafe or insecure, or is a menace to the public, or is abandoned or is maintained in a
dilapidated condition, or has been constructed or erected or is being maintained in violation of this
section, or is not permitted as required herein, he/she shall take action as follows:
(A) Except as provided in the following paragraphs (B) and (C), the building official shall
give the sign or property owner written notice to repair, remove or obtain a permit for such sign
as applicable within ten (10) days after such notice. If the sign or property owner fails to
remove, repair, or obtain a permit for such sign so as to comply with all applicable standards
and regulations, the building official shall cause the sign to be either removed or repaired and
such cost shall be charged to and paid by the property owner. If such demolition or repair
expenses are not paid by the property owner within thirty (30) days of such billing, then such
expenses shall constitute a valid lien against the property. Such notice shall also provide the
sign or property owner an opportunity to bring the sign into compliance or to request a hearing
before the city council to determine whether the sign should be repaired or removed. Such
appeal must be filed in writing with the city secretary within ten (10) days of the notice. After
consideration of all facts, the city council shall rule upon the appeal.
(B) The building official may cause any sign which is an immediate peril to persons or
property to be removed summarily and without notice.
(C) Any sign located in public right-of-way may be immediately removed by anyone without
notice to the owner.
(m) Sign standards. Signs are to comply with applicable law. All signs erected or maintained within the city
shall be erected and maintained in compliance with all applicable state laws and with this section and article, the
city's building code and the electrical code. In the event of conflict between this section and other laws, codes or
ordinances, the most restrictive standard shall apply.
(n) Signs allowed without permit.
(1) Sale or lease signs. Any realtor or property owner may erect a sign for the purpose of
advertising the sale or lease of the real property on which such sign is located, subject to the
following provisions:
(A) Signs advertising the sale or lease of nonbusiness property shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in area nor five (5) feet in height from ground level.
(B) Signs advertising the sale or lease of a business property shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in area nor eight (8) feet from ground level.
(2) Garage or yard sale signs. Any person may erect a sign on his own property, or property of
another with the owner's permission, for the purpose of advertising a garage or yard sale. Name, date
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 470/508
and address must be shown on the sign, however such signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24)
hours of the sale.
(3) Handbills and circulars. Handbills and circulars are prohibited except that hand-delivered to
individual persons is allowed.
(4) Political signs. Political signs may be erected on any private property; provided, that such signs
comply with other applicable requirements of this section, and provided further, that the owner or
occupant of the property on which such sign is displayed:
(A) Shall not erect or cause to be erected special purpose political signs until forty-five (45)
days prior to any primary or general election; and
(B) Shall remove the signs within ten (10) days after the general or runoff elections to which
a sign pertains or after the termination of a candidacy, whichever occurs first.
(5) Temporary construction signs allowed. Temporary construction signs denoting the architect,
engineer, contractor, subcontractor or financier and temporary signs denoting the future location of a
particular business, retail center or institution may be erected on such site of the proposed business.
However, only one (1) construction sign and one (1) future location sign will be permitted on such
location. No such sign shall exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area nor extend higher than fifteen
(15) feet; provided, that such signs must be located on the premises where construction, or business
location being advertised, is or will be occurring. Said signs shall be removed upon issuance of an
occupancy permit.
(6) Homebuilders and subdivision sign allowed. Except as and to the extent provided and limited
in another ordinance of the city applicable to homebuilder and subdivision signs, freestanding signs
for the purpose of identifying the location of or direction to subdivisions or major homebuilders sites
are allowed. Such signs shall be on-site and shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area nor extend
higher than fifteen (15) feet in height. A homebuilder with ten (10) lots or more qualified as a major
homebuilder. The signs permitted for each subdivision or major homebuilder site shall be removed
upon completion of the project. No such sign shall be located closer than one hundred (100) feet to a
residential dwelling not within the subdivision.
(o) Off-site signs. No off-site commercial signs shall be allowed.
(p) Nonconforming signs prohibited. Nonconforming signs erected or installed after the date of this article are
prohibited and shall be removed. Signs substantially similar to, or imitating, traffic or emergency signs are
prohibited at any location at which they may be seen from the travel lanes of any public roadway.
(q) Signs in right-of-way prohibited. No sign shall be erected or affixed within or project over any public
right-of-way or across the public right-of-way line extended across a railroad right-of-way. This section shall not
be construed so as to prohibit vehicular signs as long as such comply with other provisions of this section; nor to
prohibit the carrying or display of signs by a person or persons as long as such sign is not connected or affixed to
the real property comprising the public right-of-way, its fixtures and appurtenances.
(r) Certain signs prohibited on public property. No person shall attach any sign, paper, or other material or
paint, stencil, or write any name, number or otherwise mark on any sidewalk, curb, gutter, street, tree, or utility
pole located on public property or within the public right-of-way, public building, public fence or public
structure. This section shall not prohibit the posting of governmental signs, local school spirit signs/emblems or
the painting or attachment of street address numbers to curbs.
(s) Nonconforming signs. It is the declared purpose of this section that, in time, all privately owned signs shall
either conform to the provisions of this section or be removed. By the passage of this article and its amendments,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 471/508
no presently illegal sign shall be deemed to have been legalized unless such sign complies with all current
standards under the terms of this article and all other ordinances of the city.
(1) Any sign which does not conform to all provisions of this article but which existed on the
effective date of this section and was lawfully constructed or installed shall be considered as a
nonconforming sign. All nonconforming signs shall be permitted in the same manner as any other
legally existing sign or proposed sign; provided that no sign that was constructed or installed in
violation of any state or local law, or that was originally constructed or installed without a permit that
was then required at such time, shall be or qualify as a nonconforming sign.
(2) Whenever any nonconforming sign no longer advertises a bona fide business or a business
which has moved away or closed, a product sold, or service rendered, such sign shall be removed
within sixty (60) days. If the nonconforming sign is a wall sign, the wall sign shall be removed or
painted over with a color that resembles or matches the rest of the wall of the building. If the owner
of, or person responsible for the sign, or if the tenant closing a business, fails to remove the
abandoned sign or paint over the wall sign, the owner of the premises shall be held responsible and
the work shall be done within thirty (30) days following written notice to do so by the building
official.
(3) No nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way which would increase its
nonconformity.
(4) Should any nonconforming sign be damaged by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50)
percent of its replacement cost at time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with the provisions of this article.
(t) Variances. The city council shall be empowered to vary the provisions of this section if it appears that the
provisions would work in manifest injustice, considering such factors as the sign location and other pertinent
factors. Such decision of the council should not however conflict with the spirit of this article, which is one of
safety, provision of adequate light, open space and air, conservation of land and building values and to
encourage the most appropriate use of land. All variances to these sign regulations will require a conditional use
permit and a two-thirds vote of the city council to approve the variance.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.143), adopted 9/19/05)
State law reference–Municipal regulation of signs, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 216.001 et seq.
Sec. 14.02.124 Conditional use permits
(a) Purpose. The city council may by ordinance, adopted by four (4) affirmative votes after receiving the
recommendation of the commission, grant a conditional use permit in compliance with this section for the
conditional uses as listed in (b) below. The city council may impose appropriate conditions and safeguards,
including a specified period of time for the permit, to protect the comprehensive plan and to conserve and
protect property and property values in the neighborhood.
(b) Authorized conditional uses. The following listed conditional uses and those indicated in a specific zoning
district as a permitted use with a conditional use permit, and none other, may be authorized subject to the terms
of this subsection and compliance with all conditional terms, regulations and requirements established by the
city council.
(1) Airport, landing field, landing strip or heliport for aircraft; municipal service facilities and
buildings.
(2) Amusement park, but not within three hundred (300) feet of any residential district.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 472/508
(3) Circus or carnival grounds, but not within three hundred (300) feet of any residential district.
(4) Commercial, recreational or amusement development for temporary or seasonal periods.
(5) Hospital, clinic or institution, provided that any hospital or institution permitted in any
residential district shall be located on a site of not less than five (5) acres, shall not occupy more than
ten percent (10%) of the total lot area and shall be set back from all property lines at least two (2) feet
for each foot of building height.
(6) Riding stables.
(7) Private operated community building or recreation field.
(8) Radio or television broadcasting tower or station.
(9) Churches.
(10) Cemeteries.
(11) Schools - public and denominational.
(12) Gasoline sales.
(13) Alcoholic beverages–on-premises and alcoholic beverages–mixed drink for those specific
uses and in the specific zoning districts as provided by this article, including a bar, nightclub, tavern,
and private club.
(14) Sexually oriented business.
(c) Procedure. Before authorization of any of the above conditional uses, public notice shall be given and
public hearings shall be held as provided in chapter 211, Tex. Loc. Gov't. Code; provided that a conditional use
permit for a period not to exceed seven (7) calendar days may be given for a use set forth in (b)(3) or (b)(4)
above after a public hearing is held by the city council after having received a report and recommendation from
the commission concerning the effect of the proposed use on the adjacent and neighboring properties and
neighborhoods.
(1) Permit required. No conditional use shall be established, operated, or maintained except as
authorized by a conditional use permit issued in accordance with the requirements of this section.
(2) Conditional use permit issued by city council. A special use permit may be issued only for the
special uses specified in this section, and only for the district where it is authorized.
(3) The city council shall determine whether the proposed special use complies with each of the
general criteria in subsection (d) of this section and with each of the criteria for the district applicable
to the proposed use and shall make separate findings thereon or adopt the findings made by the
commission.
(4) The city council may condition its approval of an application on the applicant's adoption of
specified changes, additions, limitations, safeguards, or effective time periods designed to assure
compliance with the criteria.
(5) Application. An application for a special use permit shall be made in writing in a form
prescribed by the city secretary and shall be accompanied by such information as may be requested
(including a site plan, if required) in order to properly review the proposed use. Such information
may include, but is not limited to, site and building plans, drawings and elevations, and operational
data.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 473/508
(d) General criteria applicable to all special uses. A proposed special use permit must comply with all the
following criteria:
(1) The appearance, size, density and operating characteristics of the proposed special use are
compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and uses;
(2) The proposed use will not have an adverse effect on the value of surrounding properties nor
impede their proper development;
(3) The proposed use will not create a nuisance factor nor otherwise interfere with a neighbor's
enjoyment of his property or operation of his business;
(4) The traffic that the proposed use can reasonably be expected to generate on existing streets will
not create nor add significantly to congestion, a safety hazard, or a parking problem in the area, nor
will it disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood; and
(5) The proposed use complies with all other applicable ordinances and regulations.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.144), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.125 Nonconforming uses
(a) General policy. The general public, the city council and the commission are directed to take note that
nonconformity in the use and development of land and buildings are to be avoided, or eliminated where now
existing, whenever and wherever possible, except:
(1) When necessary to preserve property rights established prior to the date these regulations
become effective as to the property in question; and
(2) When necessary to promote the general welfare and to protect the character of the surrounding
property.
(b) Nonconforming structures. Where a lawful structure exists on the effective date of the adoption or
amendment of the zoning ordinance, that could not be built under the terms of the zoning ordinance or
amendment thereto by reason of added restrictions on permitted use, area, lot coverage, height, years, its
locations on the lot, or other requirements concerning the structure, such structure may be continued as long as it
remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:
(1) Buildings existing within the setback area established herein on the effective date of this article
may continue to exist therein until the building or portion thereof is removed by the owner or
reconstructed outside of the setback. Where a building was lawfully constructed under a prior zoning
ordinance, it may be rebuilt on the same footprint. Under no circumstances may the building be
enlarged or rebuilt within five feet of the property line.
(c) Nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use is the use of the property prior to the passage of the zoning
ordinance or amendment thereto that is legal but inconsistent with the use authorized in the zoning district that
the property is located within upon the adoption of the zoning ordinance or an amendment thereto. The
nonconforming use may be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful and is not discontinued, subject to
the following provisions:
(1) No existing structure devoted to a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, extended or
constructed. Any extensions or alterations of the structure may only be for uses conforming to the
applicable zoning district.
(2) If the person in control of a property with a nonconforming use decides to change the use, the
use shall only be changed to a use permitted in the district in which it is located.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 474/508
(3) A nonconforming use that has been discontinued may be resumed only if there has been no
other use of the premises or structure since the nonconforming use was discontinued, and such use
was not discontinued for a period of six months or more. Termination of water or wastewater services
for six months shall be a presumption that the nonconforming use was abandoned.
(4) A nonconforming use shall further terminate:
(A) If the nonconforming use is a heavy commercial or industrial use that is within an area
zoned residential and the use is discontinued by damage, conveyance or sale of the structure or
business.
(d) Repairs and maintenance. On any nonconforming structure, or nonconforming portion of a structure,
containing a nonconforming use, repairs and maintenance shall be performed to maintain the structure in
compliance with the electrical, plumbing and building codes; provided that such repairs and maintenance shall
be subject to the following conditions and limitations:
(1) No work may be done in any period of twelve (12) consecutive months on ordinary repairs, or
on repair or replacement of non-loadbearing walls, fixtures, wiring or plumbing, to an extent
exceeding fifty (50) percent of the current replacement cost of such structure or nonconforming
portion of such structure.
(e) Site development. Occupied property not in compliance with the screening, landscaping or other such site
requirements, shall not be required to comply with additional requirements added by amendments to the zoning
ordinance until the use of the property is changed or the primary structure is enlarged. Site development for
property with existing structures may require approval of deviations from the zoning ordinance. Any property
required to revise screening, landscaping or other exterior site development may request deviations if the
location of the previously approved structures and impervious cover interferes with compliance with the site
development requirements. The property owner will be required to have a site development plan approved
noting each deviation requested. As an example, if a commercial building exists at the time of an amendment to
the zoning ordinance which adds the requirement that a commercial property have screening in the form of a
privacy fence at the rear of the property, the structure and use may continue without complying with the new
screening requirements until (i) the commercial use is enlarged; or (ii) the type of commercial use is changed; at
such time the property owner may demonstrate that the location of the building and the existing pavement will
not support placement of a privacy fence in compliance with the ordinance but showing in a site plan the closest
the property owner can come to complying with the privacy fence requirements. The approved site plan shall
remain the approved location for screening, landscaping and other site development requirements until such time
as (i) the use is changed or otherwise loses a nonconforming status; or (ii) the use or structure are enlarged.
(f) Manufactured homes in R-1. Where a manufactured home was lawfully placed on a single-family lot that
is currently zoned R-1, R-1E or R-1C, the owner may replace the home with another manufactured home that
meets current city standards with regard to age, condition and installation.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.145), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.126 Sexually oriented businesses
(a) Purpose and intent. It is the purpose of this section of the zoning code to regulate sexually oriented
businesses to promote the public health, safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to
establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious location and concentration of sexually
oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing
a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to distributors and
exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this
article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene materials.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 475/508
(b) Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Adult arcade. Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or
electronically, electrically, or mechanically operated still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and
where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified
sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult bookstore or adult video store. A commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business
purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
(1) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
videocassettes or video reproductions, compact disc visual discs, digital visual discs, computer
pictures, slides, or other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas; or
(2) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified
sexual activities.
(3) A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities” or
“specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store. Such
other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being
categorized as an adult bookstore or adult video store so long as either:
(A) Two percent (2%) or more of its gross revenue is derived from the sale or rental of the
specified materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or
(B) Two percent (2%) or more of its inventory consists of the specified materials which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment that regularly features:
(1) Persons who appear in a state of total nudity or semi-nudity; or
(2) Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by
specified sexual activities; or
(3) Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact visual discs, digital visual discs, computer
pictures, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or
description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult motel. A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:
(1) Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, compact visual discs,
digital visual discs, computer pictures, slides or other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; including those that have a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or
(2) Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours or based on
an hourly rate; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 476/508
(3) Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is
less than ten (10) hours or based on an hourly rate.
Adult motion picture theater. Commercial establishments where, for any form of consideration, films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, compact visual discs, digital visual discs, computer pictures, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
Adult theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which regularly features
persons who appear in a state of nudity and/or semi-nudity or live performances which are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
Escort. A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide, or date for another
person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a body rub, bathing of the
body, or striptease for another person for the purpose of sexual arousal.
Escort agency. A person or business association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts
as one of its primary business purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
Establishment. Any of the following;
(1) The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business;
(2) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any
sexually oriented business;
(3) The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business;
or
(4) The relocation of any sexually oriented business.
Nude model studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical
areas is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by
other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
Nudity or a state of nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or
areola of the breast.
Permittee. A person in whose name a special use permit to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued
and the person who owns the building and/or land on which the business is located, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit.
Person. An individual human, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, limited liability partnership or other
partnership or other such company, joint venture, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
association or corporation or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The
masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context.
Semi-nude. A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and/or areola of the
breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
Sexual encounter center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes,
offers any of the following for consideration:
(1) Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 477/508
(2) Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more
of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude.
Sexually oriented business. An adult arcade, adult bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel,
adult motion picture theater, adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center.
Specified anatomical areas. The male genitals in a state of sexual arousal and/or the vulva or more internal
portion of the female genitals.
Specified sexual activities. Any of the following:
(1) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female
breasts;
(2) Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or stimulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or
sodomy;
(3) Masturbation, actual or simulated; or
(4) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through
(3) above.
Substantial enlargement of a sexually oriented business. The increase in floor area occupied by the business by
more than twenty-five percent (25%), as the floor area existed on the effective date of this article, or under a
certificate of occupancy therefor.
Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business. Any of the following:
(1) The sale, leasing or subleasing of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by
sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the
person possessing the ownership or control.
(c) Classification. Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(1) Adult arcades;
(2) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(3) Adult cabarets;
(4) Adult motels;
(5) Adult motion picture theaters;
(6) Adult theaters;
(7) Escort agencies;
(8) Nude model studios; and
(9) Sexual encounter centers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 478/508
(d) Location. This article allows the opportunity for consideration of special use permits to be issued for
sexually oriented businesses in the Industrial District zoning districts only.
(1) The following uses may be permitted within the city by special use permit only in the Industrial
District zoning district.
(A) Adult arcades;
(B) Adult bookstores or adult video stores;
(C) Adult cabarets;
(D) Adult motels;
(E) Adult motion picture theaters;
(F) Adult theaters;
(G) Escort agencies;
(H) Nude model studios; and
(I) Sexual encounter centers.
(2) No use listed in subsection (d)(1) above shall be established within one thousand (1,000) feet of
any of the following uses in existence prior to the beginning of such business:
(A) A church, chapel, or other regular place of religious worship;
(B) A public or private day care, elementary, secondary school or institute of higher learning;
(C) A boundary of any residentially zoned district;
(D) A public park, library, or playground;
(E) The property line of a lot used for residential purposes; or
(F) Within one thousand (1,000) feet of another sexually oriented business, whether located
within or outside of the city limits.
(3) For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of
the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
premises as described in (d)(2) above; or to the nearest boundary of any residentially zoned district;
or from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which a sexually oriented business is proposed to
be located to the nearest exterior wall of any other sexually oriented business.
(4) For the purposes of this section, if sexually oriented businesses cannot be located within a
minimum of 3% of the existing zoning districts within the city limits, including all nonconforming
use sexually oriented businesses, due to limitations as set forth in this section, the city will upon
written request from an applicant review the current zoning districts and shall allow zoning
alterations as necessary so that a minimum of 3% of the city-wide zoning, cumulatively within the
city limits, can be occupied by a special use permitted sexually oriented business, including all
nonconforming use sexually oriented business.
(e) Sexually explicit films and videos.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 479/508
(1) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, other than an
adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette, compact visual disc, digital visual disc, computer
picture, slide, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) The application for a special use permit for a sexually oriented business shall be
accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the location of
one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and
designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's
station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also
designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A
professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not
be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street
or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to
show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy
of plus or minus one (1) foot. The building official may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and
certifies that the configuration of the premises is correct and has not been altered since it was
prepared.
(B) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(C) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without
the prior approval of an amendment to the special use permit.
(D) It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure that at least one
employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
(E) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is
permitted access for any purpose excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video
reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager's stations designated, then
the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from
at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by direct
line of sight from the manager's station.
(F) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also be the duty of any agents
and employees present in the premises to ensure that the view area specified in the above
subsection (E) remains unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other
materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises
which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application
filed pursuant to subsection (A) of this subsection.
(G) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time.
(H) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to
illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one (1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level.
(I) It shall be the duty of the owners and operator and it shall also be the duty of any agents
and employees present in the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is
maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 480/508
(2) A person having a duty under subsections (A) through (I) of subsection (1) above commits a
misdemeanor if he or she fails to fulfill that duty.
(f) Exemptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this section that a person appearing in a state of nudity did
so in a modeling class operated:
(1) By a proprietary school, licensed by the State of Texas; a college, junior college or university
supported entirely or partly by taxation;
(2) By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which
credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation; or
(3) In a structure:
(A) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that
indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
(B) Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in
advance of the class; and
(C) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
(g) Permits. All sexually oriented businesses located within the city limits must have a special use permit or
qualify as a nonconforming use and have a permit to operate as provided herein. Each person having ownership
interest, control or owning the property upon which the sexually oriented business is to be located must have
filled out an application and his or her name must appear on the permit.
(1) Permits required. A commercial establishment that is a sexually oriented business as herein
defined, shall at all times of operation within the city limits have a valid permit.
(A) A person commits an offense if that person conducts business as a sexually oriented
business within the city unless a valid special use permit has been issued by the city for the
conduct of such business.
(B) A person commits an offense if that person conducts business as a sexually oriented
business within the city limits unless the person has a valid permit which is posted at or near the
principal public entrance to the business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons
who enter the premises, or behind the bar in a conspicuous manner.
(C) Every permittee shall have and maintain exclusive occupancy and control of the entire
permitted premises in every phase of the operation of the sexually oriented business on the
permitted premises. A permittee commits an offense if the permittee attempts to avoid such
responsibility by creating any device, scheme or plan which surrenders control of the
employees, premises or business of the permittee to persons other than the permittee.
(2) Issuance or denial of any permit. A permit, renewal or transfer permit shall be issued unless
one (1) or more of the following conditions exists:
(A) The applicant has located the sexually oriented business in violation of this article.
Unless the business is a nonconforming use as defined herein.
(B) The applicant(s) failed to supply all of the information required on the application.
(C) The applicant, or any one applicant, gave fraudulent or untruthful information on the
application. This does not apply to clerical errors.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 481/508
(D) The applicant, or any one applicant, has been convicted of a felony for which not less
than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, or a misdemeanor for
which less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever date is the later date, or of a crime in
any state involving:
(i) Public lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child as described in the
Texas Penal Code;
(ii) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(iii) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution,
compelling prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a
minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or
promotion of child pornography as defined in the Texas Penal Code;
(iv) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing
offenses; or
(v) Any similar offense to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
another state.
(E) Any applicant, or any one applicant, refuses to provide a complete and current NCIC and
TCIC criminal history of applicant obtained by applicant from the Texas Department of Public
Safety. The criminal history must be completed within 15 days of the date the application is
submitted to the building official.
(F) Permit fees are not paid in full.
(3) Application requirements. Initial permit requests for a special use permit require each owner,
having 10% or more interest in the sexually oriented business, to submit a complete application and
to update the application as changes in ownership occur (herein the “applicant” or “permittee”). The
information required in this subsection must be provided with each application and, as changes occur,
updated information within ten (10) days of any change in the information required in the
application.
(A) The following information must be provided on the application form:
(i) The name, street address (and mailing address if different) of the applicant and each
and every owner with greater than 10% ownership interest;
(ii) Two copies each of recent photographs of the applicant showing full face and each
side face profile;
(iii) A complete set of fingerprints on forms from the police department;
(iv) A complete and current NCIC and TCIC criminal history of applicant obtained by
applicant from the Texas Department of Public Safety. The criminal history must be
completed within 15 days of the date the application is submitted to the building official;
(v) The applicant's driver's license number, social security number, and, if applicable,
his/her state or federally issued tax identification number;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 482/508
(vi) The name under which the establishment is to be operated and a general description
of the services to be provided;
(vii) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name
other than that of the applicant; he or she must state (a) the sexually oriented business's
assumed name and (b) submit the required registration documents;
(viii) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted, or is awaiting trial on pending
charges, of a crime specified in subsection (g)(2)(D) of this section and, if so, the nature
of the offense(s) and the date, place, and jurisdiction of each offense;
(ix) Whether the applicant has had a previous license or special use permit under this
article or other similarly sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county
denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the license or special use permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as
well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant is or
has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a
corporation that is or was licensed under a sexually oriented business ordinance whose
license or special use permit has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including
the name and location of the sexually oriented business for which the license or special
use permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or
revocation;
(x) Whether the applicant holds any other license or special use permit under this article
or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from another city or county and, if
so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses;
(xi) The address, and legal description of the tract of land on which the establishment is
to be located;
(xii) If the establishment is in operation, the date on which the owner(s) acquired the
establishment for which the license or special use permit is sought, and the date on which
the establishment began operations as a sexually oriented business at the location for
which the special use permit is sought; and
(xiii) If the establishment is not in operation, the expected startup date (which must be
expressed in number of days from the date of issuance of the special use permit). If the
expected startup date is to be more than ten days following the date of issuance of the
special use permit, then a detailed explanation of the construction, repair or remodeling
work or other cause of the expected delay and a statement of the owner's time schedule
and plan for accomplishing the construction, repair or remodeling work.
(B) All applications for a special use permit must include the following:
(i) If the establishment is a State of Texas corporation, a certified copy of the articles of
incorporation, together with all amendments thereto.
(ii) If the establishment is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the certificate of
authority to transact business in this state, together with all amendments thereto.
(iii) If the establishment is a limited partnership formed under the laws of the State of
Texas, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together with all
amendments thereto.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 483/508
(iv) If the establishment is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy of the
certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents, together with all
amendments thereto.
(v) Proof of the current fee ownership of the tract of land on which the establishment is
to be situated in the form of a copy of the recorded deed along with the current address(es)
and telephone number(s) of the owner(s).
(vi) If the person(s) identified as the fee owner(s) of the tract of land are not also the
owners of the establishment, then the lease, purchase contract, purchase option contract,
lease option contract or other document(s) evidencing the legally enforceable right of the
owners or proposed owners of the establishment to have or obtain the use and possession
of the tract or portion thereof that is to be used for the purpose of the operation of the
establishment together with the correct address and telephone number of each person with
an ownership interest in the property.
(vii) If the property is owned by other than a natural person, the complete name,
address and telephone of each person with an interest in the entity must be included in the
application.
(viii) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to
application by a registered land surveyor depicting the property lines of any established
use listed in subsection (d)(2) of this section within 1,000 feet of the property to be
certified. For purposes of this section, a use is considered existing or established if it is in
existence at the time an application is submitted.
(ix) The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the
business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to
a designated scale no smaller than 1/4 inch equals one foot and with marked dimensions
of the placement of the building on the tract of land, and the interior of the premises to an
accuracy of plus or minus six inches. All locational requirements must be approved by the
building official within 60 days from the time the application is filed.
(x) Any of items (i) through (ix) above will not be required for a renewal application if
they were previously presented and the applicant states that the documents previously
furnished to the building official with the original application or previous renewals thereof
remain correct and current.
(C) Every application for a special use permit must contain a statement made under oath that:
(i) The applicant has personal knowledge of the information contained in the
application, and that the information contained therein and furnished therewith is true and
correct; and
(ii) The applicant has read the provisions of this article.
(D) The applicant for a sexually oriented business special use permit must be qualified
according to the provisions of this article.
(E) If the applicant who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, that
individual must sign the application for a special use permit as applicant. If the applicant who
wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who
has greater than a 10% interest in the business must sign and provide all the information
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 484/508
required by the application for a special use permit as an applicant and will be considered an
operator if a special use permit is granted.
(F) The fact that a person possesses any other valid license, certificate or permit required by
law does not exempt him from the requirement of obtaining a sexually oriented business special
use permit. A person who operates a sexually oriented business and possesses another business
license, certificate or permit must comply with the requirements and provisions of this article as
well as the requirements and provisions of the law concerning the other license, certificate or
permit.
(G) All applications must include a nonrefundable application fee of $2,500.00. An
application will not be considered to have been filed until all applicable fees are paid and all
information required by the application form has been submitted.
(H) The applicant must supplement an application with new information received after the
date the application was deemed completed. Permittees must supplement application
information within ten (10) days of any change in information provided in the application.
(I) All sexually oriented businesses located within the city and in operation as a lawful use
conforming to the zoning ordinance before the effective date of this article are granted a onetime
waiver of the application fee. Upon satisfactory completion of the application and
surrender of the existing business's current certificate of occupancy, a new special use permit
will be issued.
(J) A copy of all applications and supporting documentation for special use permits will be
maintained by the building official.
(K) Upon receipt of an application or supplemental information, the building official will
review the application to determine if all required and necessary information has been
submitted. The building official will issue a letter within a reasonable time after receipt of the
application or supplemental information and advise the applicant whether supplemental
information must be submitted. The applicant must provide any supplemental information
within 30 days or the application will be returned and the filing fee forfeited.
(4) Public notice of pending application.
(A) After the building official has issued a letter advising the applicant that the application is
complete, the building official will cause signs (at least 24 inches by 36 inches in size) to be
placed on the property subject to the proposed special use permit of occupancy that provide
notification by specifically stating, with letters at least three inches wide and six inches tall,
“SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION PENDING.” All lettering
on the signs other than above described, will be at least 1 and 1/2 inches x 2 inches in size for
each letter on the sign. The sign will also include the name, city and state of residence of each
applicant, the date on which the application was filed, and the time and place of the hearings.
The signs will be placed on the property in sufficient quantities and locations to identify the
property as being subject to a proposed sexually oriented special use permit of occupancy. One
sign will be erected on each lot corner to identify the boundaries of the property in addition to
one sign for each 300-foot increment of each public road or highway frontage on the property
existing or any part thereof. The signs will be erected within seven days after the building
official has issued a letter advising the applicant that the application is complete and will remain
erected until the application has been approved or denied by the city council.
(B) The city will give notice of the application and scheduled public hearings by publication
in two consecutive issues of the city's official newspaper. The notices will be printed in 10-point
boldface type and will:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 485/508
(i) Include the fact that a sexually oriented business special use permit has been applied
for;
(ii) Include the exact location, including the street address, of the place of business for
which the certificate is sought;
(iii) Include the names of each owner of the business and, if the business is operated
under an assumed name, the trade name together with the names of all owners;
(iv) Include, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and titles of all officers,
directors and shareholders of 10% or more of the corporation;
(v) Include the dates and times of the public hearings; and
(vi) Be published at least 15 days before each public hearing.
(5) Renewal of permit. Permits shall be valid for one (1) year from the issuance of the permit.
Permits must be renewed annually by all persons having ownership interest or control of the sexually
oriented business and all persons owning the property upon which the sexually oriented business is
located. Failure to renew the permit voids the permit.
(6) Permit transfers. A permit is personal to the persons designated in the application. A permit
may not be transferred except pursuant to and in compliance with this section. A transfer application
must be filed within thirty (30) days of any change of persons designated on the current permit. A
transfer application shall allow continuation of business under an existing permit while a new
application is being processed. Any transfer application shall require and be treated in all respects as
an original permit application. In the event that a transfer application is not timely filed, then the
existing permit shall be invalid for any purpose relating to the operation of business. Provided,
however, that nothing in this section shall affect the nonconforming use provisions herein.
(7) Revocation of permit. Any violation of this article shall constitute grounds for revocation of a
permit. A permit shall be revoked for any of the following violations:
(A) The permittee(s) have located the sexually oriented business in violation of this article.
Unless the business is a nonconforming use as defined herein.
(B) The permittee(s) failed to supply all of the information required on the application.
(C) The permittee(s) gave fraudulent or untruthful information on the application. This does
not apply to clerical errors.
(D) The permittee, or any one permittee, has been convicted of a felony for which not less
than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from
confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, or a misdemeanor for
which less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release
from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever date is the later date, of a crime in any
state involving:
(i) Public lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child as described in the
Texas Penal Code;
(ii) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(iii) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution,
compelling prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 486/508
minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or
promotion of child pornography as defined in the Texas Penal Code;
(iv) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing
offenses; or
(v) Any similar offense to those described above under the criminal or penal code of
another state.
(E) More than four criminal offenses are committed on the permitted premises in any
consecutive twelve-month period which fall in one or more of the following categories:
(i) Public lewdness, indecent exposure, or indecency with a child as described in the
Texas Penal Code;
(ii) Prohibited sexual conduct, enticing a child, harboring a runaway child, or sale or
purchase of a child as described in the Texas Penal Code;
(iii) Prostitution, promotion of prostitution, aggravated promotion of prostitution,
compelling prostitution, obscenity, sale, distribution, or display of harmful material to a
minor, sexual performance by a child, employment harmful to children, or possession or
promotion of child pornography as defined in the Texas Penal Code; or
(iv) Facilitation, attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing
offenses.
(F) Any person under the age of eighteen, not otherwise permitted by the laws of Texas to
view the material contained on the premises is permitted to enter the premises.
(8) Appeal. All denials and revocations of permit applications and renewals must be appealed to
the city council.
(A) If an application for issuance or renewal of a permit is denied a permit or a permit is
revoked, upon notice of the denial or revocation of a permit, the aggrieved applicant or
permittee shall have ten (10) days to appeal to the decision to the city council.
(B) The appeal of a revocation of a permit to the city council shall abate the revocation of the
permit until such time as the city council may hold a public hearing.
(9) Permit fee. Each application for a permit, including renewal or transfer, shall be accompanied
by a $2,500.00 application fee. In addition to the fees required for an initial license, the applicant at
the time of making an initial application shall pay a nonrefundable fee of $750.00 for the city to
conduct a survey to ensure the proposed sexually oriented business is in compliance with the location
restrictions set forth in subsection (d) of this section. Additionally, for each applicant identified
thereon, there shall be an additional $25.00 fee.
(h) Specific violations.
(1) A person commits a misdemeanor if he or she:
(A) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a special use
permit. All sexually oriented businesses shall be located within the Industrial District zoning
district unless such business qualifies as a nonconforming use.
(B) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a permit to
operate a sexually oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 487/508
(C) Operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within one thousand
(1,000) feet of any of the following uses in existence prior to the beginning of such business:
(i) A church, chapel, or other regular place of religious worship;
(ii) A public or private day care, elementary, secondary school or institute of higher
learning;
(iii) A boundary of any residentially zoned district;
(iv) A public park, library, or playground; or
(v) The property line of a lot used for residential purposes.
(D) Causes or permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of
ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within one thousand (1,000) feet of another
sexually oriented business.
(E) Causes or permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually
oriented business, as defined herein, in the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or the
increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in any building, structure or portion
thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
(2) For the purpose of subsection (h)(1)(C) of this section, measurement shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or
structure in which any, or any part of any, sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises described in subsection (h)(1)(C).
(3) For purposes of subsection (h)(1)(D) of this section, the distance between any two sexually
oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or
objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
(i) Nonconforming uses.
(1) Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this article that is in
violation of this section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. The nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed 10 years, unless sooner terminated for any reason or
voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming uses shall not
be increased, enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a conforming use.
If two or more sexually oriented businesses are within 1,000 feet of one another and otherwise in a
permissible location, the sexually oriented business which was first established and continually
operating at a particular location is the conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
(2) A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a
nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant of a special use permit for a sexually
oriented business, of a church, public or private day care, elementary or secondary school, institute of
higher learning, public park, library, or playground, or a residential lot within one thousand (1,000)
feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit,
and does not apply when an application for a permit is submitted after a permit and/or license has
expired or has been revoked.
(3) All nonconforming sexually oriented business uses in existence at the time of passage of this
article within the city limits shall have sixty (60) days to apply for a permit to operate such sexually
oriented business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 488/508
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.146), adopted 9/19/05)
Secs. 14.02.127–14.02.180 Reserved
Division 4. Administration
Sec. 14.02.181 Generally
The city building official shall administer the provisions of this article, and in furtherance of such authority, the
city building official shall:
(1) Records. Maintain permanent and current records with respect to this article, including
amendments thereto.
(2) Applications. Receive, file, and review all zoning applications to determine whether such
application complies with this article.
(3) Commission. Forward zoning applications to the commission as required by this article,
together with its recommendations thereon.
(4) Council. Forward zoning applications to the council, together with the recommendations of the
commission and the city staff.
(5) Implementation. Make such other determinations and decisions as may be required of the city
by this article, the commission or the council; and enforce and implement this article and the final
decisions by the commission and city council.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.151), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.182 Article interpretation
In the interpretation and application of the terms and provisions of this article, the following regulations shall
govern:
(1) Liberally construed. In the city's interpretation and application, the provisions of this article
shall be regarded as minimum requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience, prosperity, morals and welfare.
(2) Highest standards govern. Whenever a provision of this article and any other provision of this
article, or any provision in any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation of any kind
contains any restrictions covering the same subject matter, whichever restrictions are more restrictive
or impose higher standards or requirements shall govern.
(3) Resolution of conflicting interpretations. Where there arises a question concerning the meaning
or intent of a provision of this article, a written decision setting forth the manner in which said
provision shall be interpreted and administered is encouraged. In the event exception is taken by any
interested party to such a decision the matter may be appealed to the commission and, as appropriate,
to the council whose decision shall be final.
(4) Written decisions binding. Any final written decision made as provided in subsection (3) above
shall be archived and shall govern interpretation of this article until such time as an amendment of
this article shall nullify such decision, or the decision is overruled or rescinded by the city council.
(5) State law. The terms, provisions and conditions of this article shall be interpreted and applied
in a manner consistent with federal and state law and chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 489/508
Code.
(6) Master plan. All zoning applications shall conform to the master plan for the community and be
consistent with all of the elements thereof.
(A) Where the proposed zoning application is inconsistent with one (1) or more of the
elements of the master plan, the developer may petition the city for amendment to the particular
element or elements of the master plan either prior to, or concurrent with, submitting a request
for subdivision plat or development plan approval. Inconsistency with the provisions of the
master plan shall be grounds for disapproval of the zoning application by the city.
(B) Where the proposed zoning is for a zoning district or category provided for in this article
but that is not included on the master plan existing on the date of this article, or not existing on
the date of such application, the applicant shall propose an amendment to the master plan and
provide information and documentation in support of such amendment.
(7) Consistency with the subdivision ordinance. All development projects within the corporate
limits of the city shall be in conformance with the city's subdivision ordinance. Where the proposed
development requires a zoning classification or approval other than that currently applying to the
property to be developed, the developer shall make appropriate application to secure the necessary
zoning classification or approval required for the proposed development would comply with this
article.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.152), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.183 Board of adjustments
(a) City council. Any powers that may be delegated by the city council to a board of adjustments are hereby
retained by the city council. Any reference to the board of adjustments or board shall mean the city council.
(b) Powers. The city council has elected at this time not to establish a board of adjustments as may be
established as per the provisions of section 211.008 of the Texas Local Government Code. The city council
retains all powers and duties regarding the zoning and land use regulations as to the City of Rockdale, Texas.
(c) Meetings. Meetings of the city council to conduct hearings, consider matters, or to take action as a board
of adjustment shall be held at the call of the mayor or at such other times as the council acting as a board of
adjustment may determine. Meetings of the council acting as a board of adjustment shall be separate from and
shall not be combined with the council's agenda of regular or special called meetings.
(d) Hearings. All meetings and hearings held by the board of adjustment shall be public; provided that upon
the advice and consent of the city attorney the board may go into executive session pursuant to chapter 551 of
the Texas Government Code.
(e) Rules and regulations. The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and such minutes shall be immediately
filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. The board of adjustment shall act by resolution in
which 75% of the members must concur. The board may adopt rules in accordance and consistent with this
article as necessary and required. A copy of any such rules shall be furnished to any person requesting same. All
rules and regulations shall operate uniformly in all cases and all resolutions and orders shall be in accordance
therewith.
(f) Appeals.
(1) Procedure. Any person aggrieved by a decision of an administrative officer in the enforcement
of chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code, or this article, or any officer, department, board
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 490/508
or bureau of the city affected by any such decision by an administrative officer, may appeal such
decision to the board. Such appeal shall be made by filing with the city secretary and the officer
whose action is being appealed, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The officer from
which the appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the board all of the papers constituting the record
upon which the action appealed from is taken.
(2) Stay of proceedings. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed
from, unless the officer whose decision is appealed shall certify to the board that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his or her opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property, in
which case proceedings shall not be stayed other than by restraining order granted for just cause by
the board, or by a court of record, after notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken.
(3) Notice of hearing on appeal. The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal
or other matter referred to it, and shall give public notice of the hearing and due notice to the parties
in interest.
(4) Decision by board. The board shall decide appeals within a reasonable time. Any party to the
appeal may appear in person or by agent or attorney at any hearing. The board may, upon the
concurring vote of 75% of the members, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the
administrative official's order, requirement or decision, and make the correct order, requirement,
decision, or determination on the matter appealed from and shall make such order, requirement,
decision or determination as in its opinion ought to be made, and to that end, shall have all powers of
the officer or department from whom the appeal is taken.
(g) Powers and duties of the board.
(1) Appeals based on error. The board shall have the power to hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of chapter 211 of the Texas Local Government Code.
(2) Special exceptions. The board shall have the power to hear and decide special exceptions to the
terms of this article when this article requires the board to do so. Such special exceptions shall be as
follows:
(A) To permit a public utility or public service use or structure in any district as necessary to
house equipment, pumps, switching gear, and similar devices only, required for the provision of
the utility service or a public utility or public service building of a ground area and of a height
at variance with those provided for in the district in which such public utility or public service
building is permitted to be located, when found reasonably necessary for the provision of utility
service and the public health, convenience, safety or general welfare.
(B) To grant a permit for the extension of a use, height or area regulation into an adjoining
district for any lot platted in an approved subdivision, where the boundary line of the district
divides such lot and the lot was in a single ownership on the effective date of this ordinance.
(C) Authorize a variance from the parking and loading requirements in any of the districts
whenever the character or use of the building is such as to make unnecessary the full provision
of parking or loading facilities, and where the topography or unusual shape of the lot and
regulations would impose an unreasonable hardship upon the use of the lot.
(h) Variances. The board shall have the power to authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from
the terms of this article if the variance: (i) will not be contrary to the public interest; (ii) is owing to special
condition inherent in the property itself; (iii) the condition is unique to the property; (iv) a literal enforcement of
the provisions of this article will result in unnecessary hardship; (v) the hardship is not self-imposed or self7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 491/508
created; (vi) the spirit of this article will be observed and substantial justice done; and (vii) without the variance
the owner will be deprived of the right to use the property. Variance may be granted for the following:
(1) Yard and setback. Permit a variance in the yard requirements of any district where there are
unusual and practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship in the carrying out of these provisions due
to an irregular shape of the lot, topography or other conditions; provided that such variance will not
significantly affect any adjoining property or the general welfare.
(2) Structures. Authorize upon appeal, whenever a property owner can show that a strict
application of the terms of this article relating to the construction or alteration of a building or
structure or the use of land will impose unusual and practical difficulties or particular hardship, such
variances from the strict application of the terms of this article as are in harmony with its general
purpose and intent, but only when the board is satisfied that a granting of such variance will not
merely serve as a convenience to the applicant, but will alleviate some demonstrable and unusual
hardship or difficulty so great as to warrant a variance as established by this article, and at the same
time, the surrounding property will be properly protected; provided that the board shall not in any
event permit a use on any property that is not permitted within the zoning category for which such
property is zoned.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.153), adopted 9/19/05)
State law reference–Establishment and authority of zoning board of adjustment, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code, sec. 211.008 et
seq.
Sec. 14.02.184 Conditions for issuing a building permit
No building permit shall be issued for any new structure or change, improvement or alteration of any existing
structure, on any lot or tract of land and no municipal utility service will be furnished to such lot or tract which
does not comply with the provisions of this article and all applicable elements of the master plan, except as
herein exempted, or upon the written application and approval of a variance. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A
(12.154), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.185 Certificates of occupancy
(a) Policy and application. Certificates of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Occupancy and use of any structure or building hereafter erected or structurally altered.
(2) Change in use of an existing building to a use of a different classification.
(3) No occupancy of any new, or altered portion of any, structure or building, or any such building
or structure for which there is a change of use, shall take place until a certificate of occupancy
therefor shall have been issued by the city building official.
(b) Procedure.
(1) New and altered structures. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for a new
building, or for an existing building which is to be altered, shall be made at the same time as the
application for the building permit for such building. Said certificate shall be issued within three (3)
days after a written request for the same has been made to said city building official or his agent after
the erection or alteration of such building or part thereof has been completed in conformity with the
provisions of this article and all applicable city codes and ordinances.
(2) Change in use. Written application for a certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land, or
for a change in the use of land or a building, or for a change in a nonconforming use, as herein
provided shall be made to said city building official. If the proposed use is in conformity with the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 492/508
provisions of this article, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within three (3) days after the
application for same has been made.
(c) Approval. Every certificate of occupancy shall state that the building or the proposed use of a building or
land complies with all provisions of law. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept in file in the
office of the city building official or his agent and copies shall be furnished on request to any person having
proprietary or tenancy interests in the building or land affected.
(d) Temporary certificate of occupancy. Pending the issuance of a regular certificate of occupancy, a
temporary certificate may be issued by the city building official for a period not exceeding six (6) months,
during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending its completion. Such
temporary certificates shall not be construed as in any way altering the respective rights, duties or obligations of
the owners, or of the city, relating to the use or occupancy of the premises or any other matter covered by this
article.
(e) Nonconforming uses. A certificate of occupancy shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of
land or buildings created by adoption of this article. It shall be the duty of the city building official to issue a
certificate of occupancy for a lawful nonconforming use, and the refusal of the city building official to issue a
certificate of occupancy for such nonconforming use shall be evidence that said nonconforming use was either
illegal or did not lawfully exist at the effective date of this article.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.155), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.186 Permits
No permit for the erection, installation, alteration or enlargement of any building or structure shall be issued by
the building inspector unless there first be filed with the permit office a complete application, including a plat,
drawn to scale and in such form as may be prescribed by the said building inspector, correctly showing the
location and actual dimensions of the lot to be occupied, the dimensions and location on the lot of the building or
structure to be erected, altered or enlarged, together with a true statement in writing signed by the applicant,
showing the use for which such building or structure is arranged, intended or designed, and furnishing such other
information as the building inspector may require in the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Any failure
to comply with the provisions of this article or the application and plans approved shall be good cause for the
revocation of any such building permit by the building inspector. A record of such applications and plats shall be
kept in the office of the building inspector. Each such application for a building permit to erect, install, alter or
enlarge a building or structure shall specify the materials for which the walls and roof are to be constructed and
the proposed height of the building or structure. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.156), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.187 Fees
To defray the costs of administering this article, the applicant seeking plat approvals shall pay to the city, at the
time of submittal, the prescribed fees as set forth in the current administrative fee schedule approved by the
council, and on file in the office of the city. When applications require review, actions or inspections by an
engineer or the city attorney, such reasonable and necessary costs shall be reimbursed from the applicant to the
city. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.157), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.188 Amendments
The council may, from time to time, adopt, amend and make public rules and regulations for the administration
of this article. This article may be enlarged or amended by the council after public hearing, due notice of which
shall be given as required by law. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.158), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.189 Violations
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 493/508
Except as otherwise provided for in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
develop, improve or sell any lot, parcel, tract or block of land within the city's territorial jurisdiction, regardless
of the size or shape of said lot, parcel, tract or block, unless such lot, parcel, tract or block of land conforms with
this article. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.159), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.190 Enforcement
(a) Administrative action. The building official, city engineer and/or the city administrator shall enforce this
article by appropriate administrative action, including but not limited to the rejection of plans, maps, plats and
specifications not found to be in compliance with this article and good engineering practices, and the issuance of
stop work orders.
(b) Court proceedings. Upon the request of the city council the city attorney shall file an action in the district
courts to enjoin the violation or threatened violation of this article, or to obtain declaratory judgment, and to seek
and recover court costs and attorney fees, and/or to recover damages in an amount sufficient for the city to
undertake any construction or other activity necessary to bring about compliance with a requirement regarding
the property and established pursuant to this article.
(Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.160), adopted 9/19/05)
Secs. 14.02.191–14.02.240 Reserved
Division 5. Closing Provisions
Sec. 14.02.241 Construction
The terms and provisions of this article shall not be construed in a manner to conflict with chapter 211 of the
Texas Local Government Code and if any term or provision of this article shall appear to conflict with any term,
provision or condition of chapter 211, such article term or provision shall be read, interpreted and construed in a
manner consistent with and not in conflict with such chapter, and, if possible, in a manner to give effect to both.
The standard and accepted rules of statutory construction shall govern in construing the terms and provisions of
this article. (Ordinance 2005-09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.171), adopted 9/19/05)
Sec. 14.02.242 Penalty
In addition to the criminal penalties provided for herein, a person who shall violate any provision of this article
or shall fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof, within the city limits, is liable for a
civil penalty not to exceed two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense. Such penalty shall be in addition to all the other remedies provided herein. (Ordinance 2005-
09-19 (4A), ex. A (12.172), adopted 9/19/05)
APPENDIX A
FEE SCHEDULE
ARTICLE A1.000 BUILDING, DEVELOPMENT AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE FEES
Sec. A1.001 Building permits (IBC)
(a) Annual contractor's license: $75.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 494/508
(b) New construction fees:
(1) Residential construction: $0.10/sq. ft. + $50.00 per inspection.
(2) Commercial construction: $0.10/sq. ft. + $50.00 per inspection.
(3) Minimum permit fee: $100.00.
(4) Uncovered surfaced (asphalt and concrete) parking and walkways: $0.01/sq. ft.
(5) Inspections: $50.00.
(6) Remodeling - residential: $50.00 + $50.00 per inspection.
(7) Remodeling - commercial, duplex, multifamily: $50.00 + $0.10/sq. ft. + $50.00 per inspection.
(8) Moving permit - structures and manufactured homes: $100.00 + escort fees.
(9) Minor alterations, repair, or replacement (roof, carport, windows): $50.00 (permit and
inspection).
(10) Reinspection (if initial or subsequent inspections fail): $50.00 (for each reinspection).
(11) Swimming pool/hot tub permit: $100.00.
(12) Demolition permit - commercial: $100.00.
(13) Demolition permit - residential: $25.00.
(14) Plan review (commercial - city staff): $100.00 + $75.00/hr. review time.
(15) Plan review (commercial - outside review service): Actual cost.
(16) Plan review (residential): $50.00 + $50.00/hr. review time.
(17) Manufactured home placement application: $200.00.
(18) Fence: $50.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(19) Permit fee for nonprofit groups/organizations: No charge with proof of nonprofit status.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 2, adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. A1.002 Central heat and air conditioning/mechanical (IMC)
(a) Annual registration fee: $75.00.
(b) Permits: $75.00 + $75.00 per inspection.
(c) Reinspections (if initial or subsequent inspections fail): $75.00 for each reinspection.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(d) Permit fee for nonprofit groups/organizations: No charge with proof of nonprofit status. (Ordinance 2016-
12-12(8A), sec. 3, adopted 12/12/16)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 495/508
Sec. A1.003 Electrical permit (NEC)
(a) Annual electrical master registration fee: No charge (must register). (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 2,
adopted 12/11/17)
(b) Permits: $75.00 + $75.00 per inspection.
(c) Reinspections: $75.00 for each reinspection.
(d) Minor alteration, repair or replacement of minor electrical devices: $75.00 (permit and inspection).
(e) Reinspection (if initial or subsequent inspections fail): $75.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(f) Permit fee for nonprofit groups/organizations: No charge with proof of nonprofit status. (Ordinance 2016-
12-12(8A), sec. 4, adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. A1.004 Engineering fees
(a) Standard construction specifications: Actual engineer costs.
(b) Street map (B&W): $5.00.
(c) City limits and ETJ map (B&W): $5.00.
Sec. A1.005 Lot cleanup charge
(a) Rate of employee time + equipment use: Rate + $70.00/hr.
(b) ADM - abatement fee (administrative cost): Administrative cost.
(c) Lot: $100.00 per lot + employee rate + equipment rate.
(d) Building (plus cost of hired work): $500.00 per building + employee rate + equipment rate.
Sec. A1.006 Planning fees
(a) Concept or master plan: $500.00 fee + $25.00 per lot.
(b) Pre-application subdivision plat fee: $250.00.
(c) Short form subdivision plat: $300.00 fee + $25.00 per lot.
(d) Preliminary subdivision plat-plan: $500.00 fee + $25.00 per lot.
(e) Final subdivision plat-plan: $250.00 fee + $25.00 per lot.
(f) Subdivision plat vacation: $150.00.
(g) Subdivision replat - amending plat: $300.00 fee + $25.00 per lot.
(h) Subdivision variance request: $150.00.
(i) Capital improvement recovery fee (CIP) (section 10.02.111(b)(3)): See subdivision ordinance.
(j) Subdivision construction inspection (section 10.02.111(b)(4)): See subdivision ordinance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 496/508
(k) Subdivision professional fees: See subdivision ordinance.
(l) Subdivision engineer review fees (in addition to above): See subdivision ordinance.
(m) Zoning or rezoning requests: $250.00.
(n) Zoning exception application fee: $150.00.
(o) Document copies:
(1) Comprehensive plan: $100.00.
(2) Zoning ordinance: $0.25 per page.
(3) Subdivision ordinance: $0.25 per page.
Sec. A1.007 Plumbing permit (IPC)
(a) Annual plumber master registration fee: No charge (must register).
(b) Minimum fee (plus fees below): $75.00 + $75.00 per inspection.
(c) Repairs/replacement/remodeling (when permit required): $75.00 (permit and inspection).
(d) Reinspection (if initial or subsequent inspections fail): $75.00.
(e) Minor alterations, repair or replacement of existing water or sewer piping, water heater: $50.00 (permit
and inspection).
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(f) Permit fee for nonprofit groups/organizations: No charge with proof of nonprofit status. (Ordinance 2016-
12-12(8A), sec. 5, adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. A1.008 Sprinkler system installation permit
Permit: $75.00 + $75.00 per inspection.
Sec. A1.009 Special use permit
Exceptions to code and ordinances: $100.00.
Sec. A1.010 Street-related fees
(a) Street cuts: $6.00 per sq. ft.
(b) Signs:
(1) Street sign: $75.00 each.
(2) Stop or yield sign: $75.00 each.
(3) Combination (stop and street): $125.00.
Sec. A1.011 Well-related fees
(a) Wellhead protection drilling:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 497/508
(1) Permit to construct a well: $500.00.
(2) Permit to repair or correct a defective well: $200.00.
(3) Permit to abandon/plug a well: $50.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(b) Oil and gas well drilling and production:
(1) Surface permit fee: $2,000.00.
(2) Extended permit fee: $250.00.
(3) Annual inspection fee: $100.00.
(4) Follow-up inspection fee: $100.00.
(5) Amended permit fee: $500.00.
(6) Transfer permit fee: $700.00.
(7) Appeal fee: $2,300.00.
(8) “Taking” application fee: $3,320.00.
(Ordinance 2015-12-14(7B) adopted 12/14/15)
Sec. A1.012 Wireless network providers
(a) Application fee: $100.00.
(b) Annual public right-of-way rate fee: $250.00 per network node.
(c) Application fee for each network support pole: $100.00.
(d) Application fee for each transfer facility: $100.00.
(e) Annual transfer facility rental rate: $28.00 monthly.
(f) Collocation of network nodes on city service poles: $20.00 per year per service pole.
(Ordinance 2017-09-11(4D) adopted 9/11/17)
Sec. A1.013 Vacant commercial structure registration
(a) Annual registration fee: $100.00.
(b) Inspection charge: $0.01 per sq. ft. (minimum of $50.00).
(Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 3, adopted 12/11/17)
ARTICLE A2.000 UTILITY RATES AND CHARGES
Sec. A2.001 Utility accounts
(a) Utility account security deposit:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 498/508
(1) Residential accounts: $150.00.
(2) Commercial accounts** (Based on average gallons consumption/month):
(A) 0–2,000 gallons: $150.00.
(B) 2,001–10,000 gallons: $300.00.
(C) 10,001–50,000 gallons: $600.00.
(D) 50,001–100,000 gallons: $1,200.00.
(E) 100,001–150,000 gallons: $1,800.00.
(F) Over 150,001 gallons: $2,400.00.
(3) Multifamily accounts: $75.00/unit (1/2 of regular deposit per unit).
(4) Trash only accounts: $50.00 (1/3 of regular deposit amount).
** If average monthly consumption is found to be in excess of minimum, customer may be assessed additional
deposit as determined by the city manager.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 6, adopted 12/12/16)
(b) Water deposit if left owing more than $25.00: $300.00. (Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted
12/12/11)
(c) Occupancy inspection–Certificate of occupancy:
(1) Residential and commercial accounts: $40.00 (for up to 2 visits).
(2) Multifamily accounts: $40.00/unit (for up to 2 visits).
(3) Additional inspections: $40.00 (for up to 2 visits).
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 6, adopted 12/12/16)
(d) Inspection of RPZ valve: $100.00.
(e) Late fees for utility account: 10% of current bill or minimum of $5.00.
(f) Transfer fee for utility account: $25.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(g) Utility service fee - reconnect: $50.00. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 4, adopted 12/11/17)
(h) Turn-off/turn-on for water service:
(1) During regular business hours: $15.00.
(2) After-hours, weekends or holidays: $25.00.
(i) Pull meter (for usage from cut-off list): $50.00.
(j) Circumventing meter: As determined by PW director.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 499/508
(k) Water meter test – performed by outside entity: $100.00 minimum.
(l) Water meter test - performed by city employee: $50.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(m) TCEQ assessment fee: 0.50%. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 4, adopted 12/11/17)
Sec. A2.002 Monthly water and wastewater charges
(Ordinance 2013-08-29(5E) adopted 8/29/13)
(b) Reserved. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 5, adopted 12/11/17)
(c) Monthly wastewater charges - inside city limits:
(1) First 2,000 gallons: $15.71 minimum.
(2) All over 2,000 gallons: $6.13 per 1,000 gallons.
(Ordinance 2013-08-29(5E) adopted 8/29/13)
(d) Reserved. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 5, adopted 12/11/17)
(e) Monthly wastewater charges - inside city limits - new account rate (until sewer averaging):
(1) 1 person: $15.71.
(2) 2 people: $31.43.
(3) 3 people: $37.76.
(4) 4 or more people: $51.27.
(Ordinance 2013-08-29(5E) adopted 8/29/13)
(f) Reserved. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 5, adopted 12/11/17)
(g) Sewer averaging for monthly wastewater residential customers: Monthly wastewater service charge to be
based on the averaged three (3) winter months (Nov/Dec/Jan) metered water billing for the prior year.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 7, adopted 12/12/16)
Sec. A2.003 Tap fees
(a) Water tap fees - inside city limits:
(1) 3/4 inch: $1,050.00.
(2) 1 inch: $1,102.50.
(3) 1-1/2 inch: $1,155.00.
(4) 2 inches and above: As determined by PW director.
(Ordinance 2012-09-20 (5D) adopted 9/20/12)
(b) Reserved. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 6, adopted 12/11/17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 500/508
(c) Wastewater tap fees - inside city limits:
(1) 4 inch: $945.00.
(2) 6 inch: $997.00.
(Ordinance 2012-09-20 (5D) adopted 9/20/12)
(d) Reserved. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 6, adopted 12/11/17)
(e) Line extensions and street cut fees:
(1) Penalty for noncompliance: $2,000.00 per day.
(2) Tap fees: Reasonable cost and expense for installing, constructing and extending water or
wastewater.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
Sec. A2.004 Solid waste/garbage collection and disposal at city yard
(a) Solid waste collection (one time per week):
(1) Residential curbside pick up (6 bags per pick up): $14.28 per month.
(2) Commercial small hand pick up (1–5 bags): $14.28 per month.
(3) Commercial large hand pick up (6–10 bags): $22.80 per month.
(Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 7, adopted 12/11/17)
(4) Roll-off bins/dumpsters: Customer must contact company. (Ordinance 2015-05-11(8B) adopted
5/11/15)
(5) Additional roll-out (cart) fee: $6.76 per month/per cart. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 7,
adopted 12/11/17)
(b) Delivered to city yard - residents:
(1) Small trash bag: $1.10 per bag.
(2) Medium trash bag: $1.52 per bag.
(3) Large trash bag: $1.96 per bag.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 8, adopted 12/12/16)
(4) Pick-up truck (level): $26.22.
(5) Pick-up truck (with side boards): $52.23.
(Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 7, adopted 12/11/17)
(6) Extra-large load: As determined by PW director. (Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 8, adopted
12/12/16)
Sec. A2.005 Solid waste/septic dumping
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 501/508
(a) First 1,000 gallons: $100.00 minimum.
(b) All in excess of 1,000 gallons: $0.11 per gallon.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
ARTICLE A3.000 OTHER FEES
Sec. A3.001 Airport hangar
(a) Hangar rental:
(1) Hangar #1: $150.00 per month/per plane.
(2) Hangar #2 - Private hangar (min. of 2 planes): $150.00 per month/per plane + $100.00 privacy
fee.
(3) Hangar #3 - Private hangar (min. of 2 planes): $150.00 per month/per plane + $100.00 privacy
fee.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 9, adopted 12/12/16)
(b) Tie-down: $30.00 per month.
(c) Aviation fuel: Market.
Sec. A3.002 Alcoholic beverage permit
(a) Wine and beer retailer: 1/2 state fee.
(b) Off-premises beer and wine: 1/2 state fee.
(c) Package store permit: 1/2 state fee.
(d) Beer retailer on premises: 1/2 state fee.
(e) Wine only package store: 1/2 state fee.
Sec. A3.003 Ambulance permit
(a) Permit application fee: $200.00.
(b) Permit renewal fee: $10.00.
(c) License fee (for issuance, renewal or replacement): $10.00.
Sec. A3.004 Animal control
(a) Adoption fee: $20.00.
(b) Impound fee (per day):
(1) First time animal is impounded: $15.00 + daily care costs.
(2) Second time animal is impounded: $25.00 + daily care costs.
(3) Third time animal is impounded: $50.00 + daily care costs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 502/508
(c) Quarantine fee (per day): $20.00.
(d) Dangerous dog registration - annual: $50.00.
(e) Rabies vaccinations: Vet costs.
(f) Violation fine: $0.00 - $500.00.
(g) Euthanasia (resident/nonresident): Vet costs.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(h) Dismissal of offense upon proof of vaccination administrative fee: $20.00. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. A3.005 Animal control permits
(a) Circus/zoo permit: $500.00.
(b) Multiple animal owner permit (required for more than 4 - limit of six): $50.00.
(c) Commercial animal enterprise permit: $100.00.
(d) Guard dog permit: $50.00.
(e) Renewal of an animal control permit: $50.00.
Sec. A3.006 Animal surrender fees (owner/harbored)
(a) Dogs and cats located within the city limits: $25.00.
(b) Dogs and cats located outside the city limits: $50.00.
(c) Litters of 4 or more dogs or cats under 9 weeks of age: $50.00.
Sec. A3.007 Business and commerce
(a) Taxicab franchise:
(1) Annual filing fee: $500.00.
(2) Annual vehicle registration: $100.00 per vehicle.
(b) Tourist courts and camps annual fee: $250.00.
(c) New permanent business signs: $1.50 per square foot.
(d) Adult-oriented business - annual permit: $500.00.
(e) Wrecking/junkyard registration - annual fee: $100.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(f) Coin-operated machine occupation tax: 1/4 state fee. (Ordinance adopting Code)
Sec. A3.008 Cemetery
(a) Burial permit:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 503/508
(1) Leveling fee: $50.00.
(2) Locating fee (for non-local funeral homes only): $50.00.
(b) Baby plot (Oaklawn only): $150.00 per space.
(c) Adult plot - resident: $400.00 per space.
(d) Adult plot - nonresident: $600.00 per space.
(e) Lot location fee (for markers and curbs): $25.00.
Sec. A3.009 Civic center
(a) 1/4 building for half day use: $200.00.
(b) 1/4 building for full day use: $300.00.
(c) 1/4 building deposit: $150.00.
(d) 1/2 building for half day use: $250.00.
(e) 1/2 building for full day use: $375.00.
(f) 1/2 building deposit: $200.00.
(g) Full building for half day use: $300.00.
(h) Full building for full day use: $475.00.
(i) Full building deposit: $250.00.
(j) Decorating - day prior to use $50.00.
(k) Nonprofit organizations (as certified by the IRS): 1/2 adopted rate.
(l) Continuous use (6-month minimum, 4-hour maximum): $250.00 per month.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(m) Use of facility on Monday through Thursday: 1/2 adopted rate.
(n) Rental fee for sound system: $25.00.
(Ordinance 2012-08-13(8C) adopted 8/13/12)
Sec. A3.010 Library
(a) Nonresident fee: $6.00 + $3.00 per member.
(b) Replacement card (lost only): $5.00.
(c) Fines:
(1) Overdue books: $0.25 per day.
(2) Overdue video/audio tapes: $2.00 per day.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 504/508
(3) Lost or badly damaged books: $5.00 + cost.
(4) Lost or badly damaged videos, audios, magazines: $5.00 + cost.
(5) Overdue magazines: $0.25 per day.
(6) Overdue accelerated reader and science fair books: $0.50 per day.
(7) Overdue Chilton repair manuals: $0.50 per day.
(8) Overdue reference and genealogy books: $1.00 per day.
(d) Copies:
(1) HP LaserJet black & white printer copies: $0.25 per page.
(2) HP LaserJet color printer copies: $1.00 per page.
(3) Blank diskette/CD: $1.00.
Sec. A3.011 Manufactured homes and manufactured home parks
(a) Annual fee for each manufactured home park: $250.00.
(b) Manufactured home placement application in park: $200.00.
(c) Moving permit - structures and manufactured homes: $100.00 + escort fees.
(d) Original park permit: $400.00.
(e) Additional spaces added: $50.00 per space.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
Sec. A3.012 Miscellaneous fees
(a) Returned check or credit card payment: $30.00. (Ordinance adopting Code)
(b) Credit/debit card processing fees:
(1) Credit card processing fee: 3%.
(2) Debit card processing fee: 3%.
(Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 8, adopted 12/11/17)
(c) Limb and brush chipping: City estimate.
(d) Oil dumping - noncommercial: No charge.
(e) City charter - copy: $5.00.
(f) City map - copy: $5.00.
(g) Copies - black & white: $0.25 per page.
(h) Copies - color: $1.00 per page.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 505/508
(i) Certification of copies: $1.00 per page.
(j) Certification per statement: $1.00.
(k) Overhead charge when documents copied exceed 50 pages: 20%.
(l) Copy diskette: $1.00.
(1) Computer time per hour (15-minute minimum charge): $60.00.
(2) One part: $0.50.
Sec. A3.013 Municipal court fees
(a) State court costs: Set by legislature.
(b) Local fees (all other fees not listed below): Set by legislature.
(c) Peace officer's time: Overtime + travel time + court costs.
(d) Jury fee: $3.00.
(e) Administrative dismissal fee (for compliance dismissals): $10.00 - $20.00.
(f) Jury duty fee: $6.00.
(g) Warrant fee: $50.00.
(h) Failure to appear warrant service fee: $25.00.
(i) Failure to appear DPS contract administrative fee: $30.00.
(j) Arrest fee: $5.00.
(k) Time payment fee: $25.00.
(l) Rules of the road fee: $3.00.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(m) Administrative fee (driver's safety course):
(1) Requests received on or before appearance date: $10.00.
(2) Requests received after appearance date: $10.00–$50.00.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 11, adopted 12/12/16)
(n) Administrative fee (deferred disposition): $100.00.
(o) School crossing fee: $25.00.
(p) Failure to attend school fee: $20.00.
(q) Technology fund fee: $4.00.
(r) Security fund fee: $3.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 506/508
(s) For additional fees, see MC ordinances and state law.
Sec. A3.014 Municipal court fine schedule
City ordinance violations:
(1) For a fine range of $1.00 - $200.00: $100.00 minimum fine.
(2) For a fine range of $1.00 - $500.00: $325.00 minimum fine.
(3) For a fine range of $1.00 - $2,000.00: $770.00 minimum fine.
Sec. A3.015 Peddler, solicitor or transient merchant license
(a) Base permit: $75.00 + $1,000.00 surety bond.
(b) For each additional agent (over 1 agent): $50.00.
Sec. A3.016 Police department
(a) Accident reports: $6.00 per report.
(b) Certification of accident report: $1.00 per page.
(c) Junk vehicle storage: $10.00 + actual storage cost.
(d) Garagekeeper abandoned vehicle report: $10.00.
(e) Auction vehicles: $10.00 + 2% of sale.
(f) Impounding vehicles: $10.00 + removal + storage cost.
Sec. A3.017 Public records
(a) Copies - readily available: $0.25 per page.
(b) Copies - not readily available: $15.00 per page + actual labor cost.
(c) Postal expense: Actual cost.
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
Sec. A3.018 Swimming pool
(a) Adult admission: $4.00.
(b) Child - under 7 yrs with adult: $4.00.
(c) Child - 7 years and older: $4.00.
(Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 9, adopted 12/11/17)
(d) Pool rental:
(1) For 10–20 people: $125.00 + lifeguard(s).
(2) For 21–40 people: $150.00 + lifeguard(s).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 507/508
(Ordinance 2011-12-12(6A), app. A, adopted 12/12/11)
(e) Lifeguard: $9.50 per hour. (Ordinance 2017-12-11(7A), sec. 9, adopted 12/11/17)
(f) Season pass (for individual): $35.00 per individual per year. (Ordinance 2013-12-09(7B), sec. 3, adopted
12/9/13)
Sec. A3.019 Rental fees for Fair Park
NOTE: All rental fees are payable to the city. The city is responsible for paying the appropriate organizations.
(a) Fair Park (non-arena/showbarn areas) for events of 250+ people: Fees set by city council.
(1) BBQ outlets: $25.00 per unit per event.
(2) Restrooms: $100.00 per event.
(3) Electricity: Actual cost - Billed upon completion.
(4) Water: Actual cost - Billed upon completion.
(5) Security: Required - Provided by event organizer.
(6) Trash: Required - Provided by event organizer.
(7) After-hours work orders: Local contractor - Provided by event organizer.
(8) Security deposit: $750.00 (refundable).
(b) New Salem EEA Building at Fair Park: Fees set by New Salem EEA.
(1) Building rental (for 8 hrs): $350.00.
(2) Building rental deposit: $275.00.
(A) Refundable if notice of cancellation is received at least ten days prior to event.
(B) Refundable if building is left clean and undamaged.
(C) If a janitorial service is needed: Actual cost deducted from deposit.
(D) Damages will be charged to the renting party: Actual cost.
(3) Decorating time fee (for up to 4 hrs): $50.00 - If key is not returned within 4 hrs of use, an
additional $50.00 fee will be charged.
(4) Security (if alcohol is present): Required - Must be local licensed security personnel - Provided
by event organizer.
(c) Fair Park - Show ring and livestock barns: Fees set by fair association. Fees include the use of all facilities
except the office and concession stand.
(1) Deposit: $1,000.00.
(2) Weekend rental (48 hours): $1,600.00 - Starts 5 p.m. Friday and ends 5 p.m. Sunday.
(3) Daily rental (24 hours): $850.00 - Starts 5 p.m. the previous day until 5 p.m. the day of rental.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 508/508
(4) Additional hours: $50.00 per hour.
(5) Damages will be charged to the renting party: Actual cost.
(d) Fair Park - Rodeo arena: Fees set by fair association.
(1) Deposit: $500.00.
(2) Day rental (no lights):
(A) Pen: $400.00.
(B) Concession rental: $250.00 for event.
(3) Night rental (lights used):
(A) Pen: $400.00.
(B) Lights: $400.00 - May be turned on no earlier than 30 minutes before dark.
(4) Damages will be charged to the renting party: Actual cost.
(5) NOTE: Each organization renting the arena MUST provide their own tractor and will only be
allowed to use the steel flat drag provided by RFA for pen maintenance. The renting organization is
responsible for watering and preparation of the arena before the event. RFA will drag the arena prior
to the event to break the ground, but the renting organization will be responsible for final
conditioning of the pen.
(Ordinance 2016-12-12(8A), sec. 12, adopted 12/12/16)