7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 1/444
CITY OF ROCKPORT
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Including Supplement No. 34
This Code of Ordinances contains all ordinances deemed appropriate to be included as enacted through Ordinance 1743 adopted 12-11-18.
PART I
HOME RULE CHARTER*
ARTICLE I. - FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND BOUNDARIES
Sec. 1.01 Form of Government.
(1) The municipal government provided in this Charter shall be known as the Council-Manager form of government. Under its provisions the City
Council, consisting of the Mayor and Councilpersons elected by and responsible to the people, shall appoint a City Manager (who shall be responsible to
the City Council for the administration of the government of the City). All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council and shall be exercised in
the manner prescribed by this Charter, or if the manner not be prescribed, then in such manner as may be prescribed by ordinance, the State Constitution or
the statutes of this State.
Sec. 1.02 Boundaries of the City.
(1) The boundaries of the City of Rockport, Texas, are those heretofore established and now existing or those boundaries as may be changed by
ordinance and proceedings of the City enacted in accordance with this Charter.
Sec. 1.03 Extension of Boundaries.
(1) The boundaries of the City of Rockport, Texas, may be enlarged and extended by the annexation of additional territory. The City Council, by proper
ordinance in accordance with State law, has power to annex additional territory adjacent to or contiguous with the city limits with or without the consent of
the residents and/or the owners of the territory annexed.
(2) Upon completion of the annexation procedure, the annexed territory shall become a part of the City, and said land and its residents shall be entitled
to all the rights and privileges provided by the City for its citizens, and shall be bound by the acts, ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the City.
Sec. 1.04 Contraction of Boundaries.
(1) If, after two and one-half (2-1/2) years from the date of annexation, the newly annexed territory is not receiving the standard governmental and
proprietary services of the City, as specified by State law, then a majority of the qualified voters residing within said annexed territory may petition the
governing body of the City to disannex said territory.
(2) The petition shall be started, circulated, certified and presented consistent with the procedural rules of Sub Chapter G of Chapter 43, V.T.C.A. Local
Government Code, and Article VI of this Charter. If there are fewer than twenty (20) qualified voters residing within the annexed area, the Petitioners
Committee may be fewer than ten (10) members so long as it consists of a majority of the qualified voters within the territory proposed for disannexation.
(3) A petition to the City Council for disannexation shall be filed with the city secretary no later than thirty (30) days following the date of filing of the
required affidavit by the Petitioners' Committee.
ARTICLE II. - POWERS OF THE CITY
Sec. 2.01 General Powers of the City.
(1) The City shall be an incorporated Home Rule City, with full power and rights of self-government, as provided by the Constitution and laws of this
State. These powers and rights shall include, but not be restricted to the following:
(a) To enact, establish and enforce codes, licenses and ordinances for the maintenance of good government and the interest and well being of its
inhabitants.
(b) To cooperate with the government of the State of Texas, or any agency or any political subdivision thereof, the government of the United
States or its agencies, for any lawful purpose for the advancement of the interests, safety, convenience and welfare of its inhabitants.
(c) To exercise the right of eminent domain, the right of extraterritorial jurisdiction and to have exclusive dominion over all public property in
any manner permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 2/444
(d) To contract and be contracted with; to sue and be sued; to buy, sell, lease, mortgage, hold, manage and control such property as its interests
require.
(e) To establish, maintain, improve, alter, abandon, or vacate public streets, rights-of-way, sidewalks, alleys, squares, parks and other public
ways, and to police the use thereof.
Sec. 2.02 Public Improvements.
(1) The City shall have the power to construct and maintain, within or outside its corporate limits (which include but are not limited to) streets, utilities,
canals, waterways and other flood control facilities and sanitary, water and storm drainage facilities in, over, under or upon all public property or
easements granted for that purpose and to levy assessments for the costs of such improvements, and shall have the power to cause liens to be established
for the purpose of securing the payment of such levies and shall have the power to compel the use of such improvements by the inhabitants of the City.
Sec. 2.03 Miscellaneous Powers.
(1) The City shall have the power to establish and maintain ordinances and regulations governing the use of lands within the City and to enforce by all
lawful means said ordinances and regulations, within and outside its corporate limits. The City shall have the power to authorize, regulate and inspect all
construction and existing structures within or outside its limits, consistent with State statutes, and to establish and enforce ordinances and regulations
concerning their use, construction and reconstruction. The City shall have the power to license and regulate persons, corporations and associations engaged
in any business, occupation, profession or trade.
ARTICLE III. - THE CITY COUNCIL
Sec. 3.01 Number, Selection and Term.
(1) The legislative and governing body of the City will consist of a Mayor and four Councilpersons and will be known as the City Council of Rockport.
(a) The Mayor will be elected at large; one Councilperson shall be elected from each of four (4) Wards; all elected officials shall serve two (2)
year terms unless removed from office through the provisions of this Charter.
(b) All members of the City Council, other than the Mayor, shall be elected under the Ward System the boundaries which are defined by
ordinance and which may be amended as population changes warrant.
(c) Councilpersons from Wards One (1) and Three (3) shall be elected in odd years and the Mayor and Councilpersons from Wards Two (2) and
Four (4) in even years. No boundary change of any Ward shall operate to disqualify a duly elected Councilperson who shall be allowed to complete
his current term of office.
(d) No person shall serve more than ten (10) consecutive years on the City Council.
Sec. 3.02 Qualification of Members.
(1) In addition to any other qualifications prescribed by law, the Mayor and each Councilperson shall meet the qualifications set forth in Article V of this
Charter while in office. Council Member shall reside in the Ward they represent while in office.
Sec. 3.03 Compensation.
(1) Compensation of members of the City Council shall be determined by the Council by ordinance, but no increase in such compensation shall take
effect until commencement of the terms of Mayor and/or Councilpersons elected at the next regular election. Members of the City Council shall also be
entitled to reimbursement for actual expenses incurred in the performance of official duties with the approval of the City Council.
Sec. 3.04 Mayor and Mayor Pro-Tem.
(1) The Mayor shall be the official head of the City Government. He shall be the chairman and shall preside at all meetings of the City Council. The
Mayor shall have the same right to vote, as do other Council Members. He shall, when authorized by the City Council, sign all official documents; such as,
ordinances, resolutions, conveyances, official plats and bonds. He shall perform such other duties consistent with this Charter as may be imposed upon him
by the City Council.
(2) The Mayor Pro-Tem shall be a Councilperson elected by the City Council at the first regular meeting after each election of Council Member and/or
Mayor. The Mayor Pro-Tem shall act as Mayor during the disability or absence of the Mayor and in this capacity shall have the rights conferred upon the
Mayor.
Sec. 3.05 Vacancies, Forfeiture and Filling of Vacancies.
(1) The office of a Council Member or the Mayor shall become vacant upon death, resignation, forfeiture of, or removal from office by any manner
authorized by law.
(2) If any member of the City Council is absent from three (3) consecutive meetings, without explanation acceptable to the remaining Council Members,
his office shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the Council.
(3) If any member of the Council ceases to possess the required qualifications for office or is convicted of any felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral
turpitude, this position shall be declared vacant at the next regular meeting of the Council.
(4) In the event of a permanent vacancy in the office of the Mayor, the Mayor Pro-Tem shall become the Mayor, thereby vacating his Council position.
Vacancies in the Council, other than the Mayor, shall be filled by a majority vote of the remaining members, if the remaining term is less than one (1) year.
In the event that an election is held in any of the Wards and no candidate files or registers as a write-in, that vacancy shall be filled after said election by
the Council. In the event the remaining term is equal to or more than one (1) year, the Council may fill the position by a majority vote of the remaining
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 3/444
members or call for a special election to fill the vacancy, for the unexpired term only. In all cases, the successor shall possess all qualifications for the
position.
Sec. 3.06 Powers of the City Council.
(1) All powers of the City shall be vested in the City Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter. The City Council shall provide for the
exercise of these powers and the performance of all duties and obligations imposed by law.
Sec. 3.07 Prohibitions.
(1) Except where authorized by law, no Mayor or Councilperson shall hold any other City employment during his term as Mayor or Councilperson. No
former Mayor or Councilperson shall hold any compensated appointed office or City employment within one (1) year after the expiration of his term as
Mayor or Council Member, unless approved by a majority vote of the City Council.
(2) Members of the City Council shall not in any way dictate the appointment or removal of any City Employee whom the City Manager or any of his
subordinates are empowered to appoint. The City Council at a meeting called for that purpose may express its views and fully and freely discuss with the
City Manager anything pertaining to appointment and removal of such employees.
(3) The City Manager shall consult with the City Council before the hiring of any Department Head or promotion of an employee to Department Head.
Members of the City Council shall not give orders to any such officer or employee either publicly or privately except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
(4) The City Manager shall consult with the City Council before the removal of Department Heads.
Sec. 3.08 Meetings of the City Council.
(1) The City Council shall hold at least one (1) regular meeting each month and as many additional meetings as it deems necessary to transact the
business of the City. The City Council shall fix by ordinance the date and time of the regular meeting(s). Special meetings of the City Council shall be held
at the call of the Mayor or a majority of the Council and, wherever practicable, upon no less than twelve (12) hours notice to each member.
(2) All meetings shall be open to the public and shall be held and notice given in accordance with Article 6252-17 V.A.T.S. as amended or superseded.
Sec. 3.09 Quorum.
(1) Three (3) members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of transaction of business and no action of the City Council, except
as specifically provided in this Charter, shall be valid or binding unless adopted by the affirmative vote of Council Members present.
Sec. 3.10 Rules of Procedure.
(1) The City Council shall determine its own rules of order and business, and the rules shall provide that the citizens of the City shall have a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at any meeting with regard to any matter under consideration. The City Council shall provide for minutes to be taken and recorded
for all meetings as required by law. Such minutes shall be a public record and shall be kept and maintained by the City Secretary.
Sec. 3.11 Passage of Ordinances In General.
(1) The City Council shall legislate by ordinance only, and the enacting clause of every ordinance shall be
"BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF ROCKPORT, TEXAS ..."
Each proposed ordinance shall be introduced in the written or printed form required for adoption. No ordinance shall contain more than one subject, which
shall be clearly expressed in its title. General appropriation ordinances may contain various subjects and accounts for which monies are to be appropriated.
After adoption an ordinance shall not be amended or repealed except by the adoption of another ordinance amending or repealing the original ordinance.
Except where an ordinance is repealed in its entirety, an amendatory or repealing ordinance shall set out in full the ordinance sections or subsections to be
amended or repealed and shall indicate matter to be omitted by strikeout and shall indicate new matter by underlining and bold print.
(2) Any member of the City Council may offer any ordinance in writing to be placed on the agenda at a regular City Council meeting.
Copies of proposed ordinances, in the form required for adoption, shall be furnished to members of the City Council before the first reading. Copies of the
proposed ordinance, in the form required for adoption, shall be available at the City offices and shall be furnished citizens upon request to the City
Secretary before the first reading and, if amended, shall be available and furnished in amended form for as long as the proposed ordinance is before the
City Council.
(3) A proposed ordinance, except an emergency, budget or tax ordinance, shall be read at two (2) City Council meetings with at least one week between
readings.
(4) A proposed ordinance may be amended at either reading, but any ordinance amended in substance shall automatically be placed again on the first
reading at a subsequent meeting. At any reading of a proposed ordinance, interested persons shall have a reasonable opportunity to be heard.
(5) Every ordinance shall become effective upon adoption or at any later time(s) specified in the ordinance, except that every ordinance imposing any
penalty, fine or forfeiture shall become effective only after having been published once in its entirety or summary form, after adoption, in a newspaper
designated as the official newspaper of the City.
(6) The reading aloud of a title and caption of the ordinance shall suffice as a reading provided printed copies of the ordinance in the form required for
adoption are in front of all members of the City Council and a reasonable number of additional copies are available to citizens present at the meeting. If a
majority of the members present request that the ordinance be read in its entirety, it must be read.
Sec. 3.12 Emergency Ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 4/444
(1) The City Council may adopt emergency ordinances only to meet public emergencies affecting life, health, property or the public peace. In particular,
such ordinances shall not levy taxes, grant or renew or extend a franchise, or regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services. Neither shall
they authorize the borrowing of money except as provided in Article VII of this Charter.
(2) An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form and manner generally prescribed for ordinances, except that they shall be plainly designated
in the title as an emergency ordinance and shall contain after the enacting clause a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing it in clear
and specific terms.
(3) An emergency ordinance can be adopted with or without amendment or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. The affirmative votes of at
least three (3) members of the City Council shall be required for adoption.
(4) Emergency ordinances shall become effective upon adoption and shall be published as soon thereafter as practicable. Every emergency ordinance so
adopted, except one authorizing the borrowing of money as described herein, shall automatically stand repealed as of the sixty-first (61st) day following
the day on which it became effective, but this shall not prevent re-enactment of the ordinance.
Sec. 3.13 Authentication, Recording, Codification, Printing and Distribution.
(1) The City Secretary shall authenticate by signature and seal in properly indexed book(s) kept for that purpose all ordinances and resolutions adopted
by the City Council, and it shall be kept open for public inspection. Ordinances shall be numbered consecutively in the order in which adopted.
(2) The City Council shall cause all ordinances and amendments to this Charter to be printed promptly following their adoption, and the printed
ordinances and Charter amendments shall be sold to the public at a reasonable price to be fixed by the City Council. A copy of each ordinance and
amendment shall be placed in appropriate city offices for public reference.
Sec. 3.14 Investigations by the City Council.
(1) The City Council shall have the power to inquire into the official conduct of any department, agency, contractor, office, officer or employee of the
City and for that purpose shall have the power to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses and compel the production of books, papers or other evidence
material to the inquiry. The City Council shall provide by ordinance penalties for contempt for failing or refusing to obey any such subpoena or to produce
any such books, papers, or other evidence, and shall have the power to punish any such contempt in the manner provided by such ordinances.
Sec. 3.15 Bond.
(1) The City Manager shall make an annual recommendation as to the positions or persons who should be bonded and the amount for which they shall
be bonded. The City Council may amend the recommendations of the City Manager. Upon approval by the City Council, the necessary bonds shall be
obtained at no cost to the employee(s).
ARTICLE IV. - CITY ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 4.01 City Manager.
(1) The City Council shall appoint a City Manager who shall serve as the chief administrative officer of the City. He shall be responsible to the City
Council for administration of all the affairs of the City, with only those exceptions named in this Charter. The City Manager shall be appointed solely upon
his executive and administrative qualifications. He need not be a resident of the City when appointed, but shall reside within the City during the tenure of
his appointment within a reasonable period of time as determined by the City Council.
(2) The City Council will fix the compensation of the City Manager, and his compensation may be amended from time to time in accordance with the
City Manager's experience and qualifications. No employment agreement shall provide more than six (6) months' severance or termination compensation.
(3) The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term, and may be removed by resolution at the discretion of the Council by a majority vote of
its members. Upon passage of a resolution stating the intention to remove the City Manager and the reasons therefore, a copy of which shall be
immediately furnished him, the Council may suspend him from duty, but his salary shall continue until his removal becomes effective. Within twenty (20)
days after the passage of such a resolution, the City Manager may reply in writing to it, and may request a public hearing. If so requested the Council shall
fix a time and place for a public hearing on the question of removal, which shall be held not sooner than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after
the receipt of such request. The final resolution removing the City Manager shall not be adopted until such public hearing, if requested, has been held. The
action of the City Council in removing the City Manager shall be final. In case of the absence, disability or suspension of the City Manager, the Council
may designate a qualified administrative officer of the City to perform the duties of the office. No City Council Member may serve as Acting City
Manager.
(4) The City Manager shall have power to:
(a) Appoint, suspend and remove all City employees provided for in this Charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this Charter, or personnel
rules adopted pursuant to this Charter.
(b) Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City. He shall, when authorized by the City Council,
sign contracts, except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter.
(c) See that all State laws and City ordinances are effectively enforced.
(d) Attend all City Council meetings, with the right to take part in discussion, but he shall not vote.
(e) Prepare and accept items for inclusion in the official agenda of all City Council meetings and meetings of boards and commissions.
(f) Prepare and recommend to the City Council the annual budget and capital program, and administer the budget as adopted by the City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 5/444
(g) Prepare and submit to the City Council, within one hundred twenty (120) days of the end of the City's fiscal year, an annual report on the
finances and administrative activities of the City, as of the end of the fiscal year. The report of an individual audit, as required by this Charter, shall
be incorporated into the annual report submitted by the City Manager.
(h) Keep the City Council fully advised at least quarterly as to the financial condition and future needs of the City, and make such
recommendations concerning the affairs of the City as he or the City Council deems desirable or necessary.
(i) Make reports as he or the City Council may require concerning the operations of the City departments, offices, or agencies subject to his
direction or supervision.
(j) Perform such other duties as are specified in this Charter or may be required by the City Council, and are consistent with this Charter or State or
Federal Law.
Sec. 4.02 City Secretary.
(1) The City Council, after consultation with the City Manager, shall appoint or remove a City Secretary.
(2) The City Secretary shall:
(a) Give notice of all legal publications and official public meetings of the City Council in a manner consistent with this Charter and State laws.
(b) Attend all official public meetings and hearings of the City Council.
(c) Keep the minutes of the proceedings of all official public meetings and hearings of the City Council in a manner prescribed by the Council
consistent with applicable law.
(d) Act as custodian of all official records of the City Council.
(e) Hold and maintain the seal of the City of Rockport, and affix this seal to all appropriate documents.
(f) Authenticate by signature and seal, and record all ordinances, resolutions and proclamations of the City.
(g) Keep all contracts made by the governing body.
(h) Keep accurate records of all franchise, occupation taxes and hotel/motel taxes due to the City.
(i) Act as coordinator for all boards and commissions as directed by the City Council.
(j) Work closely with department heads and the City Manager in day-to-day operations of the City.
(k) Perform such other duties as may be required and authorized by the City Council, consistent with this Charter and the laws of the State of
Texas.
Sec. 4.03 Municipal Court.
(1) The City Council shall establish and cause to be maintained a Municipal Court. The Court shall have all the powers and duties as are now, or may be
prescribed by the laws of the State of Texas.
(2) The City Council shall appoint a judge of the Municipal Court and Alternate Judge(s) who shall be competent and duly qualified. The Judges of the
Municipal Court shall be appointed to a term of two (2) years and may be appointed to additional consecutive terms upon completion of their terms of
office. The appointment of the Judges may be terminated, for just cause, by the City Council. The Judges shall receive compensation as may be determined
by the City Council.
(3) The City Council shall, in the absence or disability of the Appointed Judges of the Municipal Court, appoint an Acting Judge to serve during such
absence or disability.
(4) The Clerk and Deputy Clerks of the Municipal Court shall have the power to administer oaths and affidavits, make certificates, affix the seal of the
Court, and perform all acts usual and necessary by the Clerks of said Courts, in conducting the business thereof, including, but not limited to, the keeping
of records and accounts of the Municipal Court.
(5) All costs, fines and penalties imposed by the Municipal Court shall be paid into the City Treasury for the use and benefit of the City, as may be
consistent with present and future State laws.
Sec. 4.04 City Attorney.
(1) The City Council, after consultation with the City Manager, shall appoint a competent, duly qualified, licensed and practicing attorney in the State of
Texas who shall serve as the City Attorney.
(2) The City Attorney shall:
(a) Serve as the legal advisor to the City Council and the City Manager regarding City affairs.
(b) Represent the City in litigation and legal proceedings as directed by the City Council and City Manager.
(c) Review and provide opinions as requested by the City Council or City Manager on contracts, legal instruments, and ordinances of the City
and other items of City business.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 6/444
(3) The City Council shall have the right to retain Special Counsel at any time that it may deem necessary and appropriate.
(4) The City Attorney and Special Counsel shall receive compensation as may be determined by the City Council.
(5) The City Attorney, with approval of the City Council, may select additional attorneys to act for him and the City in its representation and/or
litigation.
(6) The City Attorney may be removed by a vote of the City Council.
Sec. 4.05 City Engineer.
(1) The City Council, after consultation with the City Manager, may appoint a competent, duly qualified, registered and practicing professional engineer
in the State of Texas who shall serve as the City Engineer.
(2) The term "City Engineer" may refer to an individual or firm.
(3) The City Engineer shall serve as engineering advisor to the City Council and City Manager, and shall perform such other duties as may be required
by the City Council or City Manager.
(4) The City Council shall have the right to retain special engineering service anytime it may deem necessary and appropriate.
(5) The City Engineer shall receive compensation as may be determined by the City Council.
(6) The City Engineer, with the approval of the City Council, may select additional engineers to act for him and the City in serving its engineering
needs.
(7) The City Engineer may be removed by a vote of the City Council.
Sec. 4.06 Administrative Departments, Offices and Agencies.
(1) The City Council may, after hearing recommendations of the City Manager, establish, abolish, re-designate or combine departments, offices or
agencies in addition to those provided for by this Charter, and may prescribe the functions and duties of such departments, offices and agencies.
(2) All departments, offices and agencies shall be under the direction and supervision of the City Manager. The City Manager may, with the consent of
the City Council, serve as the head of one or more city departments, offices or agencies or appoint one person as the head of two or more of them.
Sec. 4.07 Personnel System.
(1) Personnel rules shall be prepared by the City Manager and presented to the City Council, which may adopt them by ordinance, with or without
amendment. The adopted rules shall establish the City as an Equal Opportunity Employer and shall govern the equitable administration of the personnel
system of the City.
(2) The adopted rules shall provide for the following requirements:
(a) A pay and benefit plan for all City employment positions.
(b) A plan for working hours, attendance policy and regulation, and provision for sick and vacation leave.
(c) Procedures for the hearing and adjudication of grievances.
(d) Additional practices and procedures necessary to the beneficial and equitable administration of the City's personnel system.
(e) A plan for oral and written evaluation annually for all City employees by their immediate supervisor, including evaluation of the City
Manager and the City Secretary by the City Council.
(3) The adopted personnel policies and rules shall be reviewed not less than biennially by the City Manager; a report of said review, to include proposed
changes, shall be submitted to Council for consideration.
ARTICLE V. - CITY ELECTIONS
Sec. 5.01 City Elections.
(1) City elections shall be conducted in accordance with Texas Election Law following procedures prescribed therein.
(2) The City's General Election shall be held annually on the May uniform election date. The City Council shall be responsible for specification of
places for holding such election.
(3) The City Council may, by resolution, order a special election for purposes consistent with this Charter and laws of the State of Texas. The City
Council will fix the time and places for such a special election, and provide all means for holding same.
(4) Municipal elections shall be conducted by election officials appointed or approved by the City Council. Sample ballots identical in format to those
used in the specific election shall be posted in the voting place(s) for the purpose of voter orientation.
(5) All municipal elections shall be publicized in accordance with the Texas Election Code.
Sec. 5.02 Filing for Office.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 7/444
(1) Candidates for City offices shall file for office with the City Secretary at City Hall.
(2) Candidates for elective City office shall meet the following qualifications:
(a) Shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the election for which they are filing.
(b) Shall be a qualified voter of the City.
(c) Shall have resided within the corporate limits of the City, or recently annexed territory, for at least twelve (12) months prior to the Election
Day.
(d) Shall have resided in the Ward, or newly created Ward, they are seeking to represent for a least twelve (12) months prior to the Election Day.
(e) No candidate may file in a single election for more than one office or position as provided by this Charter.
(f) No employee of the City shall continue in such position after filing for an elective office provided for in this Charter.
(g) A candidate filing for a Council Member position must include a petition along with their application for a place on the ballot for an office
which contains signatures of qualified voters equal in number to thirty (30%) percent or fifty (50), whichever is lesser, of those who voted in the
last election for that office. This requirement shall not be construed to mean the signatures of actual people who voted in the last election.
(h) A candidate filing for a Mayor position must include a petition along with their application for a place on the ballot for an office which
contains signatures of qualified voters equal in number to thirty (30%) percent or one hundred and fifty (150), whichever is lesser, of those who
voted in the last election for that office. This requirement shall not be construed to mean the signatures of actual people who voted in the last
election.
Sec. 5.03 Official Ballots.
(1) The name of each candidate seeking an elective office, except those who have withdrawn, died, or become ineligible, shall be printed on the official
ballot in the form designated by the candidate in accordance with the current edition of the Texas Election Code. If two or more candidates have the same
surname, or surnames so similar as to be likely to cause confusion, their residence addresses shall be printed with their names on the ballot.
(2) The order on the ballot of the names of the candidates shall be determined by lot in a public drawing to be held under the supervision of the City
Secretary in accordance with the current edition of the Texas Election Code.
(3) Procedures for voting by absentee ballot shall be consistent with the current edition of the Texas Election Code.
(4) An ordinance, bond issue, or Charter amendment to be voted on by the voters of the City shall be presented for voting by ballot title. The ballot title
of a measure may be different from its legal title and shall be a clear, concise statement, approved by the City Council, describing the substance of the
measure without argument or prejudice. Below the ballot title shall appear the following two statements, one above the other, in the order indicated:
"For adoption of the (ordinance) (bond issue) (amendment)"
"Against adoption of the (ordinance) (bond issue) (amendment)"
Immediately below or to the left of such statements shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark.
(5) Procedures for write-in votes shall be consistent with the current edition of the Texas Election Code.
Sec. 5.04 Official Results.
(1) The candidate for elective office receiving a plurality of the votes cast shall be declared the winner.
(2) The returns of every municipal election shall be handled in accordance with the Texas Election Code. These returns shall be delivered from the
election judges to the City Secretary at City Hall as soon as possible after the closing of the polls.
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Sec. 6.01 General Authority.
(1) Initiative: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to propose ordinances to the City Council and if the Council fails to adopt an ordinance
so proposed without any change in substance, the voters shall adopt or reject it at a City election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital
program or any ordinance relating to appropriation of money, the levy of taxes or salaries of City officers or employees nor any other matter which a court
of law has held to have been withdrawn as a power of initiative.
(2) Referendum: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to require reconsideration by the Council of any adopted ordinance and, if the Council
fails to repeal an ordinance so reconsidered, the voters shall approve or reject it at a City election. Such power shall not extend to the budget or capital
program or any emergency ordinance or ordinance relating to appropriation of money or levy of taxes nor any other matter which a court of law has held to
have been withdrawn as a power of referendum.
(3) Recall: The qualified voters of the City shall have power to remove, for cause, any official serving in an elective office.
(4) Qualified Voter: In the context of eligibility to sign a petition under this Chapter means a registered voter.
Sec. 6.02 Petitioners Committee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 8/444
(1) Any ten (10) qualified voters may commence proceedings contemplated by this Article by filing with the City Secretary an affidavit stating that they
will constitute the Petitioners' Committee; they will be responsible for preparing, printing and circulating the petition; they will file it in proper form; they
will specify the address to which all notices to the Committee are to be sent. The affidavit shall set out in full the proposed initiative ordinance or cite the
ordinance sought to be reconsidered, or in the case of recall, will provide a statement of the grounds for removal.
(2) In the case of recall, the City Secretary shall immediately notify in writing the officer(s) to be removed that the affidavit has been filed and shall
inform the officer(s) of its statement of grounds.
Sec. 6.03 Petition Circulation.
(1) All petition blanks used for circulation by the members of the Petitioner's Committee or their designees shall be numbered, dated and bear the
signature of the City Secretary.
Sec. 6.04 Form of Petition.
(1) All pages of a petition shall be uniform in size and style and shall be assembled as one instrument for filing. Each signer of a petition shall personally
sign his own name thereto in ink or indelible pencil. After his signature shall be printed name, place of residence within the boundaries of the City, giving
name of street and number, or place of residence, and shall also write thereon the day, the month and the year his signature was affixed. All petitions must
also contain all information required by Section 277.02 of the Texas Election Code. Petitions shall contain or have attached thereto throughout their
circulation the full text of the ordinance proposed or sought to be reconsidered, or in the case of a recall petition, a statement that distinctly and specifically
states the ground(s) upon which such petition for removal is predicated. If there is more than one ground, the statement shall specifically state each ground
with such certainty as to give the officer(s) sought to be removed notice of such matters with which he is charged.
(2) Each paper of a petition shall have attached to it when filed the affidavit executed by the circulator thereof stating that he personally circulated the
paper, the number of signatures thereon, that all the signatures were affixed in his presence, that he believes them to be genuine signatures of the persons
whose names they purport to be, and that each signer had an opportunity before signing to read the full text of the ordinance proposed, or sought to be
reconsidered, or the identity of the official whose recall is being sought.
(3) Locations for twenty (20) signatures shall be provided on each blank petition.
Sec. 6.05 Presentation of Petitions.
(1) A petition to the City Council for initiative or referendum, containing the signatures of qualified voters equal in number to fifteen (15%) percent of
those who voted in the last general municipal election, or one hundred fifty (150), whichever is greater, shall be presented to the City Secretary not later
than thirty (30) days following the filing of the affidavit by the Petitioner's Committee.
(2) A petition to the City Council for recall of the Mayor containing the signatures of qualified voters equal in number to thirty (30%) percent of those
who voted in the last election for that office, or three (300) hundred people, whichever is greater, shall be presented to the City Secretary not later than
thirty (30) days following the filing of the affidavit by the petitioner's committee.
(3) A petition to the City Council for recall of a City Council Person containing the signatures of qualified voters equal in number to thirty (30%)
percent of those who voted in that Ward in the last election for that office, or fifty (50) people, whichever is greater, shall be presented to the City Secretary
no later than thirty (30) days following the filing of the affidavit by the Petitioner's Committee.
Sec. 6.06 Suspension of Effect of Ordinance for Referendum Petitions.
(1) When a referendum petition is filed with the City Secretary the ordinance sought to be reconsidered shall be suspended from taking effect unless
such suspension will create an immediate breach of public health and safety. Such suspension shall terminate when:
(a) There is a final determination of insufficiency of the petition; or
(b) The City Council repeals the ordinance; or
(c) Upon the certification of election results by the election officials.
Sec. 6.07 Certification of Petitions and Presentation to the City Council.
(1) Within ten (10) days after the petition is presented, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate of sufficiency or insufficiency.
(2) If the petition is certified sufficient, the City Secretary shall present the certificate to the City Council at the next regular City Council meeting. The
City Council shall make a final determination of the sufficiency of the petition.
(3) If a petition has been certified insufficient, the City Secretary shall notify the Committee in his certificate, by registered mail, of the particulars in
which it is defective. The Committee may, within two (2) working days after receiving the copy of such certificate, file a request that it be reviewed by the
City Council. The City Council shall review the certificate at its next regular meeting following such a request and approve or disapprove it. Such
determination shall then be final.
(4) If a petition is certified insufficient, it may be amended once if the petitioners committee files a notice of intention to amend it with the City
Secretary within two (2) working days after having received the copy of the certificate. A supplementary petition must be filed within two (2) weeks after
receiving the copy of the certificate. Such a supplementary petition shall comply with all the requirements of Sec. 6.04 of this Article.
(5) Within five (5) days after the amended petition is filed, the City Secretary shall complete a certificate of sufficiency or insufficiency of the petition,
as amended, and shall send a copy of such certificate to the Petitioners' Committee by registered mail as in the case of an original petition. The final
determination as to the sufficiency of an amended petition shall be determined in the same manner as prescribed for original petition in this Section, except
no petition, once amended, may be amended again.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 9/444
(6) A final determination as to the sufficiency of a petition shall be subject to review in a court of competent jurisdiction. A final determination of
insufficiency, even if sustained upon court review, shall not prejudice the filing of a new petition for the same purpose.
Sec. 6.08 Public Hearing on Recall of Officers.
(1) An elected official whose removal is sought by recall may, within five (5) days after such recall petition has been presented to the City Council,
request that a public hearing be held to permit him to present facts pertinent to the charges specified in the petition. Should a request be made, the City
Council shall order a public hearing be held not less than five (5) days and no more than fifteen (15) days after receiving such request for a public hearing.
Sec. 6.09 Action on Initiative and Referendum Petitions.
(1) When an initiative or referendum petition has been finally determined sufficient, the City Council shall promptly consider the proposed initiative
ordinance in the manner prescribed for enacting ordinances or reconsider the referred ordinance by voting its repeal. If the City Council fails to adopt a
proposed initiative ordinance without any change in substance within sixty (60) days, or fails to repeal a referred ordinance within thirty (30) days after the
date the petition was finally determined sufficient, it shall submit the proposed or referred ordinance to the voters of the City not less then thirty (30) days
and nor more than sixty (60) days following the failure of the City Council to act as specified herein. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with
the Texas Election Code.
(2) The called election may coincide with a regular City election should such City election fall within the specified period. Special elections on initiated
or referred ordinances shall not be held more frequently than once each six (6) months, and no ordinance substantially the same as an initiated ordinance
which has been defeated or one substantially the same as a referred ordinance which has been approved at any election may be initiated by the voters
within two (2) years from the date of such election. Copies of the proposed or referred ordinance shall be made available at the polls and shall be published
at least once in the official newspaper of the City not more than fifteen (15) days immediately preceding the date of the election.
Sec. 6.10 Calling of Recall Election.
(1) If the officer whose removal is sought does not resign, then the City Council shall order an election and set the date for holding such recall election.
The date selected for the recall election shall be not less than twenty-five (25) days and nor more than thirty-five (35) days after the date the petition was
presented to the City Council, or from the date of the public hearing, if one was held. Any election order so issued shall comply fully with the Texas
Election Code.
Sec. 6.11 Withdrawal of Petitions.
(1) An initiative, referendum or recall petition may be withdrawn at anytime prior to determination of sufficiency by filing with the City Secretary a
request for withdrawal signed by at least six (6) members of the Petitioner's Committee. Upon the filing of such request the petition shall have no further
force or effect and all proceedings thereon shall be terminated.
Sec. 6.12 Form of Ballots.
(1) Ordinances shall be submitted by ballot title, which shall be prepared in all cases by the City Attorney. The ballot title may be different from the
legal title of any such initiated or referred ordinance and it shall be a clear, concise statement, without argument or prejudice, descriptive of the substance
of such ordinance. Immediately below the ballot title shall be printed the following two statements, one above the other, in the order indicated:
"For adoption of the ordinance"
and
"Against adoption of the ordinance"
Immediately below or to the left of such statements shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark.
(2) Ballots used at recall elections shall, with respect to each person whose removal is sought, submit the question:
"Shall (name of person) be removed from the office (name of office) by recall?"
Immediately below each such question there shall be printed the two following statements, one above the other, in the order indicated.
"For the removal of ... by recall."
"Against the removal of.... by recall."
Immediately below or to the left of such statement shall appear a square in which the voter may cast his vote by making a mark.
Sec. 6.13 Results of Election.
(1) If a majority of qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the
election results and shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances of the same kind adopted by the City Council. If conflicting
ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail.
(2) An ordinance adopted by initiative may be repealed or amended at anytime after the expiration of two (2) years by a majority vote of the City
Council.
(3) If a majority of the electors voting on a referred ordinance vote against the ordinance, it shall be considered repealed upon certification of the
election results. If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a referred ordinance vote for the ordinance, the ordinance shall be considered in effect.
(4) An ordinance repealed by referendum may be reenacted at anytime after the expiration of two (2) years by a majority vote of the City Council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 10/444
(5) If a majority of the votes cast on the question of recall at a recall election shall be against the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he
shall continue in office for the remainder of his unexpired term, subject to recall as before within the limitations of Sec. 6.14 below. If a majority of the
votes cast on the questions of recall at a recall election shall be for the removal of the elected official named on the ballot, he shall, regardless of any
technical defects in the recall petition, be deemed removed from office upon official canvas of said election and the vacancy shall be filled in accordance
with the provisions of this Charter for the filling of vacancies.
Sec. 6.14 Limitations and Restrictions.
(1) No recall petition shall be filed against any officer of the City within six (6) months after his election or appointment, or within six (6) months of
such a petition being filed and found insufficient, nor within one (1) year after an election for such officer's recall.
(2) In no instance shall an officer removed from office by recall election serve in an elective office of the City within a period of three (3) years
following the date of the election at which he was removed from office.
(3) Unless successfully withdrawn, no petition shall again be filed on a proposed or referred ordinance of substantially the same content within a period
of two (2) years of the failure of the petition at a City election.
Sec. 6.15 Failure of City Council to Call an Election.
(1) In case all of the requirements of this Charter have been met and the City Council shall fail or refuse to receive an initiative, referendum or recall
petition, or order such initiative, referendum of [or] recall election, or discharge other duties imposed upon said City Council by the provisions of this
Charter with the reference to initiative, referendum or recall, then the County Judge of Aransas County, Texas may discharge any such duties herein
provided to be discharged by the City Secretary or by the City Council. In addition, any qualified voter in the City may seek judicial relief to have any of
the provisions of this Charter pertaining to initiative, referendum or recall carried out by the proper official.
ARTICLE VII. - MUNICIPAL FINANCE
Sec. 7.01 Fiscal Year.
(1) The fiscal year of the City shall begin on the first day of each October and end on the last day of September of each calendar year. The fiscal year
shall constitute the budget year of the City government. The term "budget year" shall mean the fiscal year for which any particular budget is adopted and
in which it is administered.
Sec. 7.02 Submission of Budget.
(1) On or before the first regular scheduled meeting in August of each year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council a proposed budget for the
ensuing fiscal year and budget message. The City Council shall review the proposed budget and make any appropriate changes prior to publishing the final
budget.
Sec. 7.03 Budget.
(1) The budget shall consist of three (3) parts as follows:
(a) Part I shall contain:
(i) Budget message prepared by the City Manager, which shall outline a fiscal policy for the City government, describing therein the
important features of the budget with reference both to proposed expenditures and anticipated income for the ensuing year; and
(ii) A general budget summary with supporting schedules, which shall exhibit the aggregate figures of the budget in such manner as to show
a balanced relationship between the total proposed expenditures and the total anticipated income for the fiscal year covered by the budget, and
which shall compare these figures with the corresponding figures of the last completed fiscal year and the year in progress.
(b) Part II shall contain:
(i) Detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures, showing the corresponding expenditures for each item for the current fiscal year and the
last preceding fiscal year with explanations of increases or decreases recommended as compared with appropriations for the current fiscal year;
(ii) Detailed estimates of anticipated revenues and other income;
(iii) Delinquent taxes for current and preceding years, with estimated percentage collectible; and
(iv) Statements of the bonded debt redemption and interest requirements, the debt authorized and unissued, the condition of the sinking
funds, if any, and the borrowing capacity of the City.
(c) Part III shall contain a complete draft of the budget ordinance, including an appropriation ordinance and such other ordinances as may be
required to finance the budget.
(2) The City Council shall make available in the City offices a general summary of the proposed budget and a notice stating:
(a) The times and places where copies of the message and budget are available for inspection by the public; and
(b) The time and place, applicable to current laws, for a public hearing on the budget.
(3) City Council action:
(a) The City Council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted at the time and place so advertised or another time and place with
proper notification. All interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard, either for or against any item of the proposed budget.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 11/444
(b) At a regular or special meeting not fewer than seven (7) days after the public hearing, the City Council may adopt the budget with or without
amendment. In amending the budget, it may add or increase programs or amounts and may delete or decrease any programs or amounts, except
expenditures required by law for debt service or for an estimated cash deficit, provided that no amendment to the budget shall increase the
authorized expenditures to an amount greater than the total of estimated income plus funds available from prior years.
(c) The City Council shall adopt or amend the budget by ordinance on one (1) reading. Adoption of the budget shall constitute appropriation of
the amounts specified therein as expenditures from the funds indicated and shall constitute a levy of the property tax therein proposed.
(4) If the City Council fails to adopt the budget by the twenty-seventh (27th) day of September, the amounts appropriated for the operation during the
current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items in it prorated accordingly, until such time
as the City Council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The levy of property tax normally approved, as part of the budget adoption will be set such
that tax receipts for the budgeted year shall equal the tax receipts of the current fiscal year.
Sec. 7.04 Amendments After Adoption.
(1) If, during the fiscal year, the City Manager certifies that there are revenues available for appropriation in excess of those estimated in the budget, the
City Council may carry the excess into the next fiscal year, or, by ordinance, may make supplemental appropriations to retire indebtedness or to fund
emergency appropriations as described in Sec. 7.04 (2) of this Article.
(2) At anytime in any fiscal year, the City Council may, pursuant to this Section, make emergency appropriations to meet a pressing need for public
expenditure for other than regular or recurring requirements affecting life, health, property, or the public peace. Such appropriations shall be by ordinance
adopted by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) members of the City Council. The total amount of all emergency appropriations made in any fiscal year
shall not exceed five (5%) percent of the tax levy for that fiscal year. Such appropriations may require emergency notes, which may be renewed from time
to time, but the emergency notes and renewals of any fiscal year shall be paid not later than the last day of the fiscal year in which the emergency
appropriation was made.
(3) If, at anytime during the fiscal year, it appears probable to the City Manager that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount
appropriated, he shall report to the City Council without delay, indicating the amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken by him and his
recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The City Council shall then take such further action it may deem necessary to prevent or minimize any
deficit.
(4) At anytime during the fiscal year, the City Manager may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance among programs within a
department, office or agency. The City Council may require approval of these transfers within departments above a limit established by the City Council.
Upon written request by the City Manager, the City Council may, by budget amendments, transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation balance
from one department, office or agency to another.
(5) No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred, and no appropriation may be reduced by any amount required by law to be
appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance.
(6) The supplemental and emergency appropriations and reduction or transfer of appropriations authorized by this section shall be made effective
immediately upon adoption of the appropriate ordinance or budget amendment.
Sec. 7.05 Capital Program.
(1) The City Manager shall submit a two (2) year capital program as an attachment to the annual budget. The capital program shall include the proposed
program by the Planning & Zoning Commission and comments by the City Manager. The program, as submitted, shall include:
(a) A clear general summary of its contents;
(b) A list of all capital improvements which are proposed for the two (2) fiscal years succeeding the budget year, with appropriate supporting
information as to the necessity for such improvements;
(c) Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement; and
(d) The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the facilities to be constructed or acquired.
(2) The above information may be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in the process of construction or
acquisition.
Sec. 7.06 Public Records.
(1) Copies of the budget and capital program, as adopted, shall be public records and shall be made available to the public upon request.
Sec. 7.07 Lapse of Appropriations.
(1) Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been
expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished
or abandoned; the purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of
the appropriations. Any funds not expended, disbursed or encumbered shall be deemed excess funds.
Sec. 7.08 Borrowing.
(1) The City shall have the right and power, except as prohibited by law or this Charter, to borrow money by whatever method it may deem to be in the
public interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 12/444
(2) The City shall have the power to borrow money on the credit of the City and to issue bonds or certificates of obligation for permanent public
improvements or for any other public purpose not prohibited by law and this Charter, and to issue refunding bonds to refund outstanding bonds previously
issued. All such bonds or certificates of obligation shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas and shall be used only for purposes for
which they were issued. All bonds and certificates of obligation, except those certificates issued for public necessity, or refunding debts, shall not be issued
without an election except where otherwise permitted by State Law. The City Council shall prescribe the procedure for calling and holding such elections,
shall define the voting precincts and shall all provide for the return and canvass of the ballots cast at such elections. If, at such elections, a majority of the
vote shall be in favor of creating such a debt, it shall be lawful for the City Council to issue bonds as proposed in the ordinance submitting same, but if a
majority of the vote polled shall be against the creating of such debt, the City Council shall be without authority to issue the bonds. In all cases when the
City Council shall order an election for the issuance of bonds of the City, it shall, at the same time, submit the questions of whether or not a tax shall be
levied upon the property of the City for the purpose of paying the interest on the bonds and to create a sinking fund for their redemption.
(3) The City shall have the power to borrow money for the purpose of constructing, purchasing, improving, extending or repairing of any public utilities,
recreational facilities or any other self liquidating municipal function not prohibited by the Constitution and laws of the State of Texas, and to issue
revenue bonds to evidence the obligation created thereby. Such bonds shall be a charge upon and payable for the properties, or interest therein pledged, or
the income therein from, or both. The holds of the revenue bonds shall never have the right to demand payment thereof out of monies raised or to be raised
by taxation. All such bonds shall be issued in conformity with the laws of the State of Texas and shall be used only for the purpose for which they were
issued.
(4) In any budget year, the City Council may, by resolution, authorize the borrowing of money in anticipation of the collection of the ad valorem tax for
the same year, whether levied or to be levied. Notes may be issued for periods not exceeding one (1) year and must be retired by the end of the budget year
in which issued.
Sec. 7.09 Purchasing.
(1) The City Council may, by ordinance, confer upon the City Manager general authority to contract for expenditure without further approval of the City
Council for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by the City Council. All contracts for expenditures involving more than the set limits must be
expressly approved in advance by the City Council. All contracts or purchases involving more than the limits set by the City Council shall be let to the
lowest bidder whose submittal is among those most responsive to the needs of the City after there has been opportunity for competitive bidding as
provided by law or ordinance. The Council or City Manager in such cases as he is authorized to contract for the City, shall have the right to reject any and
all bids.
(2) Emergency contracts as authorized by law and this Charter may be negotiated by the City Council or City Manager if given authority by the City
Council, without competitive bidding. Such emergency shall be declared by the City Manager and approved by the City Council or may be declared by the
City Council.
Sec. 7.10 Administration of Budget.
(1) No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with appropriations duly made and
unless the City Manager or his designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient
funds there from are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. Any authorization of payment or
incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this Charter shall be void and any payment so made illegally. Such action shall be cause for
removal of any officer who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation, and he shall also be liable to the City for any amount
so paid. However, this prohibition shall not be construed to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital
improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds, time warrants, certificates of indebtedness, or certificates of obligation, or to
prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, providing that such action is made or approved by
ordinance.
Sec. 7.11 Depository.
(1) All monies received by any person, department or agency of the City for or in connection with the affairs of the City shall be deposited promptly in
the City depository or depositories, which shall be designated by the City Council in accordance with such regulations and subject to such requirements as
to security for deposits and interest thereon as may be established by City's Investment Ordinance and State Law. The governing body shall designate by
resolution the bank, credit union or savings association to serve as the City's depository for the municipality's funds. The governing body shall review,
approve, execute and deliver any depository service contract for a term of two (2) years or as soon as practicable but not greater than a five (5) year period.
Procedures for withdrawal of money or the disbursement of funds from the City depositories shall be prescribed by the City's Investment Ordinance.
Sec. 7.12 Financial Report.
(1) The City Manager shall submit to the City Council at its first formal meeting each month the financial condition of the City by budget item, budget
estimates versus accruals for the preceding month and for the fiscal year-to-date. The financial records of the City will be maintained on an accrual basis to
support this type of financial management.
Sec. 7.13 Independent Audit.
(1) As soon as practicable after the close of each fiscal year but no later than 120 days, an independent audit shall be made of all accounts of the City
government by a certified public accountant selected by the governing body, who has no personal interest, directly or indirectly, in the financial affairs of
the City government, or any of its officers. The governing body shall appoint an independent auditor whose contract shall be reviewed and reconsidered at
the end of five (5) years. The annual financial statement, including the auditor's opinion on the statement shall be filed in the office of the City Secretary
within 120 days after the last day of the fiscal year as a public record. A summary thereof shall be published immediately in the official newspaper of the
City.
ARTICLE VIII. - TAX ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 8.01 Power to Tax.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 13/444
(1) The City shall have the power to levy, assess and collect taxes of every character and type for any municipal purpose not prohibited by the
Constitution and laws of the State of Texas as now written or hereafter amended.
(2) The City shall have the power to grant tax exemptions in accordance with the laws of the State of Texas.
Sec. 8.02 Tax Collections.
(1) The City Council shall determine annually the method of collection of taxes by either executing a contract for services as allowed by state law or any
appointment of a City Tax Collector.
Sec. 8.03 Assessment of Property for Tax Purposes.
(1) The City shall accept the appraisal rolls from the Aransas County Appraisal District. These rolls shall be the basis for the setting of a tax rate by the
City Council.
Sec. 8.04 Taxes: When Due and Payable.
(1) All taxes due in the City of Rockport on real and personal property shall be payable at a location or locations as designated by the City Council, and
may be paid at anytime after the tax rolls for the year have been completed and approved. Taxes shall be paid before February 1 and all taxes not paid prior
to that date shall be deemed delinquent, and shall be subject to penalty and interest as provided by V.T.C.A., Tax Code Section 33.01 as enacted or as
amended. The City Council may authorize discounts for the payment of taxes prior to January 1 as allowed by state law.
(2) Failure to levy and assess taxes through omission in preparing the appraisal rolls shall not relieve the person, firm or corporation so omitted from
obligation to pay such current or past due taxes as shown to be payable by recheck of the rolls and receipts for the years in question, omitting penalty and
interest.
Sec. 8.05 Tax Liens, Liabilities and Suits.
(1) All taxable property located in the City on the 1st day of January of each year shall stand charged from that date with a special lien in favor of the
City for taxes due thereon. All persons purchasing any of said property after the 1st day of January in any year shall take same subject to the liens herein
provided. In addition to the liens herein provided, on the 1st day of January of any year, the owner of property subject to taxation by the City shall be
personally liable for the taxes due thereon for that year. The City shall have power to sue for and recover personal judgment for taxes without foreclosure,
or to foreclose its lien or liens, or to recover both personal judgment and foreclosure. In any such suit where it appears that the description of any property
in the City appraisal rolls is insufficient to identify such property, the City shall have the right to plead a good description of the property to be assessed, to
prove the same, and to have its judgment foreclosing the tax lien or for personal judgment against the owners for such taxes.
Sec. 8.06 Other Rules and Regulations.
(1) Except as otherwise provided by law or this Charter, the City Council shall have the power to provide, by ordinance, such rules, regulations and
procedures not in conflict with the laws of the State of Texas, to enforce the collection by and payment to the City Tax Collector as the City Council may
deem appropriate and may provide such penalties for the failure to pay such taxes as the City Council may deem necessary.
ARTICLE IX. - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Sec. 9.01 Authority, Composition and Procedures.
(1) The City Council shall create, establish or appoint, as may be required by the laws of the State of Texas or this Charter, or deemed desirable by the
City Council, such boards, commissions and committees as it deems necessary to carry out the functions and obligations of the City. The City Council
shall, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe the purpose, composition, function, duties, accountability and tenure of each board, commission and committee
where such are not prescribed by law or this Charter.
(2) Individuals who are qualified voters in the City may be appointed to serve on one (1) or more board, commission or committee. The City Council
may, by ordinance or resolution, consolidate the functions of the various boards, commissions or committees provided for in this Charter. Except as
otherwise provided in this Charter, members of any such board, commission or committee shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for
actual expenses as approved by the City Council.
(3) All boards, commissions or committees of the City shall keep and maintain minutes of any proceedings held and shall submit a written report of such
proceedings to the City Council.
(4) No officer of the City nor any person who holds a compensated appointive position with the City shall be appointed to any board, commission or
committee created or established by this Charter other than in an advisory capacity.
(5) Any member of a board, commission or committee who is absent from three (3) consecutive regular meetings without explanation acceptable to a
majority of the other members shall forfeit his position on the board, commission or committee.
ARTICLE X. - PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
Sec. 10.01 Organization.
(1) There is hereby established a Planning and Zoning Commission which shall consist of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the City
Council for overlapping three (3) year terms. Each member shall be a qualified City voter. Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of a member
shall be filled by the City Council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The Commission shall elect from its members a Chairman, Vice Chairman and
Secretary to serve for one (1) year beginning in July of the year elected. The Commission shall meet at least once each month when practicable. The
Council should strive to balance Commission membership to represent best each Ward and all major areas.
Sec. 10.02 Duties and Powers.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 14/444
(1) The Commission shall be responsible to act as an advisory board to the City Council. The Commission shall:
(a) Review all current and proposed ordinances and amendments pertaining to planning, zoning, platting and subdividing property and make
recommendations to the City Council for action to be taken.
(b) Make, amend, extend and add to the Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City.
(c) Submit annually to the City Manager, not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the beginning of the budget year, an annual update
to any Capital Improvement Program as developed from the Comprehensive Plan regarding land use issues. The update may identify new or
additional capital improvements as well as revisions of the project priorities by year.
(d) Keep public records of its findings and determinations.
(2) The Commission shall have full power to:
(a) Exercise the authority of the Zoning Commission as provided by State law, this Charter and City ordinances.
(b) Administer rules and recommendations pertaining to subdivisions and to platting in territories within the City limits and its extraterritorial
jurisdiction.
Sec. 10.03 The Comprehensive Plan.
(1) The Comprehensive Plan for the physical development of the City including its ETJ shall contain the Commission's recommendations for the
growth, development and beautification of the City. The Commission may recommend approval to the City Council the Comprehensive Plan as a whole or
in parts and with any amendment thereto.
Sec. 10.04 Procedure.
(1) All rules and regulations recommended for approval by the Planning & Zoning Commission for the Comprehensive Plan shall be forwarded to the
City Manager who shall submit them to the Council with his recommendations if any. The Council may adopt or reject any such rules or regulations. If any
rules or regulations should be rejected, the Planning & Zoning Commission may modify them and submit such modified rules and regulations to the City
Manager. The City Manager shall again forward such changes to the Council. The adoption of the Plan or of any such part or amendment shall be by
ordinance, but before adoption of the Plan or any such part or amendment, the City Council and the Commission shall hold at least one (1) joint public
hearing on the proposed action.
Sec. 10.05 Legal Effect of the Comprehensive Plan.
(1) Following adoption by the Council of the Comprehensive Plan, it shall serve as a guide to all future Council action concerning land use and
development regulations and expenditures for capital improvements. Any proposal, which deviates from the Comprehensive Plan, shall not be authorized
until and unless the location and extent thereof shall have been submitted to and accepted by the Commission. In case of disapproval, the Commission
shall communicate its reasons to the Council, which shall have the power to overrule such disapproval and upon such overruling, the Council or the
appropriate office, department or agency shall have authority to proceed. The failure of the Commission to act within thirty (30) days after the date of
official submission to the Commission shall be deemed accepted, unless a longer period is granted by the Council or submitting official.
ARTICLE XI. - UTILITY AND PUBLIC SERVICE FRANCHISES AND LICENSES
Sec. 11.01 Authority.
(1) The City shall have the power to buy, own, sell, construct, lease, maintain, operate and regulate public services and utilities and to manufacture,
distribute and sell the output of such services and utility operations.
Sec. 11.02 Ordinance Granting Franchise.
(1) Any ordinance granting, renewing, extending or amending a public service or utility franchise must be read at two (2) separate meetings of the City
Council and shall not take effect until thirty (30) days after the final reading. Within seven (7) days following the first reading of the ordinance, the text or
the summary of the ordinance shall be published once in a newspaper designated as the official newspaper of the City, with the expense of such publication
borne by the prospective franchisee. Copies of the proposed ordinance, in the form required for adoption, shall be available at the city offices and shall be
furnished to the citizens upon request to the City Secretary before the first (1st) reading, if amended, shall be available and furnished in amended form for
as long as the proposed ordinance is before the City Council.
(2) No franchise shall be granted for a term of more than twenty (20) years from the date of the grant, renewal or extension of any franchise.
(3) No franchise may be exclusive.
Sec. 11.03 Transfer of Franchise.
(1) No public service or utility franchise is transferable, except with the approval of the City Council. However, the franchisee may pledge franchise
assets as security for a valid debt or mortgage.
Sec. 11.04 Franchise Value not to be Allowed.
(1) Franchises granted by the City are of no value in fixing rates and charges for public services or utilities within the City and in determining just
compensation to be paid by the City for property which the City may acquire by condemnation or otherwise.
Sec. 11.05 Right of Regulation.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 15/444
(1) In granting, amending, renewing and extending public service and utility franchises, the City reserves unto itself all the usual and customary rights,
including, but limited to, the following rights:
(a) To repeal the franchise by ordinance for failure to begin construction or operation with the time prescribed, or for failure to comply with
terms of the franchise.
(b) To require all extensions of service within the City limits to become part of the aggregate property of the service and operate subject to all
obligations and reserved rights contained in this Charter. Any such extension is considered part of the original grant and terminable at the same time
and under the same conditions as the original grant.
(c) To require expansion and extension of facilities and services and to require maintenance of existing facilities to provide adequate service at
the highest level of efficiency.
(d) To require reasonable standards of service and quality of products and prevent rate discrimination.
(e) To impose reasonable regulations and restrictions to insure the safety and welfare of the public.
(f) To examine and audit accounts and records and to require annual reports on local operations of the public service or utility.
(g) To require the franchisee to restore, at franchisees' expenses, all public or private property to a condition as good as or better than before
disturbed by the franchisee for construction, repair or removal.
(h) To require the franchisee to furnish to the City, within a reasonable time, at the franchisee's expense, a general map outlining current location,
character, size, length, depth, height and terminal of all facilities over and under the property within the City and its extraterritorial jurisdiction.
(i) To require compensation, rent or franchise fees to be paid to the City.
Sec. 11.06 Regulation of Rates.
(1) The City Council has the power to fix and regulate the rates and charges of all utilities and public services, consistent with state statutes.
(2) Upon receiving written request from a utility or public service requesting a change in rates, or upon a recommendation from the City that rates for
services provided by or owned by the City be changed, the City Council shall call a public hearing for consideration of the change.
(3) The City, public service or utility must show the necessity for the change by any evidence required by the City Council, including, but not limited to,
the following:
(a) Cost of its investment for service to the City;
(b) Amount and character of expenses and revenues connected with rendering the service;
(c) Copies of any reports or returns filed with any state or federal regulatory agency within the last three (3) years; or
(d) Demonstration that the return on investment is within state and federal limitation.
(4) If not satisfied with the sufficiency of evidence, the City Council may hire rate consultants, auditors and attorneys to investigate and, if necessary,
litigate requests for rate changes, the expense of which shall be reimbursed to the City by the franchisee.
Sec. 11.07 Licenses.
(1) The City shall have the power to license, levy and collect fees in order to license any lawful business, occupation or calling subject to control
pursuant to the police powers of the State of Texas and for any other purpose not contrary to the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas.
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sec. 12.01 Public Records.
(1) All records of the City shall be open to inspection except for those that are closed to the public by law. The records may be examined and copied in
the City offices during normal office hours at a nominal charge.
Sec. 12.02 Official Newspaper.
(1) The City Council shall declare biannually an official newspaper of general circulation in the City to service for a two (2) year period. All ordinances,
notices and other matters required by this Charter, City ordinance, of the Constitution and Laws of the State of Texas shall be published in the official
newspaper.
Sec. 12.03 Nepotism.
(1) No person related within the second (2nd) degree by affinity or within the third (3rd) degree by consanguinity to the Mayor or any City Council
member or the City Manager shall be employed or appointed to any positions in the City. This shall not apply to any person continuously employed prior
to the election or appointment of the person related in the above degree.
Sec. 12.04 Oath.
(1) All elected and appointed officers of the City shall take and sign the 'Oath of Office' based on those prescribed for State elective and appointive
offices, respectively, in the Constitution of the State of Texas.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 16/444
Sec. 12.05 Prohibitions and Penalties.
(1) Equality of rights under the law shall not be denied or abridged with respect to appointment to or removal from any position because of race, sex,
age, national origin, physical disabilities, political or religious opinions or affiliations.
(2) No person who seeks appointment or promotion with respect to any City position shall, directly or indirectly, give, render or pay any money, service
or other valuable thing to any person for, or in connection with, his test, appointment or promotion.
(3) No person shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating or report in regard to any test, certification or appointment or attempt to
commit any fraud preventing the impartial execution of the personal provisions, rules and regulations of this Charter.
(4) No person who holds any compensated non-elective City position shall make, solicit or receive any contribution for any candidate for public office
in the City, or take part in the management, affairs or political campaign of such candidate. He may exercise his rights as a citizen to express his opinion
and to cast his vote.
(5) Any person who willfully engages in any of the above-prohibited activities shall be ineligible for appointment or election to a position in the City for
a period of five (5) years. If he is an officer or employee of the City at the time of the violation, he shall immediately forfeit his office or position.
Sec. 12.06 Assignment, Execution and Garnishment.
(1) Property, real and personal, belonging to the City shall not be liable to be sold or appropriated under writ or execution of cost bill. Funds belonging
to the City in the hands of any person, firm or corporation, shall not be liable to garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to
garnishment, attachment or sequestration; nor shall the City be liable to the garnishment on account of any debt it may owe or funds or property it may
have on hand owing to any person. Neither the City nor any of its officers or agents shall be required to answer any such writ of garnishment on any
account whatever.
(2) The City shall not be obligated to recognize any assignment of wages or funds by its employees, agents or contractors unless otherwise prescribed by
law.
Sec. 12.07 Security and Bond.
(1) It shall not be necessary in any action, suit or proceeding in which the City is a party for any bond, undertaking or security to be demanded or
executed by or on behalf of the City in any state court. All such actions shall be conducted in the same manner as if such bond, undertaking or security had
been given as required by law.
Sec. 12.08 Power to Settle Claims.
(1) The City Council shall have the power to compromise and settle any and all claims and lawsuits of every kind and character, in favor of, or against,
the City, including suits by the City to recover delinquent taxes.
Sec. 12.09 Service of Process Against the City.
(1) All legal processes against the City shall be served upon the Mayor and City Manager.
Sec. 12.10 Judicial Notice.
(1) This Charter shall be deemed a public act, may be read in evidence without pleading of proof, the judicial notice shall be taken thereof in all courts
and places.
Sec. 12.11 Emergency Powers of the Mayor.
(1) Whenever it comes to the knowledge of the Mayor his designee that any malignant, infectious and contagious disease or epidemic is prevalent in the
City or probably will become so, or in the case of public calamity arising by reason of flood, hurricane, tornado, fire or any other disaster, when it appears
that action may become necessary before the Council can be convened to consider such action, he shall have the power to take all steps and use all
measures necessary to avoid, suppress or mitigate such disease and prepare for and relieve distress caused by flood or resulting from hurricane, tornado,
fire or any other disaster.
Sec. 12.12 Severability.
(1) If any section or part of this Charter is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not invalidate or impair the validity, force
or effect of any other section or part of this Charter.
Sec. 12.13 Gender of Wording.
(1) The masculine gender of the wording throughout this Charter shall always be interpreted to mean either sex.
Sec. 12.14 Amendment of Charter.
(1) Amendments to this Charter may be framed and submitted to qualified voters of the City in the manner provided by Chapter 9, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code now in effect or as now written or hereafter amended.
(2) Any petition submitted by at least five (5%) percent of the qualified voters of the City seeking submission to the voters of one or more proposed
charter amendment shall be started, circulated, certified and presented consistent with the procedural rules of Article VI of this Charter.
(3) A petition submitted as contemplated by this section shall be filed with the city secretary no later than thirty (30) days following the date of filing of
the required affidavit by the Petitioners' Committee. To be considered for placement on a ballot at the next uniform election date, a petition must be
certified and presented to the City Council at least forty-five (45) days before that uniform election date.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 17/444
Sec. 12.15 Charter Review Commission.
(1) The City Council, as hereafter provided, shall appoint, a Charter Review Commission of five (5) citizens of the City which shall:
(a) Inquire into the operation of the City government under the Charter and determine whether any provisions require revision. To this end,
public hearings may be held. The Commission may compel the attendance of any officer or employee of the City and require submission of any
City records it deems necessary to conduct the hearings;
(b) Propose any recommendation(s) it deems desirable to insure compliance with the Charter by the government;
(c) Propose amendments to the Charter to improve the effective application to current conditions; and
(d) Report its findings and present its recommendations, if any, to the City Council.
(2) The City Council shall receive and have posted at a place convenient to the public in the City Hall any report presented by the Commission; shall
consider any recommendations made, may order any amendments suggested to be submitted to the voters of the City in the manner provided by Chapter 9,
V.T.C.A., Local Government Code as now written or hereafter amended.
(3) The term of office of the Commission shall be for not more than six (6) months, at the end of which time a report shall be presented to the City
Council and all records of proceedings of the Commission shall be filed with the City Secretary and become a public record.
(4) A Commission contemplated by this section shall be appointed by the City Council no less than every five (5) years subsequent to the date of the last
charter amendment election held by the City.
Sec. 12.16 Rearranging and Numbering.
(1) The City Council shall have the power, by ordinance; to renumber and rearrange all articles, sections and paragraphs of this Charter or any
amendments thereto, as it is deemed appropriate. Upon the passage of any such ordinance a copy thereof, certified by the City Secretary, shall be
forwarded to the Secretary of State for filing.
PART II
CODE OF ORDINANCES
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS*
Sec. 1-1. How Code designated and cited.
The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated the "Code of Ordinances, City of Rockport,
Texas," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as the Rockport Code.
(Code 1972,  1-1)
Charter referencePrinting of ordinances,  3.13.
State law referenceAuthority of city to adopt codification of civil and criminal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  53.001 et seq.
Sec. 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the city council, the following definitions and rules shall be observed,
unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council:
City. The words "the city" or "this city" or "city" shall mean the City of Rockport, in the County of Aransas and State of Texas.
Code. The words "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Rockport, Texas, as designated in section 1-1.
Computation of time.
(1) In computing a period of days, the first day is excluded and the last day is included.
(2) If the last day of any period is a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period is extended to include the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday or legal holiday.
(3) If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the
concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 18/444
which case the period ends on the last day of that month.
State law referenceComputation of time, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.014.
Council. Whenever the words "council," "the council" or "city council" are used, they shall mean the city council of the City of Rockport, Texas.
County. The words "county," "the county" or "this county" shall mean Aransas County, Texas.
Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
State law referenceGender, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.012(c).
Highway. The term "highway" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to
the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
State law reference"Highway" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  13(a).
Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of officers or other persons may be executed by a majority of them unless expressly provided
otherwise.
State law referenceGrants of authority, V.T.C.A., Government Code  312.004.
Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month.
Number. The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.
State law referenceNumber, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.012(b).
Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation, and the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and
"affirmed."
State law reference"Oath" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005(1).
Officers, boards, etc. Whenever reference is made to any officer, department, board or commission, the same shall be construed as if followed by the
words "of the City of Rockport."
Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it.
Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint tenant or
tenant by the entirety, of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
Person. The word "person" includes any individual, firm, company, corporation, organization, government or governmental subdivision or agency,
business trust, estate, trust, partnership, association and any other legal entity.
State law reference"Person" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005(2).
Roadway. The term "roadway" shall mean that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or
shoulder. If a highway includes two or more separate roadways the term "roadway" as used in this Code shall refer to any such roadway separately but not
to all such roadways collectively.
State law reference"Roadway" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  13(c).
Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean that portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral lines of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines
intended for the use of pedestrians.
State law reference"Sidewalk" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  13(d).
Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include any symbol executed or adopted by a person with present intention to
authenticate a writing.
State law reference"Signed" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005(6).
State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Texas.
Street. The word "street" shall mean the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use
of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.
State law reference"Street" defined, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  13(a).
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present.
Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. The designation "Vernon's Ann. C.C.P." shall mean Vernon's Annotated Code of Criminal Procedure, as amended.
Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. The designation "Vernon's Ann. Civ. St." shall mean Vernon's Annotated Civil Statutes, as amended.
V.T.C.A. The designation "V.T.C.A." shall mean Vernon's Texas Codes Annotated, as amended.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 19/444
Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters, symbols or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
State law reference"Written" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005(11).
Year. The word "year" means 12 consecutive months.
(Code 1972,  1-2)
State law reference"Year" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.005(12).
Sec. 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code, printed in boldface type, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
(Code 1972,  1-3)
State law referenceHeadings, V.T.C.A., Government Code  311.024.
Sec. 1-4. Amendments or additions to Code.
(a) All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the
numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof,
such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when
passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated herein, so that a reference
to the Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
(b) Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this
Code in the following language: "That section ________________ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Rockport, Texas, is hereby amended to read as
follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired.
(c) If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of
Rockport, Texas, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______________, which section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall
then be set out in full as desired.
(Code 1972,  1-4)
Sec. 1-5. Certain ordinances not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following:
(1) Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any
evidence of the city's indebtedness.
(2) Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for city officers and
employees.
(3) Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city.
(4) Any ordinance designating, or otherwise relating to, city depositories.
(5) Any ordinance granting any franchise, permit or other right.
(6) Any ordinance designating no parking areas.
(7) Any ordinance approving, prescribing or otherwise relating to rates to be charged by utility companies.
(8) Any ordinance approving, authorizing or otherwise relating to any contract or agreement.
(9) Any ordinance accepting, dedicating, vacating or otherwise relating to any easement.
(10) Any ordinance zoning or rezoning specific property.
(11) Any ordinance relating to the population of the city.
(12) Any ordinance relating to an industrial development corporation.
(13) Any ordinance relating to a specific fund.
(14) The comprehensive plan of the city.
(15) Ordinance No. 218, relating to participation in the National Flood Insurance Program, set out in Appendix A of this Code.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 20/444
(Code 1972,  1-5)
Sec. 1-6. Code does not affect prior offenses, penalties, contracts, rights.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any
contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code.
(Code 1972,  1-6)
Sec. 1-7. General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations.
(a) Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or
whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is
provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00.
(b) A violation of the following provisions shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00:
(1) Chapter 22, article VIII.
(2) Chapter 42, article II, division 1.
(3) Chapter 54, article III.
(c) A violation of the following provisions shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $2,000.00: Chapter 22, articles IV and X.
(d) No penalty shall be greater or less than the penalty provided for the same or a similar offense under the laws of the state. Each day any violation of
this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
(Code 1972,  1-7)
State law referencePenalties for violation of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  54.001.
Sec. 1-8. Severability of parts of Code.
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if
any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of
competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code,
since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence,
paragraph or section.
(Code 1972,  1-8)
Sec. 1-9. History notes.
The history notes appearing in parentheses after sections of this Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to indicate the
source of matter contained in the section.
Sec. 1-10. References and editor's notes.
The references and editor's notes appearing throughout the Code are not intended to have any legal effect, but are merely intended to assist the user of the
Code.
Sec. 1-11. Supplementation of Code.
(a) By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city council. A
supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council or adopted by initiative and
referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code and shall also include all amendments to the Charter
during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which
have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through
the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement.
(b) In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof
from reprinted pages.
(c) When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make
formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a
unified code. For example, the codifier may:
(1) Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions;
(2) Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make
changes in catchlines, headings and titles;
(3) Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material,
change existing section or other subdivision numbers;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 21/444
(4) Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or
to "sections _________ through _________" The inserted section numbers will indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive
sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; and
(5) Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case
shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code.
Chapter 2
ADMINISTRATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 2-12-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COUNCIL*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 2-26. Day, time of regular meetings.
The regular meetings of the council shall be held on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at 6:30 p.m.
Sec. 2-27. General rules.
(a) The city council hereby adopts Robert's Rules of Order to regulate city council proceedings not covered by the rules of order and procedure adopted
herein. The city council adopts Texas Rules of Evidence and Texas Rules of Civil Procedure to regulate city council proceeding for all formal inquiries
brought by the city council pursuant to authority granted in Article 3.14 of the City Charter.
(b) Citizens to be heard. During any meeting, a reasonable opportunity shall be given for citizens to be heard under these rules. These rules of procedure
are enacted as guidelines to be followed by all persons in the city council chamber including the city council, the city administrative staff, news media and
visitors.
(c) Meetings to be public. All official meetings of the city council and city committees, except closed meetings permitted by the provisions of the Texas
Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code, as amended, shall be open to the public (Charter,  3.08(2)).
(d) Quorum. Three members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business (Charter,  3.09).
(e) Misconduct. The city council may punish its own members for misconduct.
(f) Minutes of meetings. An account of all proceedings of the city council shall be kept by the city secretary and shall be entered in a book constituting
the official record of the city council (Charter,  3.10). A certified agenda shall be prepared for all closed meetings and shall be approved by the presiding
officer according to Chapter 551 of the Texas Government Code, as amended.
(g) Questions to contain one subject. All questions submitted for a vote shall contain only one subject. If two or more points are involved, any member
may require a division, if the questions reasonably admit of a division.
(h) Right of floor. Any person desiring to speak shall be recognized by the presiding officer and shall confine his or her remarks to the subject under
consideration or to be considered. No member shall be allowed to speak more than once on any one subject until every member wishing to speak shall
have spoken.
(i) City manager. The city manager, or acting city manager, shall attend all meetings of the city council unless excused. He or she may make
recommendations to the city council and shall have the right to take part in all discussions of the city council, but shall have no vote (Charter,  4.01(4)
(d)).
(j) City attorney. The city attorney, or acting city attorney, shall attend all meetings of the city council unless excused and shall, upon request, give an
opinion, either written or oral, on questions of law. The city attorney shall act as the city council's parliamentarian.
(k) City secretary. The city secretary, or acting city secretary, shall attend all meetings of the city council unless excused, and shall keep the official
minutes and perform such other duties as may be requested by the city council (Charter,  4.02(2) (b) and (c)).
(l) Officers and employees. Any officer or employee of the city, when requested by the city manager, shall attend any meeting of the city council. If
requested to do so by the city manager, such officer or employee may present information relating to matters before the city council.
(m) Rules of order. These rules govern the proceedings of the city council in all cases, except that where these rules are silent, the most recent edition of
Robert's Rules of Order (revised) shall govern.
(n) Suspension of rules. Any provision of these rules not governed by the City Charter or City Code may be temporarily suspended by the affirmative
vote of three members of the city council. The vote on any such suspension shall be taken by a show of hands in favor or opposed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 22/444
(o) Amendment of rules. These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted by the affirmative vote of three members of the city council, as with any
ordinance requiring two readings. (Charter,  3.11(2) and (3)).
(p) Votes of mayor and council members. The mayor and council members will demonstrate their vote in favor or in opposition by a show of hands.
Those abstaining from voting will verbally so state for the record. (Ord. No. 1186,  1, 1-8-02; Ord. No. 1323,  2, 4-12-05)
Sec. 2-28. Code of conduct.
(a) Council members.
(1) During city council meetings, city council members shall preserve order and decorum and shall neither by conversation or otherwise delay or
interrupt the proceedings nor refuse to observe the rules of the city council.
(2) A council member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted while speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer, unless a point of
order is raised by another member or parliamentarian, or unless the speaker chooses to yield to questions by another member. If a city council
member is called to order while he or she is speaking, he or she shall cease speaking immediately until the question of order is determined. If ruled
to be in order, he or she shall be permitted to proceed. If ruled to be not in order, he or she shall remain silent or shall alter his or her remarks so as
to comply with the rules of the city council.
(b) Administrative staff.
(1) Members of the administrative staff and employees of the city shall observe the same rules of procedure and decorum applicable to members
of the city council, and shall have no voice unless and until recognized by the presiding officer.
(2) While the presiding officer shall have the authority to preserve decorum in meetings as far as staff members and city employees are
concerned, the city manager also shall be responsible for the orderly conduct and decorum of all city employees under his or her direction and
control.
(3) The city manager shall take such disciplinary action as may be necessary to ensure that such decorum is preserved at all times by city
employees in city council meetings.
(4) All remarks and questions addressed to the city council shall be addressed to the city council as a whole and not to any individual member
thereof.
(5) No staff member, other than a staff member having the floor, shall enter into a discussion either directly or indirectly without permission of
the presiding officer.
(c) Citizens. Citizens are welcome and invited to attend all meetings of the city council (Charter,  3.08(2)).
(1) All citizens will refrain from private conversations in the chamber while the council is in session.
(2) Citizens attending council meetings shall observe the same rules of propriety, decorum and good conduct applicable to the administrative
staff. Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks, or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council or while attending
the council meeting shall be removed from the room if the sergeant-at-arms is so directed by the presiding officer, and such person shall be barred
from further audience before the council during that session of the council.
(3) Inappropriate remarks from the audience, stamping of feet, applauding, whistles, yells, and similar demonstrations shall not be permitted by
the presiding officer, who shall direct the sergeant-at-arms to remove such offenders from the room. In case the presiding officer shall fail to act,
any member of the council may move to require him or her to act to enforce the rules, and the affirmative vote of three members of the council shall
require the presiding officer to act.
(4) No placards, banners, or signs of any kind will be permitted in the council chamber except exhibits, displays, and visual aids used in
connection with presentations to the council, provided that such exhibits, displays, and visual aids do not disrupt the meeting.
(5) Enforcement. The city manager, in the absence of a designated law enforcement officer, shall act as sergeant-at-arms for the council, and shall
furnish whatever assistance is needed to enforce the rules of decorum herein established.
(6) Seating arrangement. The city manager, city attorney and city secretary shall occupy respective seats in the council chamber assigned to them
by the mayor. The mayor shall be seated in the middle of the council members who shall be in equal numbers on either side of him or her, arranged
numerically by ward. (Ord. No. 1186,  1, 1-8-2002)
Sec. 2-29. Types of meetings.
(a) Regular meetings. The council shall meet at 6:30 p.m. on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month (City Code,  2-26) or at any other times set
by the council, unless postponed or canceled for valid reason (Charter,  3.08(1)). All regular meetings of the city council will be held in the Council
Chambers of City Hall located at 622 East Market Street, or such location as the city council may, by motion, resolution or ordinance designate.
(b) Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the mayor or by a majority of the city council. The call for a special meeting shall be filed with
the city secretary in written form, and he or she shall post notice thereof as provided by law.
(c) Workshop meetings. Workshop meetings or work sessions may be called using the same procedure required for special meetings (Charter,  3.08(1)).
The purpose of the workshop meeting is to discuss or explore matters of interest to the city, to meet with a city board or commission, or committee
members, city staff or officers or members of civic organizations, governing bodies of other governing entitities, or individuals specifically invited to the
session by the mayor, council or city manager. These meetings are informational and no action shall be taken unless the posted agenda indicates otherwise.
Citizens or other interested persons attending the work session will not be allowed to participate in the session unless invited to do so by the mayor or
council members. Citizens should be advised of the nature of the work session and that their input may be received and considered at a regularly scheduled
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 23/444
city council meeting where the agenda provides for final action to be taken. The purpose of this procedure is to allow the citizens attending the regular
meeting the opportunity of hearing the views of their fellow citizens in a more formal setting. Any citizen may supply the city council with a written
statement or report regarding the citizen's opinion on a matter being discussed in a work session. If the presiding officer invites citizens to participate in a
work session, their participation will cease at the point the presiding officer closes the session to public input to allow the council to give city staff
direction as to needed information for the possible future meeting without distracting comment from the audience.
(d) Emergency meetings. In case of emergency or urgent public necessity, which shall be expressed in the notice of the meeting, an emergency meeting
may be called by the mayor or by four members of the city council, and it shall be sufficient if the notice is posted two hours before the meeting is
convened as provided by law.
(e) Closed meetings. The city council may meet in a closed meeting pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings Act, Chapter 551, Texas
Government Code, as amended.
(f) Notice of meetings. The agenda for all meetings, including city council committee or subcommittee meetings, shall be posted by the city secretary on
the city's official bulletin board and notice of all meetings shall be given by the city secretary pursuant to the requirements of the Texas Open Meetings
Act, Chapter 551, Texas Government Code, as amended. (Ord. No. 1186,  1, 1-8-2002)
Sec. 2-30. Presiding officer and duties.
(a) Presiding officer. The mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore (mayor pro-tem) shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of
the city council. In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro-tem, and a quorum is present, the council members present will choose one of their number as
the presiding officer.
(b) Call to order. The meetings of the city council shall be called to order by the presiding officer.
(c) Preservation of order. The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum, and confine members in debate to the question under discussion. The
presiding officer shall call upon the sergeant-at-arms, as necessary, to enforce compliance with the rules contained herein.
(d) Points of order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order, subject to the right of any member to appeal to the council. If any appeal is
taken, the question shall be, "shall the decision of the presiding officer be sustained?" if a majority of the members present vote "no" by a show of hands
the ruling of the presiding officer is over-ruled; otherwise, it is sustained.
(e) Questions to be stated. The presiding officer shall state all questions submitted for a vote and announce the result.
(f) Substitution for presiding officer. The presiding officer may call on any other council member to take his or her place, such substitution not to
continue beyond adjournment.
(g) Call for recess. The presiding officer may call for a recess of up to 15 minutes at regular intervals of approximately one hour at appropriate points in
the meeting agenda, or if requested by any council member. (Ord. No. 1186,  1, 1-8-2002)
Sec. 2-31. Order of business.
(a) Agenda. The order of business of each meeting shall be as contained in the agenda prepared by the city manager (Charter,  4.01(4)(e)). The agenda
shall be a listing by topic of subjects to be considered by the city council. The presiding officer may take agenda items in any order. This section shall
govern placement of items on the agenda. Conduct of business at special meetings and council committees and subcommittees will likewise be governed
by an agenda and the rules of procedure contained herein.
(b) Presentation of proclamations. The agenda may provide a time for the presentation of proclamations. The presiding officer may deliver and present
proclamations upon the request of citizens. Proclamations may encompass any activity or theme of a community nature except that proclamations shall not
be used for any commercial or advertising purpose.
(c) Presentations by citizens.
(1) Public input. During the "Citizens to be heard" portion, each speaker is limited to one presentation per meeting and a time limit set at council
discretion on any item except a posted agenda item for the meeting. Citizens may not assign their allotted time to other citizens wishing to speak.
No formal city council action is permitted under the Texas Open Meetings Act. The regular meeting will begin after public input concludes.
(2) Any person who wishes to address the city council regarding an item that is not on the consent agenda shall sign in and complete a "Request
to speak" card and provide it to the city secretary before the meeting begins. "Request to speak" cards must be filled out completely any incomplete
cards will be returned. The presiding officer will receive the "Request to speak" cards from the city secretary and will call upon the citizen to speak
for a time limit set at council discretion as that particular agenda item is considered by the city council. The provisions of this paragraph also do not
apply to persons appearing at a public hearing in response to an official agenda notice or publication. Persons shall not have a right to speak or
provide input on consent agenda items, unless such items are removed from the consent agenda and placed on the regular agenda by request of the
mayor or any city council member. The provisions of this paragraph also do not apply to workshop meetings, and a citizen's right to speak and
provide input at those meetings shall be limited and controlled by section 2-29(c), Workshop meetings, in this article.
(3) Speaking at public hearings. Any person who wishes to address the city council at a public hearing shall sign in and complete a "Request to
speak" card and provide it to the city secretary before the meeting begins. "Request to speak" cards must be filled out completely; any incomplete
cards will be returned. The presiding officer will receive the "Request to speak" cards from the city secretary and will call upon the citizen to speak
for a time limit set at council discretion. Citizens may not assign their allotted time to other citizens wishing to speak on the same issue.
(4) Consent agenda. The agenda may provide for a consent agenda. Matters under the consent agenda are considered to be routine by the city
council and will be enacted by one motion. There will not be separate discussion of these items. If discussion is desired, that item will be removed
from the consent agenda and will be considered separately.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 24/444
(5) Oral presentations by the city manager. Matters requiring the attention of the city council that may have developed after the deadline for
delivery of the written communication to the council may be presented orally by the city manager, as may be permitted by law. If formal city
council action on a subject is required, such action may be taken only if the provisions of the Texas Open Meetings Act have been satisfied.
(6) Future agenda items. If a citizen wishes to place a subject on a city council agenda, they need to provide a written request to the city secretary
no later than one week before a regular city council meeting. This allows preparation of the agenda to ensure distribution and posting within the 72-
hour requirement of the Texas Open Meetings Act. The written request should include:
a. The issue to be presented to the city council.
b. Why this issue needs to be presented to the city council. Sometimes an issue is administrative or a disagreement is not yet ready for city
council intervention.
c. A brief explanation of the position plus background, if any. This written request is supplied to the city council members so they are
familiar with the issue before the presentation at the meeting.
d. What outcome is expected. Sometimes, the relief given is not what the citizen wanted. What is obvious to the requestor is not always
obvious to a five-person council.
Any city council member may simply notify the city manager to place an issue on the agenda. If the information from (6) above is not provided, the only
background provided ahead of time may be "requested by council member (name)."
(Ord. No. 1186,  1, 1-8-2002)
Secs. 2-322-35. Reserved
DIVISION 2. INVESTIGATIONS*
Sec. 2-36. Issuance of subpoena.
The city secretary, at the request of the city council or any party to any pending inquiry into the official conduct of any department, agency, office, officer
or employee of the city, or of any agent or attorney, shall issue a subpoena for any witness who may be represented to reside within the limits of the city
and/or the county, or who may be found within such distance at the time of any hearing before the council; provided that the city secretary issuing a
subpoena pursuant to the provisions of this section, or of any other section of this Code, shall issue a separate subpoena, together with a copy thereof, for
each witness subpoenaed.
(Ord. No. 825,  1, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-37. Form of subpoena.
The form of the subpoena shall be in the same style as that of other subpoenas issued under the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 177, and, when
applicable, may further state that the purpose of the subpoena is to give evidence at any inquiry by the city council.
(Ord. No. 825,  2, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-38. Production of documentary evidence.
A subpoena may also provide for the production of documentary evidence in that it may also command the person to whom it is directed to produce the
books, papers, documents or tangible things designated therein; but the council, on motion made seasonably and in any event at or before the time
specified in the subpoena for compliance therewith, may quash or modify the subpoena if it is unreasonable and oppressive, or may condition denial of the
motion to quash or modify upon the advancement by the person in whose behalf the subpoena is issued, of the reasonable costs of producing the books,
papers, documents or tangible things, in accordance with Texas Rules of Civil Procedure, Rule 177a, which is adopted by reference thereto.
(Ord. No. 825,  3, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-39. Service of subpoena.
Section 178 of the Texas Rules of Civil Procedure is hereby adopted, wherein it is stated "Subpoenas may be executed and returned at any time by the
sheriff or constable, or by any other person who is not a party and is not less than 18 years of age, and shall be served by delivering a copy of such
subpoena to the witness; and service thereof may be accepted by any witness by a written memorandum, signed by such witness, attached to the
subpoena."
(Ord. No. 825,  4, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-40. Conduct of meetings.
The city council hereby adopts the Texas Rules of Evidence and Civil Procedure as the desired standard for the conduct of the meetings pertaining to its
inquiries and for grievance hearings, and shall be governed by and adopts the Texas substantial evidence rules as to the burden necessary to be met in
rendering its decisions based on the evidence presented to it in any hearing held before the council.
(Ord. No. 825,  5, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-41. Grievance board hearings.
The rules and standards enumerated in sections 2-36 through 2-41 shall also be applicable to hearings before any grievance board held in accordance with
grievance procedures set out in the personnel manual for the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 25/444
(Ord. No. 825,  6, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-42. Duty of witness to attend until discharged.
Every witness summoned in any inquiry or hearing before the council and/or grievance board shall attend the hearing from day to day until discharged by
the council and/or grievance board or party summoning such witness.
(Ord. No. 825,  7, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-43. Failure to give evidence.
Any witness refusing to give evidence may be fined as provided in section 2-44 for such failure to give evidence.
(Ord. No. 825,  8, 1-10-89)
Sec. 2-44. Penalty.
If any witness, after being duly summoned, shall fail to attend and/or produce the documentary evidence requested by subpoena, then the presiding officer
may direct that a complaint be filed with the municipal court of the city indicating the manner and/or type of violation and section alleged to be violated.
After notice and hearing as provided in violations of other city ordinances, the judge of the municipal court may fine such witness as provided in section 1-
7(a).
(Ord. No. 825,  9, 1-10-89)
Secs. 2-452-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES*
Sec. 2-66. Nepotism.
No person related within the second degree by affinity or within the third degree by consanguinity to a department head and/or supervisor of a department
shall be employed in any position within the same department of the city. This section shall not apply to any person who has been continuously employed
by the city prior to July 8, 1986.
(Ord. No. 727,  1, 7-8-86)
Charter referenceNepotism,  12.03.
State law referenceDegrees of relationship, nepotism prohibitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 573.
Secs. 2-672-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Secs. 2-862-95. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TEXAS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT SYSTEM
Sec. 2-96. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
System means the Texas Municipal Retirement System.
(Ord. No. 782,  1, 8-11-87)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 2-97. Election to participate; employees included.
(a) On behalf of the city, the city council hereby exercises its option and elects to have the city and all of the employees of all departments now existing
or hereafter established participate in the Texas Municipal Retirement System as provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq. and all of the
benefits and obligations of such system are hereby accepted as to such employees.
(b) Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department on or after the effective date of participation of the department shall become
a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System as a condition of his employment.
(Code 1972,  2-23)
Sec. 2-98. Refusal to add new participants; discontinuance of participants.
The city may, in the future, refuse to add new departments or new employees to the Texas Municipal Retirement System, but shall never discontinue as to
any participants.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 26/444
(Code 1972,  2-24)
Sec. 2-99. Employee and city contributions.
(a) The deposits to be made to the Texas Municipal Retirement System on account of current service of the employees of the several participating
departments are hereby fixed at the rate of seven percent of the earnings of each employee of the departments, and in determining the deposits to be made
on account of such service, the maximum earnings shall be full salary.
(b) Pursuant to  855.407(g) of the TMRS Act, the city hereby elects to make future normal and prior service contributions to its account in the benefit
accumulation fund of the system at such combined rate of the total compensation paid by the city to employees who are members of the system, as the
system's actuary shall annually determine as the rate necessary to fund, within the amortization period determined as applicable to the city under the
TMRS Act, the costs of all benefits which are or may become chargeable to or are to be paid out of the city's account in said accumulation fund, regardless
of other provisions of the TMRS Act limiting the combined rate of city contributions.
(Code 1972,  2-25; Ord. No. 1137,  1, 12-14-99; Ord. No. 1616,  1, 12-10-13)
State law referenceMember contributions, V.T.C.A., Government Code  855.401.
Sec. 2-100. Remittance to board of trustees; prior service certifications, other reports.
The city secretary is hereby directed to remit to the board of trustees of the Texas Municipal Retirement System, at its office in Austin, Texas, the city's
contributions to the system and the amounts which shall be deducted from the compensation or payroll of employees, all as required by the board under the
provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., and the city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to ascertain and certify officially on
behalf of the city the prior service rendered to the city by each of the employees of the participating departments, and the average prior service
compensation received by each, and to make and execute all prior service certifications and all other reports and certifications which may be required of
the city under the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq., or in compliance with the rules and regulations of the board of trustees of the
Texas Municipal Retirement System.
(Code 1972,  2-26)
Sec. 2-101. Supplemental death benefits fund.
The city hereby elects to participate in the supplemental death benefits fund of the Texas Municipal Retirement System beginning on January 1, 1979, for
the purpose of providing in-service death benefits in the amounts and on the terms provided for in V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.601 et seq., 855.314
and 855.502, for each of the city's employees who are members of the system, and for the purpose of providing post-retirement death benefits as provided
in such sections for annuitants whose last covered employment was as an employee of this city.
(Ord. No. 458,  1, 8-14-78)
Sec. 2-102. Membership a condition of employment; rights, benefits of members.
(a) Pursuant to Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h,  XX (now repealed), the city adopts the following plan provisions affecting participation of its
employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System:
(1) Each person who becomes an employee of any participating department of this city and who is not already a member of the Texas Municipal
Retirement System shall become a member of the system as a condition of employment, provided such person is then under 60 years of age.
(2) An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty
(60) years old and has at least five (5) years of creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility
under this subsection or are subject to section 854.102(e) of this subtitle [TMRS Act].
(3) The membership of any member who has completed at least ten years of creditable service with this city and other participating
municipalities which have adopted the plan provisions of Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6243h,  XX (now repealed), shall not terminate because of
absence from service.
(4) Any person who is an employee of a participating department of this city on September 1, 1980, but who at the date of his employment was
under 60 years of age but did not become a member of Texas Municipal Retirement System because he was then above the maximum age then
prescribed by law for initial membership in the system, shall become a member of the system on September 1, 1980, unless he has already become
a member under other provisions of the governing act, and shall be allowed prior service credit for each month of creditable service performed for
this city subsequent to the date such person was precluded from membership and prior to the effective date of his membership. Such prior service
credit shall be calculated using the same percentage of the base prior service credit as was most recently used in calculating prior service credits or
updated service credits in the system for current member employees of this city.
(b) The rights, credits and benefits authorized in this section shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force on September 1,
1980, pursuant to the act governing the system.
(Ord. No. 514,  1, 2, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 1664,  1(b), 7-12-16)
Sec. 2-103. Eligibility for participation.
Pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code  852.105, 854.202(f), 854.204, 854.405, 854.406 and 854.410, the city adopts the following
provisions affecting participation of its employees in the Texas Municipal Retirement System:
(1) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement benefit, if the member has at
least 25 years of credited service in that system performed for one or more municipalities that have participation dates after September 1, 1987, or
have adopted a like provision under V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.202(f).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 27/444
(2) If a member described in V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.204(b), shall die before becoming eligible for service retirement and leaves
surviving a lawful spouse whom the member has designated as beneficiary entitled to payment of the member's accumulated contributions in event
of the member's death before retirement, the surviving spouse may by written notice filed with the system elect to leave the accumulated deposits
on deposit with the system subject to the terms and conditions of V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.204(b). If the accumulated deposits have not
been withdrawn before such time as the member, if living, would have become entitled to service retirement, the surviving spouse may elect to
receive, in lieu of the accumulated deposits, an annuity payable monthly thereafter during the lifetime of the surviving spouse in such amount as
would have been payable to the surviving spouse had the member lived and retired at that date under an optional annuity described by V.T.C.A.,
Government Code  854.104(c)(1).
(3) At any time before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity, a surviving spouse to whom subsection (2) of this section applies may,
upon written application filed with the system, receive payment of the accumulated contributions standing to the account of the member in lieu of
any benefits otherwise payable under this section. If the surviving spouse dies before payment of the first monthly benefit of an annuity allowed
under this section, the accumulated contributions credited to the account of the member shall be paid to the estate of such spouse.
(4) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system and who performed service for this city prior to September 1, 1987 (for which
service that employee did not receive credit with the system because the employee was not at that time a member of the system due to his age at the
date of his employment), is hereby granted service credit with the system for all of such service (performed after the date of his latest employment
by the city) that is prior to September 1, 1987, for which the employee has not previously received credit with the system, pursuant to V.T.C.A.,
Government Code  852.105.
(5) The rights, credits and benefits hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force on
September 1, 1987, pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code ch. 851 et seq.
(6) Any employee of this city who is a member of the system is eligible to retire and receive a "standard occupational disability retirement
annuity" under V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.408, or an "optional occupational disability retirement annuity" under V.T.C.A., Government
Code  854.410, upon making application therefor upon such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the board of trustees of the system,
provided that the system's medical board has certified to the board of trustees: that the member is physically or mentally disabled for further
performance of the duties of the member's employment; that the disability is likely to be permanent; and that the member should be retired. Any
annuity granted under this subsection shall be subject to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.409.
(7) The provisions relating to the occupational disability program as set forth in subsection (5) of this section are in lieu of the disability program
heretofore provided for under V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.301854.308.
(8) An employee of the city who is a member of the system may retire and receive a service retirement annuity if that member is at least sixty
(60) years old and has at least five (5) years of creditable service performed for one or more municipalities that either have authorized eligibility
under this subsection or are subject to section 854.102(e) of this subtitle [TMRS Act].
(Ord. No. 782,  1, 8-11-87; Ord. No. 1664,  1(b), 7-12-16)
Sec. 2-104. Prior service credit.
(a) Any employee of this city who is a member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System and who performed service as a probationary employee of
this city prior to September 1, 1989, for which the employee did not receive credited service in the system because the person, as a probationary employee
was not enrolled as a member of the system during the period of probationary employment, is hereby allowed to obtain prior service credit for the period
of such probationary service (not in excess of six months), pursuant to the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.304.
(b) To obtain prior service credit allowable under subsection (a) of this section any employee entitled thereto shall file a detailed written statement of the
service claimed with the city secretary within one year from September 1, 1989.
(c) As soon as practicable after the employee has filed a claim the prior service credit under V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.304, the city secretary
shall, if the officer determines that such service was performed as claimed, verify the prior service allowable (not exceeding six months) and the average
monthly compensation paid the member during the period of probationary employment and shall certify to the board of trustees of the system the
creditable prior service approved, and the average monthly compensation paid to the person by the city during the period of probationary employment.
(Ord. No. 833,  1-3, 8-15-89)
Sec. 2-105. Military service credit.
(a) Pursuant to V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.502, the city elects to allow eligible members in its employment to establish credit in the Texas
Municipal Retirement System for active military service performed as a member of the armed forces or armed forces reserves of the United States or an
auxiliary of the armed forces or armed forces reserves. Eligible members as used herein shall be those employees meeting the criteria set forth in V.T.C.A.,
Government Code  853.502(b) and 853.503, and the amount and use of creditable military service shall be as further set forth in V.T.C.A., Government
Code  853.505.
(b) In order to establish credit for military service under this section, a member must deposit with the Texas Municipal Retirement System (in that
member's individual account in the employees saving fund), an amount equal to the number of months for which credit is sought, multiplied by $15.00.
The city agrees that its account in the municipality accumulation fund is to be charged at the time of the member's retirement with an amount equal to the
accumulated amount paid by the member for military service credit, multiplied by the city's current service matching ratio in effect at the date the member
applies for such military service credit.
(Ord. No. 918,  1, 2, 5-12-92)
Sec. 2-106. Authorization of updated service credits.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.401 through 853.404, each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement
System who has current service credit or prior service credit in the system in force and effect on January 1 of the calendar year preceding such allowance,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 28/444
by reason of service in the employment of the city, and on such date had at least 36 months of credited service with the system, shall be and is hereby
allowed updated service credit (as that term is defined in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.402(d)).
(b) On the terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.601, any member of the system who is eligible for updated service credits
on the basis of service with this city, who has unforfeited credit for prior service and/or current service with another participating municipality or
municipalities by reason of previous service, and was a contributing member on January 1, 1992, shall be credited with updated service credits pursuant to,
calculated in accordance with, and subject to adjustment as set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.601, both as to the initial grant hereunder and all
future grants under sections 2-106-2-108.
(c) The updated service credit hereby allowed and provided for shall be 100 percent of the base updated service credit of the member (calculated as
provided in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.402(c)).
(d) Each updated service credit allowed under this section shall replace any updated service credit, prior service credit, special prior service credit, or
antecedent service credit previously authorized for part of the same service.
(e) In accordance with the provisions of V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.401(d), the deposits required to be made to the system by employees of the
several participating departments on account of current service shall be calculated from and after January 1, 1993, on the full amount of such person's
compensation as an employee of the city.
(Ord. No. 936,  1, 11-24-92)
Sec. 2-107. Increase in retirement annuities.
(a) On terms and conditions set out in V.T.C.A., Government Code  854.203, the city hereby elects to allow and to provide for payment of the increases
below stated in monthly benefits payable by the system to retired employees and to beneficiaries of deceased employees of the city under current service
annuities and prior service annuities arising from service by such employees to the city. An annuity increased under this section replaces any annuity or
increased annuity previously granted to the same person.
(b) The amount of the annuity increase under this section is computed as the sum of the prior service and current service annuities on the effective date
of retirement of the person on whose service the annuities are based, multiplied by 70 percent of the percentage change in Consumer Price Index for All
Urban Consumers, from December of the year immediately preceding the effective date of the person's retirement to the December 1991.
(c) An increase in an annuity that was reduced because of an option selection is reducible in the same proportion and in the same manner that the
original annuity was reduced.
(d) If a computation under this section does not result in an increase in the amount of an annuity, the amount of the annuity will not be changed under
this section.
(e) The amount by which an increase under this section exceeds all previously granted increases to an annuitant is an obligation of the city and of its
account in the municipality accumulation fund of the system.
(Ord. No. 936,  2, 11-24-92)
Sec. 2-108. Dates of allowances and increases.
The initial allowance of updated service credit and increase in retirement annuities under sections 2-106-2-108 shall be effective on January 1, 1993,
subject to approval by the board of trustees of the system. An allowance of updated service credits and an increase in retirement annuities shall be made
hereunder on January 1 of each subsequent year until this article ceases to be in effect under subsection (e) of section 853.404 of the TMRS Act, provided
that, as to such subsequent year, the actuary for the system has made the determination set forth in V.T.C.A., Government Code  853.404(d).
(Ord. No. 936,  3, 11-24-92)
Sec. 2-109. Additional rights granted.
(a) Any employee of the City who is a member of the System is eligible to retire and receive a service retirement annuity if the member has at least 20
years of credited service in the System performed for one or more municipalities that have adopted a like provision under Section 854.202(g) of the TMRS
Act.
(b) The rights hereinabove authorized shall be in addition to the plan provisions heretofore adopted and in force at the effective date of Ordinance No.
1050 pursuant to the TMRS Act.
(Ord. No. 1050,  1, 3, 2-25-97)
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1050,  1, 3, and Ord. No. 1051,  1-3, both adopted Feb. 25, 1997, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion as 
2-109 and 2-110 has been at the editor's discretion.
Sec. 2-110. Restricted prior service credit.
(a) On the terms and conditions set out in sections 853.305 of Subtitle G of Title 8, Texas Government Code, as amended (hereinafter referred to as the
"TMRS Act"), each member of the Texas Municipal Retirement System (hereinafter referred to as the "System") who is now or who hereafter becomes an
employee of this city shall receive restricted prior service for service previously performed as an employee of any of the entities described in such section
853.305 provided that (a) the person does not otherwise have credited service in the system for that service, and (b) the service meets the requirements of
such section 853.305.
(b) The service credit hereby granted may be used only to satisfy length-of-service requirements for retirement eligibility, has no monetary value in
computing the annuity payments allowable to the member, and may not be used in other computations, including computation of updated service credits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 29/444
(c) A member seeking to establish restricted prior service credit under this ordinance must take the action required under said section 853.305 while still
an employee of this city.
(Ord. No. 1051,  1-3, 2-25-97)
NoteSee the editor's note following  2-109
Sec. 2-111. Health benefits coverage for city retirees.
(a) The city hereby elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool under the pool's interlocal agreement.
(b) The city hereby adopts the following definition of "retiree" for purposes of this section:
Meets the definition of retiree under TMRS and is eligible for benefits.
(c) The city hereby adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee
Benefits Pool:
(1) If retirees are not eligible for Medicare at the time of enrollment:
a. The same medical plan(s) offered to active employees up to 195 percent of the active employee contribution.
b. Retiree Optional Life Insurance-The maximum policy amount offered by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee
Benefits Pool up to $5,000.00.
(2) If retirees are eligible for Medicare at time of enrollment:
a. The city shall pay the cost of any Medicare Supplement offered by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool up to $268.08 per month per retired employee.
b. Retiree Optional Life Insurance-The maximum policy amount offered by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee
Benefits Pool up to $5,000.00.
(d) The city follows and abides by the rules and regulations as adopted by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool
which provide that any retired employee who declines to participate in any given year is not eligible for retiree health insurance in subsequent years.
(e) This section will only apply to individuals retiring after its effective date or to employees who retired under a previous ordinance. For individuals
retiring after the effective date of this section [May 8, 2001] to qualify they must enroll for this coverage within 30 days of their retirement (See Exhibit
A).
EXHIBIT A
POLICY FOR PROVIDING INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR RETIREES
The city will extend its group insurance policy to cover individuals retired under the eligibility requirements of the Texas Municipal Retire [Retirement]
System and will only pay premiums under the group policy. The city will not be responsible for nor guarantee the city's then-current insurance company
will accept the individual. The city will pay a percentage of the individual's group health insurance cost based on the number of continuous whole years of
service to the city upon the employee's voluntary termination as follows:
Continuous Service to City Percentage of Premium Paid by City
Less than 10 years service 0%
10 years service 50%
11 years service 55%
12 years service 60%
13 years service 65%
14 years service 70%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 30/444
15 years service 75%
16 years service 80%
17 years service 85%
18 years service 90%
19 years service 95%
20 years service 100%
(Ord. No. 1089,  2-6, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 1159,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1182,  1, 5-8-01; Ord. No. 1252,  1, 8-12-03; Ord. No. 1458,  1, 7-28-09)
Sec. 2-112. Continuation of coverage, administrator; authorization to execute agreement.
The City of Rockport hereby elects to have the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risks Pool administer the city's continuation of coverage, and the
city hereby adopts the continuation of coverage agreement provided by the Texas Municipal League Group Benefits Risk Pool. The mayor is hereby
authorized to execute the TML Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool continuation of coverage agreement on behalf of the city.
(Ord. No. 1104,  2, 3, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 1158,  1, 7-25-00)
Secs. 2-1132-130. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. RECORDS MANAGEMENT*
Sec. 2-131. What constitutes municipal records.
All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, photographs, sound or video recordings, microfilm, magnetic tape, electronic media, or other information
recording media, regardless of physical form or characteristic and regardless of whether public access to them is open or restricted under the laws of the
state, created or received by the city or any of its officers or employees pursuant to law, including an ordinance, or in the transaction of public business are
hereby declared to be the records of the city and shall be created, maintained and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of this article or procedures
authorized by it and in no other manner.
(Ord. No. 916,  1, 4-14-92)
State law reference"Local government record" defined, V.T.C.A., Government Code  441.151, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  201.003.
Sec. 2-132. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Department head means the officer who by ordinance or administrative policy is in charge of an office of the city that creates or receives records.
Essential record means any record of the city necessary to the resumption or continuation of its operations in an emergency or disaster, to the recreation of
its legal and financial status, or to the protection and fulfillment of obligations to the people of the state.
Permanent record means any record of the city for which the retention period on a records control schedule is given as permanent.
Records control schedule means a document prepared by or under the authority of the records management officer listing the records maintained by the
city, their retention periods, and other records disposition information that the records management program may require.
Records management means the application of management techniques to the creation, use, maintenance, retention, preservation and disposal of records
for the purposes of reducing the costs and improving the efficiency of recordkeeping. The term includes the development of records control schedules, the
management of filing and information retrieval systems, the protection of essential and permanent records, the economical and space-effective storage of
inactive records, control over the creation and distribution of forms, reports, and correspondence, and the management of micrographics and electronic and
other records storage systems.
Records management officer means the person designated in section 2-135.
Records management plan means the plan developed under section 2-136.
Retention period means the minimum time that must pass after the creation, recording or receipt of a record, or the fulfillment of certain actions associated
with a record, before it is eligible for destruction.
(Ord. No. 916,  2, 4-14-92)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 31/444
State law referenceDefinitions, V.T.C.A., Government Code  441.151, and V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  201.003.
Sec. 2-133. Municipal records declared public property.
All municipal records are hereby declared to be the property of the city. No municipal official or employee has, by virtue of his position, any personal or
property right to such records even though he may have developed or compiled them. The unauthorized destruction, removal from files, or use of such
records is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 916,  3, 4-14-92)
State law referenceDeclaration of records as public property, access, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  201.005.
Sec. 2-134. Policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to provide for efficient, economical and effective controls over the creation, distribution, organization,
maintenance, use and disposition of all municipal records through a comprehensive system of integrated procedures for their management from creation to
ultimate disposition, consistent with the requirements of the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.) and
accepted records management practice.
(Ord. No. 916,  4, 4-14-92)
State law referencePurpose of Local Government Records Act, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  201.002.
Sec. 2-135. Designation of records management officer.
The office of the city secretary, and the successive holders of that office, shall serve as records management officer for the city. As provided by state law,
each successive holder of the office shall file his name with the director and librarian of the state library and archives commission within 30 days of the
initial designation or of taking up the office, as applicable.
(Ord. No. 916,  5, 4-14-92)
State law referenceDesignation of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  203.025.
Sec. 2-136. Development of records management plan; approval, authority.
(a) The records management officer shall develop a records management plan for the city for submission to the city council. The plan must contain
policies and procedures designed to reduce the costs and improve the efficiency of recordkeeping, to adequately protect the essential records of the
municipality, and to properly preserve those records of the city that are of historical value. The plan must be designed to enable the records management
officer to carry out his duties prescribed by state law and this article effectively.
(b) Once approved by the city the records management plan shall be binding on all offices, departments, divisions, programs, commissions, bureaus,
boards, committees, or similar entities of the city and records shall be created, maintained, stored, microfilmed or disposed of in accordance with the plan.
(c) State law relating to the duties, other responsibilities, or recordkeeping requirements of a department head do not exempt the department head or the
records in the department head's care from the application of this article and the records management plan adopted under it and may not be used by the
department head as a basis for refusal to participate in the records management program of the city.
(Ord. No. 916,  6, 4-14-92)
Sec. 2-137. Duties of records management officer.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article or by law, the records management officer shall:
(1) Administer the records management program and provide assistance to department heads in its implementation.
(2) Plan, formulate and prescribe records disposition policies, systems, standards and procedures.
(3) In cooperation with department heads identify essential records and establish a disaster plan for each municipal office and department to
ensure maximum availability of the records in order to reestablish operations quickly and with minimum disruption and expense.
(4) Develop procedures to ensure the permanent preservation of the historically valuable records of the city.
(5) Establish standards for filing and storage equipment and for recordkeeping supplies.
(6) Study the feasibility of and, if appropriate, establish a uniform filing system and a forms design and control system for the city.
(7) Monitor records retention schedules and administrative rules issued by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission to determine if the
records management program and the city's records control schedules are in compliance with state regulations.
(8) Disseminate to the city and department heads information concerning state laws and administrative rules relating to local government records.
(9) Ensure that the maintenance, preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition of the records of the city is carried out in accordance
with the policies and procedures of the records management program and the requirements of state law.
(10) Maintain records on the volume of records destroyed under approved records control schedules or through records destruction authorization
requests, the volume of records microfilmed or stored electronically, and the estimated cost and space savings as the result of such disposal or
disposition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 32/444
(11) Report annually to the city council on the implementation of the records management plan in each department of the city, including
summaries of the statistical and fiscal data compiled under subsection (10) of this section.
(12) Bring to the attention of the city council noncompliance by department heads or other municipal personnel with the policies and procedures
of the records management program or the Local Government Records Act (V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 201 et seq.).
(Ord. No. 916,  7, 4-14-92)
State law referenceDuties of records management officer, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  203.023.
Sec. 2-138. Duties, responsibilities of department heads.
In addition to other duties assigned in this article, department heads shall:
(1) Cooperate with the records management officer in carrying out the policies and procedures established in the city for the efficient and
economical management of records and in carrying out the requirements of this article.
(2) Adequately document the transaction of government business and the services, programs and duties for which the department head and his
staff are responsible.
(3) Maintain the records in his care and carry out their preservation, microfilming, destruction or other disposition only in accordance with the
policies and procedures of the records management program of the city and the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 916,  8, 4-14-92)
Sec. 2-139. Records control schedules to be developed; approval; filing with state.
(a) The records management officer, in cooperation with department heads, shall prepare records control schedules on a department by department basis
listing all records series created or received by the department and the retention period for each series. Records control schedules shall also contain such
other information regarding the disposition of municipal records as the records management plan may require.
(b) Each records control schedule shall be monitored and amended as needed by the records management officer on a regular basis to ensure that it is in
compliance with records retention schedules issued by the state and that it continues to reflect the recordkeeping procedures and needs of the department
and the records management program of the city council.
(c) Before its adoption a records control schedule or amended schedule for a department must be approved by the department head and the city council.
(d) Before its adoption a records control schedule must be submitted to and accepted for filing by the director and librarian of the state library and
archives commission as provided by state law. If a schedule is not accepted for filing, the schedule shall be amended to make it acceptable for filing. The
records management officer shall submit the records control schedules to the director and librarian.
(Ord. No. 916,  9, 4-14-92)
State law referenceRetention periods, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  203.042.
Sec. 2-140. Implementation of records control schedules; destruction of records under schedule.
(a) A records control schedule for a department that has been approved and adopted under section 2-139 shall be implemented by department heads
according to the policies and procedures of the records management plan.
(b) A record whose retention period has expired on a records control schedule shall be destroyed unless an open records request is pending on the
record, the subject matter of the record is pertinent to a pending law suit, or the department head requests in writing to the records management officer that
the record be retained for an additional period.
(c) Prior to the destruction of a record under an approved records control schedule, authorization for the destruction must be obtained by the records
management officer from the city council.
(Ord. No. 916,  10, 4-14-92)
Sec. 2-141. Destruction of unscheduled records.
A record that has not yet been listed on an approved records control schedule may be destroyed if its destruction has been approved in the same manner as
a record destroyed under an approved schedule and the records management officer has submitted to and received back from the director and librarian of
the state library and archives commission an approved destruction authorization request.
(Ord. No. 916,  11, 4-14-92)
Secs. 2-1422-160. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. CLAIMS AGAINST CITY*
Sec. 2-161. Notice to city of claim for property damage or personal injury.
The city shall never be liable for any claim for property damage or for personal injury, whether such personal injury results in death or not, unless the
person damaged or injured, or someone in his behalf, who may have a cause of action under the law by reason of such death or injury, shall, within six
months from the date of damage or injury was received, give notice in writing to the city of the following facts:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 33/444
(1) The date and time when the injury occurred and the place where the injured person or property was at the time when the injury was received.
(2) The nature of the damage or injury sustained.
(3) The apparent extent of the damage or injury sustained.
(4) A specific and detailed statement of how and under what circumstances the damage or injury occurred.
(5) The amount for which each claimant will settle.
(6) The actual place of residence of each claimant by street, number, city and state on the date the claim is presented.
(7) In the case of personal injury or death, the names and addresses of all persons who, according to the knowledge or information of the
claimant, witnessed the happening of the injury or any part thereof and the names of the doctors, if any, to whose care the injured person is
committed.
(8) In the case of property damage, the location of the damaged property at the time the claim was submitted along with the names and addresses
of all persons who witnessed the happening or any part thereof.
(Ord. No. 862,  1, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 1323,  3, 4-12-05)
Sec. 2-162. Council consideration required prior to suit.
No suit of any nature whatsoever shall be instituted or maintained against the city unless the plaintiff therein shall declare and prove that prior to the filing
of the original petition the plaintiff applied to the city council for redress, satisfaction, compensation or relief, as the case may be, and that it was refused
by vote of the city council.
(Ord. No. 862,  2, 9-11-90)
Sec. 2-163. Service of notices.
All notices required by this article shall be served upon the city secretary or city manager at 622 East Market Street, Rockport, Texas and all such notices
shall be effective only when actually received in the office of the person named above. Upon receipt of such notice the manager shall immediately inform
the mayor, or in the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem.
(Ord. No. 862,  3, 9-11-90)
Sec. 2-164. No authority to waive provisions.
Neither the mayor, a city councilmember, nor any other officer or employee of the city shall have the authority to waive any of the provisions of this
article.
(Ord. No. 862,  4, 9-11-90)
Sec. 2-165. Notice to be sworn to.
The written notice required under this article shall be sworn to by the person claiming the damage or injuries or by someone authorized by him to do so on
his behalf. Failure to swear to the notice as required shall not render the notice fatally defective, but failure to so verify the notice may be considered by the
city council as a factor relating to the truth of the allegations and to the weight to be given to the allegations contained therein.
(Ord. No. 862,  5, 9-11-90)
Sec. 2-166. Applicability to claims under Texas Tort Claims Act.
This article shall not apply to claims governed by the Texas Tort Claims Act (V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code ch. 101), and the notice of such
claims shall comply with that act.
(Code 1972,  2-2(b))
Secs. 2-1672-200. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. MUNICIPAL COURT FEES
Sec. 2-201. Court building security fund.
(a) All defendants convicted in trial of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be assessed a three dollar security fee as cost of court.
(b) A person shall be considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person receives community supervision, including deferred adjudication; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The costs collected shall be paid to the finance director and deposited in a fund to be known as the Municipal Court Building Security Fund. This
fund shall be administered under the direction of the city council and may be used only to finance the following items identified in Article  102.017 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (as amended) when used for the purpose of providing security services for the municipal court building including:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 34/444
(1) The purchase or repair of x-ray machines and conveying systems;
(2) Hand-held metal detectors;
(3) Walkthrough metal detectors;
(4) Identification cards and systems;
(5) Electronic locking and surveillance equipment;
(6) Bailiffs, deputy sheriffs, deputy constables, or contract security personnel during times when they are providing appropriate security services;
(7) Signage;
(8) Confiscated weapon inventory and tracking systems;
(9) Locks, chains, or other security hardware;
(10) Continuing education on security issues for court personnel and security personnel; and
(11) The purchase or repair of bullet-proof glass.
(Ord. No. 1086,  1, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 1594,  1, 12-11-12)
Sec. 2-202. Municipal court technology fund.
(a) All defendants convicted in trial of a misdemeanor offense in municipal court shall be assessed a $4.00 technology fee as cost of court, pursuant to
article 102.0172 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which fund may be maintained in the general revenue account.
(b) A person is considered convicted if:
(1) A sentence is imposed on the person;
(2) The person is placed on community supervision, including deferred adjudication community supervision; or
(3) The court defers final disposition of the person's case.
(c) The clerk of the court shall collect the fee and shall deposit it in a fund to be known as the municipal court technology fund, which shall be
administered by or under the direction of the city council and shall be used only to finance the purchase of technological enhancements for the municipal
court including:
(1) Computer systems;
(2) Computer networks;
(3) Computer hardware;
(4) Computer software;
(5) Imaging systems;
(6) Electronic kiosks;
(7) Electronic ticket writers; or
(8) Docket management systems.
(Ord. No. 1131,  1, 9-28-99; Ord. No. 1594,  2, 12-11-12)
Sec. 2-203. Court costs; municipal court juvenile case manager fund.
The city hereby creates and authorizes a $5.00 court fee to be assessed on every individual convicted of a fine-only misdemeanor offense in municipal
court. The $5.00 fee shall be placed in a municipal court juvenile case manager fund trust account to be administered by the city's finance department. The
funds may be expended only for the salaries and benefits of juvenile case managers employed by the county whose work primarily relates to city
municipal court school attendance cases involving either children or parents. The municipal court judge is authorized to waive the juvenile case manager
fund court cost in cases of financial hardship.
(Ord. No. 1507,  1, 7-27-10)
Sec. 2-204. Collection fees.
(a) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by article 103.0031, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure in the amount of 30% of
debts and accounts receivable, such as unpaid fines, fees, court costs, forfeited bonds, and restitution ordered paid by a court serving the municipality when
such debt or account receivable is more than 60 days past due and has been referred to an attorney or private vendor for collection.
(b) A collection fee is hereby authorized and imposed, as provided by article 103.0031, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, in the amount of 30% of
amounts in cases in which the accused has failed to appear:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 35/444
(1) As promised under subchapter A, chapter 543, Transportation Code, or other law;
(2) In compliance with a lawful written notice to appear issued under article 14.06(b), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, or other law;
(3) In compliance with a lawful summons issued under article 15.03(b), Texas Code of Criminal Procedure, or other law;
(4) In compliance with a lawful order of a court serving the municipality; or
(5) As specified in a citation, summons or other notice authorized by section 682.002, Transportation Code, that charges the accused with a
parking or stopping offense;
when such amounts are more than 60 days past due and have been referred to an attorney or private vendor for collection.
(Ord. No. 1626,  2, 5-13-14)
Secs. 2-2052-210. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. INVESTMENT POLICY*
Sec. 2-211. Policy statement.
It is the policy of the city that the administration of its funds and the investment of those funds shall be handled as its highest public trust. Investment shall
be made in a manner which will provide the maximum security of principal invested through limitations and diversification while meeting the daily cash
flow needs of the city and conforming to all applicable state statutes governing the investment of public funds.
The receipt of a market yield will be secondary to the requirements for safety and liquidity. It is the intent of the city to be in complete compliance with
local law and the Texas Public Funds Investment Act, chapter 2256, Texas Government Code (the "act"). The earnings from investments will be used in a
manner that best serves the interests of the city.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-212. Scope.
This investment policy applies to all the financial assets and funds of the city. The city commingles its funds into one pooled investment portfolio for
investment purposes to gain efficiency and maximum investment opportunity. These funds are defined in the city's comprehensive annual financial report
(CAFR) and include:
(1) General fund;
(2) Enterprise funds;
(3) Special revenue funds;
(4) Capital project funds;
(5) Debt service funds;
(6) Trust and agency funds;
(7) Vehicle and equipment replacement funds; and
(8) Any new fund created, unless specifically exempted by city council and this policy.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1433,  1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-213. Objectives; strategy; cash management.
(a) Objective. It is the policy of the city that all funds shall be managed and invested with four primary objectives, listed in order of their priority: safety,
liquidity, diversification and yield. Investments are to be chosen in a manner which promotes diversity by market sector, credit and maturity in response to
cash needs and market conditions. The choice of high-credit quality government investments and money market instruments are designed to assure the
marketability of those investments should liquidity needs arise. To meet anticipated cash flow and control for over-extension the maximum weighted
average maturity (WAM) of the overall portfolio shall not exceed six months.
(1) Safety of principal. Safety of principal is the foremost objective of the city. Investments of the city shall be undertaken in a manner that seeks
to ensure the preservation of capital. Each investment transaction shall be conducted in a manner to avoid capital losses, whether they be from
security defaults, safekeeping, or erosion of market value.
(2) Liquidity. The city's investment portfolio will be based on a cash flow analysis of needs and will remain sufficiently liquid to enable it to meet
all operating requirements which might be reasonably anticipated.
(3) Diversification. Diversification of the portfolio will include diversification by maturity and market sector and will include the use of a
number of broker/dealers for diversification and market coverage.
(4) Yield. The city's investment portfolio shall be designed with the objective of attaining a reasonable market rate, taking into account the city's
risk constraints and the cash flow needs of the portfolio. The benchmark for the commingled portfolio shall be the yield on the current six-month
U.S. Treasury Bill for the comparable period designated for its comparability to the expected cash flow and maximum weighted average maturity
(WAM).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 36/444
(b) Strategy. The city maintains one commingled portfolio for investment purposes which incorporates the specific investment strategy considerations
and the unique characteristics of the fund groups represented in the portfolio. The city shall pursue a conservative strategy. Securities may be sold before
they mature if market conditions present an opportunity to benefit from the trade but the strategy will be primarily buy-and-hold.
(1) The investment strategy for operating funds has as its primary objective assurance that anticipated liabilities are matched and adequate
liquidity provided. This may be accomplished by purchasing high credit quality securities (02 years) which will complement each other in a
laddered maturity structure permitting some extension for yield enhancement.
(2) The investment strategy for debt service funds shall have as its primary objective the assurance of available funds adequate to fund the debt
service obligations on a timely basis. Successive debt service dates will be fully funded before any maturity extension.
(3) The investment strategy for debt service reserve funds shall have as its primary objective the ability to generate a revenue stream to the debt
service funds from high quality securities. The potential for loss shall be further controlled through the purchase of securities within the desired
maturity range.
(4) The investment strategy for capital projects or capital project funds will have as its primary objective assurance that anticipated cash flows
are matched and provide adequate investment liquidity. A liquidity buffer should be maintained to provide flexibility and for unanticipated project
outlays.
(c) Cash management. Effective cash management is recognized as essential to good fiscal management. Cash management is defined as the process of
managing monies in order to ensure maximum cash availability. The city shall maintain a cash management program which includes timely collection of
accounts receivable, prudent investment of its available cash, disbursement of payments in accordance with invoice terms and the management of banking
services.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-214. Legal limitations, responsibilities and authority.
Authority to manage the city's investment program is derived from the city charter, ordinances, statutes and resolutions. Direct specific investment
parameters for the investment of public funds in Texas are found in the act. The Public Funds Collateral Act, chapter 2257, Texas Government Code,
specifies collateral requirements for all public funds deposits. All investments will be made in accordance with these statutes, bond requirements and city
ordinances to include Ordinance 1351, Ordinance 1354, Ordinance 1433, Ordinance 1499, and Ordinance 1559.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-215. Delegation of investment authority.
(a) Management responsibility.
(1) Management responsibility for the investment program is hereby delegated to the city manager who shall be responsible for administrative
oversight.
(2) The city manager is also responsible for considering the quality and capability of staff, investment advisors, and consultants involved in
investment management and procedures. All participants in the investment process shall seek to act responsibly as custodians of the public trust.
(b) Investment officer(s).
(1) The city council will designate investment officer(s) by resolution. The investment officer(s) shall develop and maintain procedures for the
operation of the investment program consistent with this investment policy. Procedures will include safekeeping, funds transfers, investment
procedures, banking services, and collateral.
(2) The investment officer shall be responsible for all transactions undertaken and shall establish a system of controls to regulate the activities of
subordinate officials and staff. The investment officer(s) shall designate a staff person as a liaison/deputy in the event circumstances require timely
action and the investment officer is not available.
(3) No officer or designee may engage in an investment transaction except as provided under the terms of this policy and the supporting
procedures.
(4) Each designated investment officer will obtain ten hours of investment training within the first 12 months of taking the position and ten hours
of training within each two-year fiscal years thereafter.
(c) City council responsibilities. The city council holds ultimate fiduciary responsibility for the portfolio. It will designate investment officer(s), receive
and review quarterly reporting, provide for investment officer training, approve broker/dealers, and review and adopt the investment policy and strategy at
least annually.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-216. Prudence.
(a) The standard of care to be used in the investment function shall be the "prudent person rule" and shall be applied in the context of managing the
overall portfolio. This standard states: "Investments shall be made with judgment and care, under circumstances then prevailing, which
persons of prudence, discretion, and intelligence exercise in the management of their own affairs, not for speculation, but for investment, considering the
probable safety of their capital as well as the expected income to be derived."
(b) Limitation of personal liability. The investment officer(s) and those delegated investment authority under this policy, when acting in accordance with
the written procedures and this policy and in accord with the prudent person rule, shall be relieved of personal liability in the management of the portfolio
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 37/444
provided that deviations from expectations for a specific security's credit risk or market price change or portfolio shifts are reported in a timely manner and
that appropriate action is taken to control adverse market effects. In determining whether an investment officer has exercised prudence with respect to an
investment decision, the determination shall be made taking into consideration the investment of all funds over which the officer has responsibility rather
than a consideration as to the prudence of a single investment.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-217. Internal controls.
(a) Controls. The investment officer(s) shall establish a system of written internal controls which will be reviewed annually with the independent auditor
of the city. The controls shall be designed to prevent loss of public funds due to fraud, employee error, misrepresentation by third parties, unanticipated
market changes, or imprudent actions by employees of the city.
(b) Cash flow forecasting. Cash flow forecasting is designed to protect and sustain cash flow requirements. Supplemental to the financial and budgetary
systems, the investment officer(s) will maintain a cash flow forecasting process designed to monitor and forecast cash positions for investment purposes.
(c) Monitoring credit ratings. The investment officer(s) shall monitor, on no less than a monthly basis, the credit rating on all authorized investments in
the portfolio based upon independent information from a nationally recognized rating agency. If any security falls below the minimum rating required by
policy, the investment officer shall notify the city manager of the loss of rating, and liquidate the investment within one week.
(d) Monitoring FDIC status for mergers and acquisitions. The investment officer(s) shall monitor, on no less than a weekly basis, the status and
ownership of all banks issuing brokered CDs owned by the city based upon information from the FDIC. If any bank has been acquired or merged with
another bank in which brokered CDs are owned, the investment officer shall immediately liquidate any brokered CD which places the city above the FDIC
insurance level.
(e) Competitive bidding. All securities, including certificates of deposit, will be purchased or sold only after three or more offers/bids are taken to verify
that the city is receiving fair market value/price for the investment.
(f) Delivery versus payment (DVP). All securities shall be purchased on a delivery versus payment (DVP) settlement basis. The safekeeping agent shall
not release city funds until receipt of the security. The safekeeping agent shall provide the city with proof of ownership delivered within one business day.
(g) Unauthorized investments. Investments need not be liquidated if authorized at the time of purchase.
(h) Documentation of investment transactions. All investment transactions, including the transfer of funds for investment purposes, shall be documented
and such documentation maintained by the investment officer(s).
(i) Compliance audit. At least once a year, the investment officer(s) shall complete a compliance audit to assure that the investment program is operating
in compliance with the policy and the act.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-218. Authorized investments.
Authorized investments shall be limited to the instruments listed below and as further described by the act. If additional types of securities are approved for
investment by state statute, they will not be eligible for investment by the city until this policy has been amended and the amended version adopted by the
city council.
(1) Obligations of the United States government, its agencies and instrumentalities, not to exceed two years to stated maturity, excluding all
mortgage-backed securities;
(2) Fully insured or collateralized depository certificates of deposit issued by a bank or a savings bank doing business in Texas which is
guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, or its successor, or collateralized in accordance with this policy not to exceed
two years to stated maturity, to include CDARS;
(3) Fully insured share certificates from Texas based credit unions, insured by the NCUIF, with a stated maturity not to exceed two years;
(4) FDIC insured brokered certificates of deposit securities from a bank in any US state, delivered versus payment to the city's safekeeping agent,
not to exceed two years to maturity. Purchased from a bank or broker doing business in Texas. Before purchase, the investment officer must verify
the FDIC status of the bank (on www.fdic.gov) to assure that the bank is FDIC insured;
(5) Fully collateralized repurchase agreements as defined by the act, not to exceed 180 days to stated maturity, managed under an executed Bond
Market Association Master Repurchase Agreement. The repurchase transactions shall be placed only through a primary government securities
dealer, as defined by the Federal Reserve of NY, or a financial institution doing business in Texas. Flex repurchase agreements specifically for
capital projects may extend beyond two years but must to match the expenditure plan of the bond projects;
(6) AAA-rated SEC registered money market mutual funds which strive to maintain a $1.00 net asset value;
(7) Texas Local Government Investment Pools, complying with the act, which strive to maintain a $1.00 net asset value; and
(8) Fully insured or collateralized interest-bearing accounts in any bank in Texas.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1354,  1, 6-27-06; Ord. No. 1433,  1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 1499,  1, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1559,  1, 2-14-12; Ord. No.
1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-219. Ethics and conflicts of interest.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 38/444
(a) Investment officer(s) and employees involved in the investment process shall refrain from personal business activity that could conflict with proper
execution of the investment program, or which could impair their ability to make impartial investment decisions.
(b) Investment officer(s) shall disclose to the Texas Ethics Commission and the city council, within the quarter, any personal financial interest
representing ten percent ownership or voting stock in an amount greater than $10,000.00 with a business, or receipt of funds from the business exceeding
ten percent of gross income for the previous year, or interest in real property if the interest has a fair market value of $2,500.00 or more. Any relationships
within the second degree by affinity or consanguinity, as specified in chapter 171 of the Texas Local Government Code with their officers, brokers and
employees who conduct business with the city shall also be reported.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-220. Authorized financial dealers and institutions.
(a) All investments made by the city will be made through an authorized broker/dealer or a bank in Texas. A list of a least three broker/dealers will be
maintained in order to assure competitive bidding (exhibit A to the policy, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary).
(b) Securities broker/dealers must meet certain criteria as determined by the investment officer(s). The following criteria must be met by those firms on
the list:
(1) Provision of a audited financial statement each year;
(2) Proof of certification by the Financial Industry Regulatory Agency (FINRA) and provision of firm's CRD number;
(3) Proof of current registration with the Texas State Securities Commission; and
(4) Policy certification.
(c) Every broker/dealer, pool, and bank with whom the city transacts business will be provided a copy of this investment policy for review to assure that
they are familiar with the goals and objectives of the investment program. A representative of the firm will be required to return a signed certification
acceptable to both parties stating that the policy has been received and reviewed and that controls are in place to assure that only authorized securities are
sold to the city. Material changes to the policy will require re-certification of the policy.
(d) A list of qualified broker/dealers will be reviewed and adopted at least annually by the city council.
(e) In order to perfect the DVP process the banking services depository, or its brokerage subsidiary, will not be used as a broker.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1559,  2, 2-14-12; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-221. Diversification and maturity limitations.
(a) It is the policy of the city to diversify its investment portfolio. Invested funds shall be diversified to minimize risk or loss resulting from overconcentration
of assets in a specific maturity, specific issuer, or specific class of securities. Diversification strategies shall be established and periodically
reviewed. Diversification guidelines by security type shall be:
SECURITY TYPE MAX % OF PORTFOLIO
U.S. Treasury Obligations 100%
U.S. Government Agencies and Instrumentalities Not to exceed 80%
Depository CDs Not to exceed 50%
Brokered Certificate of Deposit Securities Not to exceed 30%
Repurchase Agreement Not to exceed 20%
*Flex agreement by bond issue 100%
Money Market Fund 100%
*% ownership of fund Not to exceed 10%
Local Government Investment Pools 100%
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 39/444
*Maximum percent ownership of pool Not to exceed 20%
(b) The investment officer(s) shall diversify security types and maturities, to the extent possible and attempt to match investments with anticipated cash
flow requirements. Matching maturities with cash flow dates will reduce the need to sell securities prior to maturity, thus reducing market risk. The
investment officer may not invest more that 20 percent of the portfolio for a period greater than one year. The investment officer may not invest any
portion of the portfolio for a period greater than two years with the exception of a flex repurchase agreement.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1499,  2, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-222. Safekeeping; collateralization of time and demand deposits.
(a) Safekeeping.
(1) The laws of the state and prudent treasury management require that all purchased securities be bought on a delivery versus payment basis and
be held in safekeeping by either the city, an independent third party financial institution, or the city's designated banking services depository.
(2) All safekeeping arrangements shall be designated by the investment officer(s) and an agreement of the terms executed in writing. The third
party custodian shall be required to issue safekeeping receipts to the city listing each specific security, rate, description, maturity, cusip number, and
other pertinent information. Each safekeeping receipt will be clearly marked that the security is held for the city or pledged to the city. Substitution
allowed with prior city approval.
(3) All securities pledged to the city for certificates of deposit or demand deposits shall be held by an independent third party bank doing
business in Texas. The safekeeping bank may not be within the same holding company as the bank from which the securities are pledged.
(b) Collateralization. Collateralization is required on all time and demand deposits above FDIC insurance coverage. In order to anticipate market
changes and provide a level of additional security for all funds, the collateralization level required will be 102 percent of the book value of the principal
plus accrued interest. Collateral will be held in accordance with a written agreement approved by the pledging bank's board or loan committee to fulfill
FDIC requirements.
(c) Custody. Collateral shall be held by an independent, third party custodian approved by the city. The custodian shall provide a written monthly report
directly to the city listing all pledged collateral by description and market value at a minimum. The pledging bank is responsible for maintaining collateral
levels at all times.
(d) Authorized collateral.
(1) Obligations of the U.S. government, its agencies and instrumentalities including mortgage-backed securities and CMO which pass the bank
test;
(2) Obligations of any U.S. state, agencies, counties, cities, or other political subdivisions of any state rated at least 'A' as to investment quality
by a nationally recognized rating agency;
(3) An irrevocable letter of credit from the FHLB;
(4) Pooled collateral under the terms of the Public Funds Collateral Act.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1433,  1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 1499,  3, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-223. Performance evaluation and reporting.
The investment officer(s) shall submit monthly to the city manager and quarterly to the city council investment reports containing sufficient information to
permit an informed outside reader to evaluate the performance of the investment program and in compliance with the act. Market prices for market
valuations will be obtained from an independent source.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-224. Depositories.
(a) Banking services depository. The city will designate one banking institution through a competitive process as its central banking services provider at
least every five years. This institution will be used for normal banking services including disbursements, collections, and safekeeping of securities. In
selecting a depository, the services, cost of services, credit worthiness, earnings potential, and collateralization by the institutions shall be considered.
All time and demand deposits in any depository shall be insured or collateralized at all times in accordance with this policy.
(b) Additional depositories. Other banking institutions from which the city may purchase certificates of deposit will also be designated as a depository
after they provide their latest audited financial statements to the city. All depositories holding deposits above FDIC coverage will execute a written
depository agreement and have the bank's board or bank loan committee pass a resolution approving the agreement and provide collateral in accordance
with the policy.
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Sec. 2-225. Review and adoption by city council.
The city's investment policy and strategies shall be reviewed and adopted annually by the city council. A written resolution adopting that review and
denoting changes to the policy from the review will be passed by the city council.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 40/444
(Ord. No. 1351,  3, 5-9-06; Ord. No. 1433,  1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 1499,  4, 4-27-10; Ord. No. 1650,  1, 5-12-15)
Secs. 2-2262-239. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. PURCHASING POLICY
Sec. 2-240. Purpose and goals.
It is the purpose of this article to establish uniform guidelines by which city department can acquire goods and services. The goals are designed to:
(1) Ensure compliance with state and local laws pertaining to municipal purchasing;
(2) Ensure the lowest responsive vendor is paid for goods and services meeting city specifications;
(3) Meet the operational needs of the city;
(4) Provide a timely and cost effective method for acquiring goods and services;
(5) Provide reasonable and efficient internal controls; and
(6) Encourage competitive bidding on the part of vendors.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-241. Public records policy.
Records, including purchase orders, invitations to bid, bid tally sheets and other information of a public nature are available for review at the city
secretary's office following completion of the bidding process. Release of documents is subject to the Texas Public Information Act as may be retained
pursuant to the city's records management policy.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-242. Conflict of interest.
No officer or employee of the city shall have a financial interest directly or indirectly in any contract of the city or be financially interested directly or
indirectly in the purchase or sale of any land, supplies or services except on behalf of the city as an employee of the city.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-243. Acceptance of gifts.
The acceptance of gifts is governed by section 40-42 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances. Unless otherwise allowed, no employee shall accept a
gift from any person, firm or organization who is or is attempting to sell or buy land, supplies or equipment to the city.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-244. Prompt payment act.
(a) The V.T.C.A. Government Code,  2251.027 (e), commonly known as the Prompt Payment Code, sets out required deadlines for payment of a
government's obligations to its vendors, requirements for vendors payments to their subcontractors, and penalties for failure to comply with the Code and
exceptions to the Code.
(b) Unless the city provides otherwise on the purchase order or contracts, the Code requires political subdivisions to pay all payments owed not later
than 30 days after the goods and services are received, or the date the invoice is received, whichever is later. Interest automatically accrues at one percent
per month. The act also requires vendors to follow the same rules for payments to their subcontractors. Subcontractors must pay their suppliers, material
men and servicemen, with ten days of receipt of their payment.
(c) When the city believes there is an error received from a vendor, it has until the 21st day after receipt to notify the vendor of the dispute. If resolved in
favor of the city, the vendor must submit a new invoice and the city has 30 days to pay. If the dispute is resolved in favor of the vendor, interest is due from
the original date of the invoice. The notice shall be sent to the vendor by the director of finance, following discussions with department heads, and a copy
of the notice shall be attached to the finance department payment records.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-245. Sales tax exemptions.
(a) Tangible personal property incorporated into realty of the city under V.T.C.A. Tax Code  151.309 or 151.310 is exempt from sales and use tax.
This includes materials used in lump sum and separated contracts.
(b) Tangible personal property that is necessary or essential to the performance of a contract for the city is exempt if the property is completely
consumed at the job sites. Tangible personal property is completely consumed if, after being used once for its intended purpose it is used up or destroyed.
Machinery and equipment are not exempted and the contractor owes tax on the purchase, lease or rental of machinery, equipment, repair or replacement
parts, and accessories for the machine or equipment.
(c) Taxable services purchased for use in performing the contract will be exempt from tax if the service is performed at the job site, and the service is
either expressly required under the contract or is integral to the performance of the contract.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 41/444
(d) Sales and use tax exempt certifications and Texas resale certificate forms are issued by the contractors directly to the suppliers.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-246. Historically underutilized businesses.
(a) A municipality, in making an expenditure of more that $3,000.00 but less that $25,000.00, shall contact at least two historically underutilized
businesses (HUBS) on a rotating basis based on information provided by the Office of Small Business Assistance of the Texas Department of Commerce,
pursuant to Section 1.03 State Purchasing and General Service Act (Article 601 b, Vernon's Civil Statutes).
(b) If the list fails to identify a HUB in the county of which the city is situated, the city is exempt from this act. The City of Rockport is situated in
Aransas County.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-247. Payments withheld for delinquent taxes.
Payments for goods and services will be withheld from any person, firm or corporation when a notice of levy is issued by the Internal Revenue Service for
delinquent taxes, or when an order is received from the Federal Bankruptcy Courts.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-248. Legal considerations.
(a) All contracts, purchases and expenditures exceeding amounts as provided by state law must be expressly approved in advance by the city council and
subject to competitive bidding or competitive sealed proposals and shall be let to the bidder who is most responsive to the needs of the city after all factors
and circumstances surrounding the bid including, but not limited to the lowest price. The city council retains the right to reject all bids. Relevant purchases
order procedures in Section 3.1 of this policy procedure and other purchasing procedures in the policy should be followed for purchase and expenditures in
excess of amounts provided by state law.
(b) The exceptions to bidding requirements are stated in V.T.C.A. Local Government Code,  252.022.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-249. Notice requirements.
(a) V.T.C.A. Local Government Code,  252.041 specifies the notice requirements for municipalities. Consistent with the code, the following procedures
shall be followed:
(1) If the competitive sealed bidding requirement applies to the contract notice of the time and place which the bids will be publicly opened and
read aloud must be published at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the city's official newspaper. The date of the first publication must
be before the 14th day before the date set to publicly open the bids and read them aloud.
(2) 2. If the competitive sealed proposal requirement applies to the contract, notice of the request for proposals must be given in the same manner
as the prescribed in subsection (1) above.
(3) If the contract is for the purchase of vehicles or equipment, the notice for bids and the order for purchases must include a general
specification of the vehicle or equipment desired.
(b) Departments are responsible for submitting requests for bids and requests for proposals to the city secretary's office to allow for sufficient time for
the necessary advertisements prior to bid or proposal opening dates. The city secretary's office is responsible for placing the advertisements required.
Departments are responsible for preparing and providing to the city secretary bid invitation forms (Exhibit E) to be mailed by the city secretary to each
firm known to be interested in bidding on the goods or service to be acquired.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-250. General provisions.
The following are general provisions to be followed with regard to purchase procedures:
(1) As bids and proposals are received by the city secretary's office, they shall be stamped with the date and time of receipt, but left unopened.
(2) On the date and time of bid opening as designated in the published notice, the city secretary or other persons designated by the city manager
shall open the bids at a public meeting. If bidders are represented at the bid opening, they should be provided a tabulation of the bids/proposals
received not later that three days after bid opening and should be informed of the process and schedule to be observed in awarding the contract.
(3) If the contract is for construction of public works, the successful bidder must provide a bond for the faithful performance for the full amount
of the contract.
(4) Consistent with Section 7.09 of the City Charter, the city council may, by ordinance, confer upon the city manager general authority to
contract for expenditure without further approval of the city council for all budgeted items not exceeding limits set by the city council. Consistent
with state law, all expenditures must be approved in advance by the city council and subject to competitive bidding or competitive sealed proposals.
These provisions apply to professional service agreements.
(5) Department heads shall submit a list of individuals authorized to purchase to the finance department. This list shall contain the level at which
each individual is allowed to purchase.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 42/444
(6) It shall not be permissible to make several purchases of the same or similar items for the purpose of circumventing the competitive bidding or
competitive proposal requirements.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-251. Purchase order/purchase approval system.
(a) Purchases up to $1,000.00. A payment authorization form will be used for these purchases. The payment authorization form will be forwarded to the
accounting clerk with the original invoice for payment processing.
(b) Purchases from $1,000.00 to $25,000.00. The department head will prepare a report including at least two telephone quotes on the cost of the item to
be purchased. This report should be included n the purchase requisition form and forwarded to the accounting clerk for approval. The accounting clerk will
check the purchase requisition for budget control and issue a purchase order. Upon receipt of the signed purchase order from the accounting clerk, the
requesting department is free to make the purchase.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-252. Payment authorizations.
(a) A payment authorization form may be used for purchases of the following:
(1) Purchases made through purchasing agreements with the State of Texas, or the Government Services Association;
(2) Payment initiated by the finance department for utility bills and other similar payments;
(3) Insurance premium payments;
(4) Monthly or other regularly scheduled payments under existing contractual agreements;
(5) Professional or legal services; and
(6) Payments authorized by the city manager or his/her designee.
(b) The following information should be included on each payment authorization form:
(1) Account number from which funds will be disbursed;
(2) Payee to include name, address and phone number of vendor;
(3) Signature authorizing purchase, initials of accounting clerk confirming the availability of funds;
(4) Date submitted; and
(5) Amount of request.
(c) Receipts, invoices and/or other documentation supporting the payment authorization should be attached to the payment authorization. On occasion
there may not be a receipt, invoice or other documentation supporting the request. In these cases, the person requesting the payment should provide a
memo containing the information that should be attached to document. This memo should be signed and dated by the responsible for proving the
appropriate documentation.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-253. Emergency purchases.
(a) When an emergency arises after normal business hours, the department head may authorize the purchase and prepare a requisition the next business
day and explain the emergency in the comment section of the requisition. Upon receipt, a purchase order will be generated by the accounting clerk and sent
to the vendor for invoicing purposes.
(b) Emergencies created through negligence or improper planning must be avoided. Examples of these situations are orders for goods or services for
projects planned several weeks in advance or the depletion of stock due to inattention of supply inventory.
(c) A list of emergencies will be documented and reported to the city manager on a periodic basis. Many vendors charge premium prices for goods and
services needed on a rush basis and expedited freight service is expensive. Better prices are usually obtained through normal purchases that request
delivery in a timely manner.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 2-254. Sole source.
(a) Sole sources may occur because of the existence of patents, copyrights, secret processes or natural monopolies, such as utility services. The purchase
of comparative replacement parts or components for equipment may result in sole source procurement as well.
(b) Sole source purchases are rare and all purchase orders must contain a brief explanation why only one source is available for the purchase. Merely
listing that the purchase is sole source is not sufficient documentation for auditors and others who may question the validity of the purchase.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 43/444
Sec. 2-255. Forms and procedures.
(a) Payment authorization. The payment authorization form is used for purchases from $0.00 to $1,000.00. The objective of this form is to inform the
budget officer of the using department's need to purchase an item and to provide record to the accounting clerk of the purchase.
(b) Purchase requisition. The purchase requisition is the form needed to notify the budget or finance officer of a request to purchase merchandise or
service. The objectives of the purchase requisition are as follows:
(1) To inform the budget officer of the using department's need to purchase an item;
(2) To place an emphasis on spending control within the organization;
(3) To exercise a positive cash flow, with the finance officer exercising discretion in the purchase of the item, based upon cash available;
(4) To improve and develop proper accounting records;
(5) To exercise judgment as to the appropriateness of the proposed expenditures.
(c) Purchase requisition procedure:
(1) The department head will prepare a report of two quotes obtained for purchases of $1,000.00 and above and the department head's
recommendation. This report will be included on the purchase requisition.
(2) Purchase requisition will contain the following:
a. Department requesting purchase;
b. Date of requisition;
c. Vender name, address, and telephone number;
d. Quantities, description, unit price, and total price of purchase;
e. Explanation of reason for request;
f. Budget account number purchase will be charged to;
g. Signature of department head making request.
(d) Purchase requisition form (a duplicate form) will be sent to the accounting clerk to be verified for compliance with the budget. Accounting clerk will
approve the purchase requisition and issue a purchase order if in compliance with the budget. A signed purchase order and a copy of the purchase
Requisition will be returned to the requesting department head who may then purchase the items requested.
(e) Purchase order. The purpose of the purchase order form is to extend authorization to the vendor to ship and invoice for the merchandise ordered and
functions as a contract between the municipality and the vendor. The primary purpose of the purchase order is to provide control of purchasing for the
municipality. The accounting clerk of the finance department writes a purchase order after approval of the purchase requisition. The purchase order
extends an "authority to order" to the using department.
(f) Purchase order routing. The purchase order form should consist of an original and three copies:
(1) Copy 1-The original copy of the purchase order is submitted to the requesting department with their copy of the purchase requisition to
signify that the requisition has been authorized.
(2) Copy 2-This copy is retained by the finance department and attached to the other documents associated with the purchase in order to
formulate a payment voucher.
(3) Copy 3-The finance department retains the copy where it is placed in a file for outstanding purchase orders.
(4) Copy 4-This copy consists of the receiving report and should be provided to the using department.
(g) Receiving report. A receiving report will be submitted to indicate acknowledgment from the requesting department that the merchandise has been
received. A superintendent or department head should receive merchandise. Along with the receiving report, the requesting department should attach
freight tickets, packing slips, etc. The purpose of this report is to officially acknowledge that the municipality has received the merchandise in accordance
with the purchase order; therefore notifying the finance officer that the item described can be paid once the bill is received. If there is invalid, damaged, or
mispriced materials, a receiving report should not be prepared; Identification of damaged merchandise should be made at the time of delivery to the
delivery person.
(Ord. No. 1324,  1, 4-26-05)
Secs. 2-2562-278. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. ANNEXATION POLICY*
Sec. 2-279. Applicability.
Annexations to the City of Rockport shall be enacted in a manner consistent with the City of Rockport Comprehensive Plan, the City of Rockport Home
Rule Charter and in compliance with Texas Statutes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 44/444
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Sec. 2-280. Goal.
It is the City of Rockport's goal to ensure an orderly and sequential development of land.
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Sec. 2-281. Guiding principals for areas considered for annexation.
(a) Annexation should lead development where practical to enhance the city's ability to manage the quality and environmental impact of development on
the Live Oak Peninsular.
(b) Annexation should lead to improve services and to enhance property values.
(c) Annexations should support and/or protect future extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) areas.
(d) Annexation shall be enacted to encourage developers to extend sewer lines and other infrastructure in to newly annexed areas.
(e) The impact on citizens for areas to be annexed shall be considered but not controlling when considered with the overall benefit to all citizens of the
city.
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Sec. 2-282. Urban service eligibility.
The city shall determine, through a service plan, that adequate levels of urban services and infrastructure are available, or will be made available to the
proposed annexed area in a timely manner pursuant to state law. The service plan shall include the method and source of financing required to provide the
necessary facilities.
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Sec. 2-283. Application for voluntary annexation.
Nothing herein shall prevent a landowner from requesting voluntary annexation of their land. A landowner requesting voluntary annexation shall complete
and shall provide the following:
(1) A map indicating the proposed land to be annexed and demonstrating that the proposed annexation is contiguous to the city.
(2) Address or legal description of all lands within the proposed annexation area (Lengthy metes and bounds legal descriptions shall be provided
in electronic format as specified by the city).
(3) Names and addresses of all residents in the proposed annexation area (Signatures of all property owners within the proposed annexation area
when consent to annex is requested by the property owners themselves).
(4) Current assessed valuation of land and improvements as shown on the current Aransas County Assessor's tax rolls.
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Sec. 2-284. Annexation procedure.
Procedures for annexation and scheduling of public hearings pursuant to annexation shall be in accordance with V.T.C.A. Municipal Annexation of the
Texas Local Government Code, ch. 43.
(Ord. No. 1331,  1, 9-13-05)
Secs. 2-2852-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. DEDICATION AND/OR NAMING OF CITY FACILITIES
Sec. 2-300. Policy.
The naming of a city facility or public park may be based on the following:
(1) A significant monetary gift, grant, donation or request to the city toward the acquisition or development of a public facility;
(2) A substantial community service that has had a major impact or benefit to a large sector of the city from an individual who:
a. Demonstrated dedication to service in ways that bring special credit to the city, or
b. Volunteers and gave extraordinary help to individuals, families, groups or community services.
(Ord. No. 1438,  1, 8-12-08)
Sec. 2-301. Criteria for naming a city facility or public park.
Naming a city facility or public park after a living person or an organization is not recommended. However, there are times when the community believes
it to be the proper and necessary thing to do. The person should have made a major contribution to the city in either deed or monetary contribution. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 45/444
organization also should have made a major contribution to the city in either deed or monetary contribution. Honoring a living individual or an
organization will be subject to the most careful examination.
(1) Some criteria considerations include, but are not limited to:
a. A significant monetary contribution toward the acquisition or development of a public facility;
b. When 80 percent or more of the value of the property is donated by the person or organization;
c. When 80 percent or more of the cost of development is donated by the person or organization to the enhancement of the quality of life in
the community;
d. When a major contribution has been made by the person or organization to the enhancement of the quality of life in the community; and
e. Outstanding accomplishments by an individual for the good of the community. Quality of the contribution should be considered along
with the length of service of the individual.
(2) Implicit to the naming process is the intent of permanent recognition. Therefore, the process shall be careful and deliberate and, as much as
possible, involve the evaluation criteria as follows:
a. Fine moral character;
b. Demonstrated leadership qualities;
c. Nature of the contributions compliment and support the mission of the City of Rockport;
d. Substantial contribution, whether consisting of volunteer service, the provision of land or monetary donation; and
e. Initiative and/or involvement relating to a specific program or project of exceptional merit, which has extensively and directly benefited
the public.
(3) If the city facility or public park is to be named after an individual, it is recommended that it be after the person has been deceased for a
minimum of two years. Some criteria considerations can include:
a. Same guidelines for living people or an organization shall apply;
b. Proposed names commemorating a deceased person(s) shall be considered only if the living next of kin have approved the request;
c. Naming a city facility or public park in memory of a deceased person should not be considered until at least 12 months after the date of
the death of the person;
d. Honoring city officials, management, staff or appointed public officials who may be considered after the employment or public service
has concluded for a minimum of two years; and
e. Honoring deceased national and/or state historical leaders and/or heroes.
(4) Public parks.
a. As a general policy, public parks shall be named in accordance with the general criteria outlined above.
b. City parks may be named after a geographical designation, a predominate physical feature of the land, a historic name, organizations or
the name of an individual.
c. Community and neighborhood parks should be named after the subdivision which dedicated the land, the name of the neighborhood, an
adjacent street, organizations or the name of an individual.
d. The suffix "park" should be added to the name of the park.
e. Areas, facilities and accessories such as playgrounds, pavilions or sports fields within a park can be named differently using the above
stated criteria.
(Ord. No. 1438,  1, 8-12-08)
Sec. 2-302. Renaming of city facilities or public parks.
(a) Renaming of a city facility or public park is strongly discouraged. The primary reason is to not diminish the original justification for the name or
discount the value of the prior contributors. If a city facility or public park is proposed to be renamed, only those city facilities or public parks named for
geographic locations, outstanding features or subdivision names will be considered for renaming. City facilities and public parks named by deed
restrictions cannot be considered for renaming.
(b) Once a city facility or public park is named after an individual, the name of the public property should not be changed unless there are compelling
reasons presented for the change. Requests to change a name should be subject to the most critical examination, so as not to diminish the original
justification for the name or discount the value of the prior contributors.
(Ord. No. 1438,  1, 8-12-08)
Sec. 2-303. Procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 46/444
(a) Submission of requests. A person or organization may submit a request for naming or renaming a city facility or endorse a previously submitted
request. A request for naming or renaming a city facility or public park must include justification for the requested name. If the request is for an
individual's name, a biographical sketch of the individual, a description of the individual's involvement in the community, and the individual's connection,
if any, to the city facility or public park must be submitted.
(1) Requests for the naming or renaming of public parks or features within a public park shall be submitted in writing to the director of parks and
leisure services for presentation to the parks and leisure services advisory board.
(2) Requests for the naming or renaming of city facilities not under the management of the parks and leisure services department will be
submitted to the city secretary with all of the background information and/or letter(s) of support outlined above.
(b) Public hearing. Upon receipt of the recommendation of the parks and leisure services advisory board or direct submission for city facilities, the city
secretary will set a public hearing using existing policy for public hearings.
(c) Consideration by the city council. The city council will conduct the required public hearing. Based on the submission, the city council may require
the staff to solicit input from individuals or organizations that may have an interest in the naming or renaming, but did not provide information, either
verbally or in writing, during the public hearing.
(d) Action by the city council. No sooner than two weeks after the public hearing, the city council will consider the request. The city council is the final
authority for all such requests.
(Ord. No. 1438,  1, 8-12-08)
Chapters 3-5 RESERVED
Chapter 6
ADVERTISING*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 6-16-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SIGNS AND OUTDOOR DISPLAYS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 6-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Words and phrases not defined in this section, but defined in other ordinances of the city shall be given the meanings
set forth in such ordinance. All other words and phrases shall be given their common, ordinary meaning, unless the context clearly requires otherwise.
A-frame or sandwich sign means an advertising device which is ordinarily in the shape of an A or some variation thereof, located on the ground, easily
movable, not permanently attached thereto and which is usually two-sided.
Abandoned sign means a sign that advertises goods, products, services or facilities, which are no longer available to the public at the location of the sign.
Advertising message means that copy on a sign describing products or services being offered to the public.
Animated sign means any sign which includes action or motion. For purposes of this article, this term does not refer to flashing, changeable copy or
indexing, all of which are separately defined.
Area identification sign means a sign to identify a common area containing a group of structures, or a single structure, such as a residential subdivision,
apartment complex, industrial park or shopping center, located at the entrance of the area.
Awning means a roof-like structure which is not an integral part of the building it serves, but is an accessory; which is supported from the exterior wall and
is composed of either rigid or nonrigid materials except for the supporting framework.
Banner sign means a temporary sign composed of lightweight material secured or mounted on a building at one or more edges. National flags, state or
municipal flags, or the official flag of any institution or business shall not be considered banner signs.
Beacon means a revolving light or strobe light, which flashes or projects illumination, single color or multicolored, in any manner which is intended to
attract or divert attention; however, this term is not intended to include any kind of lighting device which is required or necessary under the safety
regulations described by the Federal Aviation Administration or similar agencies.
Billboard. See Off-premises sign or off-site sign or Outdoor advertising (posters and bulletins).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 47/444
Building means any structure designed or built for the enclosure, support, shelter or protection of persons, animals or property.
Building face or wall means all window, door and wall areas of a building in one plane or elevation.
Building marker means any sign indicating the name of a building and date and incidental information about its construction, which sign is cut into a
masonry surface or made of bronze or other permanent material.
Building official means an agent of the city authorized to permit, inspect, approve or deny construction within the jurisdiction of the city and the city's
extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), and the authorized government representative on sign issues, or his authorized representative.
Bulletin board means any sign erected by a charitable, educational or religious institution or a public body, which is erected upon the same property as the
institution, for purposes of announcing events which are held on the premises, and contains no commercial message.
Canopy. See Awning.
Canopy sign means any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic or structural protective cover over a door, entrance,
window or outdoor service area. A marquee is not a canopy.
Changeable copy sign means a sign or portion thereof with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or
surface of the sign. This includes but not limited to electronic light emitting diode (LED) signs, also known as changeable electronic variable message
signs (CEVMS).
Commercial message means any sign wording, logo or other representation that, directly or indirectly, names, advertises, or calls attention to a business,
product, service, sale or sales event or other commercial activity.
Construction sign means a temporary sign identifying a building or construction site and/or any of the architects, engineers, financial institutions,
contractors and suppliers involved.
Copy means the wording on a sign surface.
Directional sign means a sign of a noncommercial nature which directs the reader to the location of public or educational institutions, to the location of
historical structures or areas, to the location of public parks or buildings or to a business location.
Display surface area means the net geometric area enclosed by the outer extremities of all letters, characters and delineations; provided, however, the
display surface area shall not include the structural supports for freestanding signs.
District or zoning district means a part of the city wherein regulations of this article and the zoning ordinance in chapter 118 are uniform.
Entrance/exit sign. See incidental sign.
Erect means to build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix, and shall also include the painting of wall signs.
Estate sale means a sale of the property or possessions of a deceased person.
Feather flag. See pennant.
Flag means any fabric, banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or
other entity.
Flashing sign means any illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
when in use.
Freestanding sign means a sign which is attached to or a part of a completely self-supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or
below the ground surface and shall not be attached to any building or any other structure whether portable or stationary. Such sign is sometimes called a
pole sign or a pylon sign.
Frontage means the length of the property line of any one premises parallel to and along each public right-of-way it borders.
Garage/yard sale means a private sale of personal property used to dispose of personal household possessions; not for the use of any commercial venture.
Ground sign means a freestanding sign installed directly on the ground; sometimes called a monument sign.
Illuminated, direct means any sign designed to provide artificial light through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign.
Illuminated, indirect means any sign that reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it, for example, by means of floodlights, gooseneck
reflectors or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures.
Incidental sign means a secondary sign not advertising goods, products, services or facilities which are available on the premises where the sign is located
but describing such service information as necessary for the public good; i.e., credit cards accepted, official notices required by law, trade affiliations,
"entrance/exit", "loading only", "telephone", etc.
Indexing means the turning and stopping action of the sections of a multiprism sign designed to show several messages in the same area.
Joint identification sign means a sign that serves as common or collective identification for a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zone lot
(e.g., shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons or businesses included, but carry no other advertising matter.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 48/444
Lease means an agreement by which a property owner conveys, usually for a specified rent, to other persons, permission to erect and maintain an
advertising sign upon his property.
Lot means any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that
is recognized and intended as a unit for the purpose of transfer of ownership.
Mall means any concentration of retail stores and/or service establishments which share customer parking areas and are located within an enclosure having
public walkways whereby a customer in one store or establishment may walk to another store or establishment without leaving the enclosure.
Mansard roof means any roof that has an angle greater than 45 degrees and which derives part of its support from the building wall and is attached to (but
not necessarily a part of) a low slope roof and which extends along the full length of the front building wall or three-quarters of the length of a side
building wall. For purposes of this article, a low slope roof shall mean any roof with a pitch less than three inches rise per 12 inches horizontal.
Marquee means any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building,
designed and constructed as an integral part of the building to provide protection from the weather. An awning or canopy is not a marquee.
Marquee sign means any sign attached to or made a part of a marquee.
Master signage plan means an accurate plot plan to scale, showing the total of all present signs and proposed signs and their measurements.
Multiprism sign means a sign made with a series of sections that turn and stop, or flip to show several pictures or messages in the same area.
Nonconforming sign means any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully or unlawfully erected and maintained prior to November 22, 1994, and
which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this article.
Off-premises sign or off-site sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered and existing
elsewhere than upon the same lot where such sign is displayed.
On-premises sign or on-site sign means a sign which directs attention to a business, service, entertainment or attraction sold, offered and existing on the
same lot where such sign is displayed (see section 26-27 of this code).
Outdoor advertising sign means outdoor advertising signs which advertise foods, products or services not necessarily sold on the premises on which the
sign is located, are of four main types:
(1) Poster panels or bulletins normally mounted on a building wall, roof or freestanding structure with advertising copy in the form of pasted
paper.
(2) Multi-prism signs alternating advertising messages on one displayed area.
(3) Painted bulletins, where the advertiser's message is painted directly on the background of a wall-mounted, roof or freestanding display area.
(4) Changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS).
Outdoor menu board means a permanent outdoor sign, associated with restaurants with drive-through windows, which gives a detailed list of foods served
that are available at that restaurant.
Parapet or parapet wall means that portion of a building wall that rises above the roof level.
Pennant means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, string,
stick, rod, pole or self-supporting framework, usually independent or in series, designed to move in the wind. The terms vertical flag, feather flag or flags
of similar design shall have the same meaning as pennant.
Permit means a written order required by any individual, firm or corporation to construct, alter, repair (other than routine maintenance), or install any sign.
Portable sign means any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not
limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels, A- or T-frames, menu and sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used
for advertising, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in the normal dayto-
day operations of the business.
Premises means an area of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, is one unit of real estate.
Principal building means the building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is located. Lots with multiple principal uses may have
multiple principal buildings, but storage buildings, garages and other clearly accessory uses shall not be considered principal buildings.
Projecting sign means any sign that shall be affixed at an angle or perpendicularly to the wall of any building in such a manner to read perpendicularly or
at an angle to the wall on which it is mounted.
Public event means any event that is authorized by the city whether funded in part, total or not at all.
Public property means any real property owned or leased by any governmental body and including public right-of-way.
Public right-of-way means the distance across a public street, alley, or other public easement measured from one property line to another property line.
Real estate sign means a temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of advertising to the public the sale or lease of the property.
Residential sign means any sign located in a district zoned for residential uses that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods or
services legally offered on the premises where the sign is located, if offering the service at such location conforms with all requirements of the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 49/444
Roof sign means any sign erected upon, against or directly above a roof or on top of or above the parapet of a building.
Setback means the distance from the property line to the nearest part of the applicable building, structure or sign, measured perpendicularly to the property
line.
Shopping center means a group of two or more businesses sharing a common parking area, located on one platted tract of land.
Sign means any device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark, plane, point, design, picture, logo, stripe, trademark or reading matter which is used or
intended to be used to attract attention or convey information when it is placed out of doors in view of the general public.
Sign corridor zone means that portion of the Highway 35 bypass system within both the city limits of the city and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ). The sign corridor zone, however, does not include that portion of F.M. 3036 that is integral to the Highway 35 system.
Sign sticker means a sticker affixed either to the face or the channel of a sign visible from the street denoting the name of the manufacturer or designated
servicing company for purpose of identification by city officials or others.
Street means a public highway, road, alley or thoroughfare which affords the principal means of access to adjacent lots, measured from one property line to
another property line.
Street frontage means the distance for which a lot line of a lot adjoins a public street, from one lot line intersecting that street to the furthest distant lot line
intersecting the same street.
Strip center. See shopping center.
Structure means anything constructed or erected, which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground.
Suspended sign means a sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane surface and is supported by such surface.
Temporary sign means a sign that is used only temporarily and which is not permanently affixed.
Vertical flag. See pennant.
Wall sign means any sign that is affixed parallel to the wall or painted on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the wall on which
it is mounted; provided, however, the wall sign shall not project above the top of the wall or beyond the end of the building. For the purpose of this article,
any sign display surface that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be considered a wall sign.
Window sign means any sign, pictures, symbol or combination thereof, designed to communicate information about an activity, business, commodity,
event, sale or service, that is placed inside a window or upon the window.
(Ord. No. 977,  2.1, 2.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  2.1, 2.2, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1175,  1, 2-27-01; Ord. No. 1263,  1, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1310,  1, 12-
14-04; Ord. No. 1432,  1, 5-27-08; Ord. No. 1627,  1, 6-10-14)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 6-27. Scope.
The purposes of the sign regulations in this article are to encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication, to maintain and enhance the
aesthetic environment and the city's ability to attract sources of economic development and growth, to improve pedestrian and traffic safety, to minimize
the possible adverse effect of signs on nearby public and private property, and to enable the fair and consistent enforcement of the sign regulations.
(Ord. No. 977,  1.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  1.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-28. Applicability.
A sign may be erected, placed, established, painted, constructed or maintained in the jurisdiction of the city and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ)
only in conformance with the standards, procedures, exemptions and other requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  1.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  1.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-29. Reserved.
Sec. 6-30. Administration.
The building official shall be the city employee charged with the responsibility for the administration of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.1, 11-22-94)
Administration, ch. 2
Sec. 6-31. Sign building permits.
(a) No sign lawfully erected within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) prior to the effective date of Ordinance No. 987 shall require
any new permitting or registration with the city.
(b) No sign shall be erected within the city or the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) unless exempted by this article, without first obtaining a city
sign building permit as set forth in division 5 of this article. No sign building permit shall be issued by the building official in violation of this article. Any
conforming sign erected without first having been permitted shall be charged an additional administrative fee of $25.00. Any nonconforming sign erected
shall be subject to immediate removal and other penalties as set forth in division 6 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 50/444
(Ord. No. 977,  3.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-32. Computation of area, height.
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area and sign height:
(1) Computation of area of individual signs. The area of a sign face (which is also the sign area of a wall sign or other sign with only one face)
shall be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that will encompass the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, color or other display, together with any material or color forming an integral part of the background of the display
or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is placed, but not including any supporting framework, bracing, or
decorative fence or wall when such fence or wall otherwise meets these or other ordinances or regulations and is clearly incidental to the display
itself.
(2) Computation of area of multifaced signs. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of
all sign faces visible from any one point. When two identical sign faces are placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point
at the same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are not more than 42 inches apart, the sign area shall be
computed by the measurement of one of the faces.
(3) Computation of height. The height of a sign shall be computed as the distance from the base of the sign at normal grade to the top of the
highest attached component of the sign. Normal grade shall be construed to be the lower of existing grade prior to construction, or the newly
established grade after construction, exclusive of any filling, berming, mounding or excavating solely for the purpose of locating the sign. In cases
in which the normal grade cannot reasonably be determined, sign height shall be computed on the assumption that the elevation of the normal grade
at the base of the sign is equal to the elevation of the nearest point of the crown of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to
the principal structure on the lot, whichever is lower.
(4) Computation of maximum total permitted sign area for a lot. The permitted sum of the area of all individual signs on a lot shall be computed
by applying the formula in the appropriate section of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-33. Signs allowed on private property without permit.
No commercial messages are allowed on any of the signs not requiring a sign-building permit. Signs that are exempt from sign building permit
requirements are as follows:
(1) House or building identification, such as address and any building marker, having no more than four square feet and attached to the
referenced building;
(2) Personal messages, such as birth announcements, anniversaries, birthdays, not to exceed six square feet and displayed no longer than 14 days;
yard of the month signs may be displayed for 30 days;
(3) Flags of the United States of America, any state, any city or foreign nations, historical, weather and other official flags of any institution or
business. Business flags are designated as flags normally associated with a specific business such as "bait" or "antiques". Any flag not meting any
one or more of these criteria shall be considered a banner sign and shall be subject to regulation as such.
(4) Church signs as regulated in section 6-67, section 6-96, and section 6-117
(5) Incidental signs as defined in this article.
(6) Political signs as addressed in section 6-51 of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.4, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.4, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  2, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-34. Forfeiture of signs, removal by confiscation.
Any sign installed or placed on public property, except in conformance with the requirements of this article, shall be forfeited to the public and be subject
to immediate removal by confiscation. In addition to other remedies under this article, the city shall have the right to recover from the owner or person
placing such a sign the full costs of removal and disposal of the sign.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.5, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-35. Existing nonconforming signs.
Nonconforming signs may not be enlarged or altered in a way which would increase its nonconformity. Should any existing nonconforming sign be
damaged by any means to an extent of more than 50 percent of its replacement cost at time of damage, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity
with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.6, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1310,  2, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1678,  1, 2-14-17)
Sec. 6-36. Signs shall not constitute traffic hazard.
No sign or other advertising structure as regulated by this article shall be erected or continued to be displayed at the intersection of any street or any public
right-of-way in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or device.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.7, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.7, 11-22-94)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 51/444
Sec. 6-37. Placing signs on public and private property.
(a) Placing signs on public property. No signs other than signs approved by the city council shall be erected on any public property. Informational signs
may be erected upon city streets or other public property under the following conditions, once approval has been obtained:
(1) The signs direct the reader to the location of a public facility or community event attended principally by out-of-town patrons; to a facility or
community event operated by a nonprofit entity and attended principally by out-of-town patrons; to a facility relating to public health, safety or
welfare; to scenic or historic trails; or to general business or industrial districts.
(2) The signs are fabricated, erected and maintained by the entity requesting the sign.
(3) The entire cost of the signs is borne by the entity requesting the signs.
(4) The signs are installed at locations where they would not constitute a traffic hazard.
(5) The maximum number of informational signs permitted under this section shall be six for each entity; the limitation provided hereby shall not
apply to signs directing the reader (thereof) to scenic or historic trails.
(b) Placing signs on private property. No signs shall be placed on any private property, as permitted in this article, without the consent of the owner.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.8, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.8, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-38. Placing signs on trees or rocks.
No signs shall be placed or painted on any tree or rock on public property.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.9, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.9, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-39. Placing signs on utility poles.
No signs shall be placed on any utility pole, light pole or telephone pole, etc., except for utility identification or similar purposes.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.10, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.10, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-40. Signs in public right-of-way.
No signs shall be allowed in the public right-of-way, except for the following:
(1) Signs erected by a governmental agency or a franchised public utility company.
(2) Signs erected by a contractor doing authorized or permitted work within the public right-of-way.
(3) Projecting signs and marquee signs in the B-2 business district.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.11, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.11, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-41. Beacons and strobe lights.
It shall be unlawful for any person to continue in operation or erect any attraction device or sign which contains a beacon or strobe light of any type.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.12, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.12, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-42. Fluctuating illumination.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any attraction device, sign, or changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS), which flashes, blinks or
is animated except as may be authorized by this article. Illumination of attraction devices or signs located in the city that fluctuate in light intensity shall be
prohibited.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.13, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.13, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1432,  2, 5-27-08)
Sec. 6-43. Use of vehicle as sign.
It shall be unlawful to use a vehicle, boat or trailer as a sign in circumvention of this article except advertising copy may be displayed on a vehicle which is
normally used by the business in its day-to-day operations. Vehicles, boats or trailers may be used as landscaping or decoration components, but may not
display any signage and may not violate any other city ordinance.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.14, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.14, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-44. Revolving, rotating or moving signs.
It shall be unlawful to erect an attraction device or sign which revolves, rotates or otherwise moves. Refer to section 6-42 regarding animated signs.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.15, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.15, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1432,  3, 5-27-08)
Sec. 6-45. Directional signs.
(a) Directional signs on private property as permitted in this article shall be no larger than six square feet. Directional signs utilized for directions to
nonbusiness locations shall be limited to six signs for any entity. Nonbusiness directional signs shall not require sign building permits.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 52/444
(b) Directional signs utilized for directions to business locations shall be limited to two signs for any business. Information on directional signs for
businesses shall be limited to the name of the business, a directional arrow and the distance to the business location. Business directional signs shall
require sign building permits.
(Ord. No. 987,  3.16, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-46. Pennants.
(a) Pennants may be used in residential districts to designate an open house or garage sale event provided that the event lasts no more than three (3) days
and thereafter the pennant(s) is(are) immediately removed. The number of vertical flag types, specifically, shall be restricted to no more than two (2) per
property (lot) on which the event is being held.
(b) Pennants may be used in commercial and industrial districts, as in subsection (a) above, and to designate new openings or sales events, but shall be
limited to no more than 30 days of display in a rolling 90-day period. The number of vertical flag types, specifically, shall be restricted to no more than six
(6) per property (lot) on which the event is being held.
(c) Pennants may be used in all districts to control ingress and egress to undeveloped property or to designate restricted areas thereon, or areas (not
buildings) under construction or repair, access to which is restricted for purposes of public safety.
(d) All pennants must be kept in good condition at all times. Failure to maintain pennants in good condition shall be subject to penalties set forth in
division 6 of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.16, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.17, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1627,  2, 6-10-14)
Sec. 6-47. Off-premises signs.
Off-premises signs of any type are prohibited, except sponsor's signs at community-sanctioned athletic fields approved by the city council.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.17, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.18, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-48. Portable signs.
Portable signs are prohibited, whether mounted on vehicles, wheels, platforms or freestanding.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.18, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.19, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-49. Construction signs.
All construction signs shall comply with the regulations as established in section 6-62(1), section 6-82 and section 6-107.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.19, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.20, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-50. Other prohibited signs.
All signs not expressly permitted under this article or exempt from regulation under this article in accordance with section 6-51 are prohibited in the city
and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ). Such signs include, but are not limited to:
(1) Outside mannequins.
(2) Bench signs, planter box sign on public property.
(3) Billboards, outdoor advertising signs, including changeable electronic variable message signs (CEVMS). A CEVMS that becomes a part of
the city or a part of the city's ETJ because of annexation shall be allowed to continue in use for seven years, after which said sign shall either be
removed or converted to a static sign. During the seven years, such sign shall comply with section 6-100(c) of this article.
(4) Inflatable signs, tethered balloons.
(5) Strings of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background, except those exempt under the provisions of this article.
While benches and planter boxes are allowed on public property in B-2 zoning, no signage of any nature is permitted on such benches or planter boxes.
One small identification plate (no larger than two inches by six inches indicating the donor of benches or planter boxes) is permitted.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.20, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.21, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1432,  4, 5-27-08)
Sec. 6-51. Signs exempt from regulation.
The following signs shall be exempt from regulation under this article:
(1) Any public notice or warning required by a valid and applicable federal, state or local law, regulation or ordinance;
(2) Works of art that do not include a commercial message;
(3) Holiday lights and decorations with no commercial message;
(4) Traffic control signs on private property, such as "Stop," "Yield" and similar signs, the face of which meet department of transportation
standards and which contain no commercial message;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 53/444
(5) Historical markers if approved by the city council, county or state historical commissions;
(6) Community event, function or services and athletic field signs, if approved by the city council;
(7) Political signs that are less than 36 feet in area and less than eight feet high.
(Ord. No. 977,  3.21, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  3.22, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  2, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-52. Political signs in all zoning districts.
Political signs shall not be permitted within the City of Rockport or within the city's ETJ that are:
(1) Larger than 36 feet in area;
(2) Higher than eight feet above ground;
(3) Signs shall be removed within ten days following the election to which it applies; the owner of the property on which said sign is placed shall
give permission and be responsible for its removal;
(4) Signs shall not be erected or placed on public property, nor on public fences, public sign post, light poles, utility poles, etc.
(Ord. No. 1263,  2, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1371,  3, 2-27-07)
Secs. 6-536-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. RESIDENTIAL SIGNAGE
Sec. 6-61. Purpose.
This division will deal with the issuance of sign building permits in areas residentially zoned and with miscellaneous signs such as political signs,
garage/yard sale signs, real estate signs, etc.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.1, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-62. Miscellaneous signs allowed.
Signage is allowed in residential districts as follows and for those services only if properly allowed or legally offered on the premises. (Refer to zoning
ordinance for permitted uses). Exceptions shall not be construed as relieving the owner of such signs from the responsibility of complying with certain
applicable provisions of this article. The exemptions shall apply to the requirement for sign building permit only, and no sign building permit shall be
required for the erection of the following signs, unless otherwise required:
(1) Construction signs. On-site building construction signs shall have a total, combined maximum display surface area not to exceed 16
nonilluminated square feet for residential lots. These signs shall all be attached to a single or double post, or a single freestanding sign as long as
they are collectively grouped together. Only necessary signage will be allowed, and signage required by city, county, state or federal law. This
signage must be erected in an orderly manner. Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be responsible for
removing all signs.
(2) Home improvement signs. On-site home improvement signs may be placed in the yard where the improvements are being made. A home
improvement sign shall be a freestanding sign not exceeding 16 nonilluminated square feet and may be placed during construction, but must be
removed after construction is complete.
(3) Private pier signs. Pier signs may be placed on a private pier by the owner to designate restrictions, dangers or similar messages. No
commercial messages are permitted. Maximum display surface area shall not exceed eight square feet.
(4) Temporary subdivision signs. In any district, one temporary subdivision identification sign, not to exceed 32 square feet in area per surface
may be erected at any principal entrance (not to exceed two entrances) to a subdivision, provided that in no event shall such sign remain for more
than six months, or be erected within 50 feet of an unoccupied residential dwelling.
(5) Permanent subdivision signs. Permanent subdivision signs may be placed at all major entrances to the subdivision and shall be erected under
the following conditions:
a. Each sign shall require a sign building permit.
b. All signs are placed in an acceptable easement authorized for signage, not on a public right-of-way.
c. No more than two signs per entrance.
d. Display surface area not to exceed 48 square feet or eight feet in height.
e. Sign must be maintained in a clean, safe and structurally sound condition at all times by the entity requesting the sign.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.2, 4.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-63. Real estate signs.
Real estate signs are permitted in residential districts for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease of a specific piece of property under the following
conditions:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 54/444
(1) Number, type, display area permitted. A maximum of two real estate signs may be placed on a lot, provided such signs shall be limited to
wall and freestanding signs with a maximum display surface area of eight nonilluminated square feet.
(2) Temporary open house signs. Such signs, of a size not greater than eight nonilluminated square feet, may be placed at a rate of one per
company per intersection, on the days of the open house only. There shall be only one route designated by signs to a particular open house. No
more than six directional open house signs may be placed within the city limits for any one open house on any two consecutive days. All signs must
be placed on private property with approval of the property owner.
(3) Sold signs. Such signs of a size not greater than 25 percent of the sign on which it is placed, may be placed at a rate of one per lot or tract, per
company. All real estate signs shall be removed from the lot or tract within 30 days of the sale or within 30 days after the sold sign has been placed.
(4) Real estate sign building permits. Real estate signs as outlined in this section shall not require sign building permits.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.4, 11-22-94)
Cross referenceElections, ch. 34.
Sec. 6-64. Banner signs.
Banner signs shall be prohibited except when used as follows:
(1) Election campaigns. Election campaign banner sign may be placed on private property only, and removed within ten days following the
election to which the banner sign applies. The banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible for
removal of the sign. Election banner signs over eight square feet shall require a sign building permit.
(2) Public events. Public event banner signs shall be placed no earlier than 60 days prior to and removed within ten days following the event to
which the banner sign applies. This type of banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the banner sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible
for removal of the banner sign. Public event banner signs may be installed across public streets with permission of the city council.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.6, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1371,  4, 2-27-07)
Sec. 6-65. Garage/yard/estate sale signs.
The following regulations shall regulate and control garage/yard/estate sale signs:
(1) Size and type. All signs shall be no larger than four square feet, placed on a single or double stake or other freestanding structure. Signs shall
not be illuminated.
(2) Location. Such signs may be placed at a rate of one per sale per intersection, on the day of the sale only; provided, that there shall be only one
route designated by signs to a particular sale. No more than six directional sale signs may be placed within the city limits for any one sale on any
two consecutive days. All signs must be placed on private property with approval of the property owner. No garage/yard/estate sale sign shall be
placed, affixed, stapled, glued or taped to any utility pole, street sign, traffic sign, etc. No garage/yard/estate sale sign shall be placed in any public
right-of-way.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.7, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-66. Church signs.
All signs for churches in residential districts shall have permission from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.7, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.8, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-67. Marquee signs.
Marquee signs are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts.
(Ord. No. 977,  4.8, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  4.9, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-68. Directional signs.
Directional signs as allowed in this article shall be limited to wall or freestanding signs. Sign size and number of directional signs shall be regulated as
specified in section 6-45. Only nonbusiness directional signs shall be permitted in residential districts.
(Ord. No. 987,  4.10, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-69. Roof signs.
Roof signs are prohibited in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 districts. Roof signs are permitted in R-6 and R-7 districts under the following conditions:
(1) Overall height of the roof sign and the structure on which it is mounted may not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Roof signs must meet all building and electrical codes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 55/444
(Ord. No. 987,  4.11, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-70. Off-site signs.
Off-site signs of any type are prohibited. Exception: directional signs as allowed under section 6-68.
(Ord. No. 987,  4.12, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  3, 9-23-03)
Secs. 6-716-80. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. COMMERCIAL SIGNAGE
Sec. 6-81. Purpose.
This division will deal with the issuance of sign building permits in areas that are zoned commercial. Signage is allowed in commercially zoned areas as
follows in this division and only for those goods, products, services or facilities offered on the premises. A sign-building permit is required as explained in
division 5 of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 1175,  2, 2-27-01)
Sec. 6-82. Construction signs.
On-site building construction signs shall have a total combined maximum display surface area, not to exceed 32 nonilluminated square feet. These signs
shall be attached to a single or double post, or a single freestanding sign as long as they are collectively grouped together. Signage required by city, county,
state or federal law shall not exceed an additional 32 square feet. This signage must be erected in an orderly manner. Before the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be responsible for removing all signs.
(Ord. No. 987,  5.2, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-83. Roof signs.
Roof signs are permitted in commercial districts under the following conditions:
(1) Overall height of the roof sign and the structure on which it is mounted may not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Roof signs must meet all building and electrical codes.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-84. Freestanding signs.
On-site freestanding signs are subject to the following:
(1) Businesses adjoining the "sign corridor zone" may have a permanently constructed sign, installed in the ground and located on the same lot as
the business establishment to which it refers. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of highway frontage of the lot
or 300 square feet, whichever is smaller, and not to exceed 35 feet in height. Signs shall be set back sufficiently not to overhang the right-of-way
boundary. Signs shall be engineered to meet applicable wind loads as prescribed by the International Building Code.
(2) Businesses along other thoroughfares in commercially zoned districts may have a permanently constructed sign, installed in the ground and
located on the same lot as the business establishment to which it refers. Such signs shall be no higher than:
a. Eight feet above grade when sign is located within 20 feet of the property line.
b. Twenty feet above grade when sign is completely located between 20 and 150 feet of a property line.
c. Thirty-five feet above grade when sign is completely located in excess of 150 feet from a property line.
d. The height limits in a., b. and c. above do not apply to shopping centers. Shopping centers however, shall have signs no higher than 35
feet above grade.
e. For all other commercial sign applications the height limits in a., b. and c. above may be waived by the city council upon recommendation
from the city's code official in charge of administering sign regulations. The code official shall make such recommendation only when it is
determined that such sign height may constitute a traffic hazard, interfere with prevention of crime and/or interfere with landscape/tree
requirements.
(3) In addition, on-site free standing sign are subject to the following:
a. Only one on-site freestanding sign shall be permitted for each 200 linear feet of street frontage. Where more than one sign is allowed, the
signs shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart;
b. Display surface area shall be calculated as allowing one square foot of signage for each linear foot of street frontage, up to a maximum of
200 square feet;
c. A freestanding sign erected on property at intersecting public streets or on property in which private drives intersect public streets and
within a vision triangle formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at a point 20 feet from the corner lot lines shall have a vision
window of not less than seven feet under the sign nor more than three feet above the sign as measured from street level.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 56/444
d. Sign shall be set back sufficiently not to overhang the street right-of-way.
e. On-site building construction signs shall have a total, combined maximum display surface area not to exceed 32 square feet for
commercial lots. These signs shall all be attached to a single or double post, or a single freestanding sign as long as they are collectively
grouped together. Only necessary signage will be allowed, and signage required by city, county, state or federal law. This signage must be
erected in an orderly manner. Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be responsible for removing all
signs.
(4) Commercial off-site signs. Off-site signs of any type, except business directional signs as permitted in this article, are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.4, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1310,  3, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1326,  1, 4-26-05)
Sec. 6-85. Projecting signs.
Projecting signs are allowed over public property only in the downtown B-2 central business district in accordance with the prescriptive sign requirements
of the International Building Code.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.4, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.5, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-86. Wall signs.
(a) Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the surface upon which they are mounted; provided, the upper edge of a wall sign mounted on
a mansard roof may project more than 18 inches so long as the sign is perpendicular to the ground.
(b) The total signage allowed on any wall shall not be more than 20 percent of the linear wall's square footage. Where a building houses more than one
business, wall signs shall be limited in number to one wall sign per business on each wall.
(c) Reference should be made to the master signage plan set out in section 6-142.
(d) Off-site wall signs are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.6, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-87. Area identification signs.
(a) The size and location of the structure which will contain the area identification sign, must be approved by the building official, who will approve
such structure upon the criterion of traffic safety sight lines.
(b) The maximum display surface area of each area identification sign shall not exceed 32 square feet and will require a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.7, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-88. Real estate signs.
Real estate signs are permitted in commercial districts for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease of a specific piece of property under the following
conditions:
(1) Number, type, display area permitted. A maximum of two real estate signs may be placed on a lot or tract, provided such signs shall be
limited to wall and freestanding signs with a maximum display surface of 32 nonilluminated square feet.
(2) Temporary open-house signs. Such signs, of a size not greater than eight nonilluminated square feet, may be placed at a rate of one per
company per intersection, on the days of the open house only. There shall be only one route designated by signs to a particular open house. No
more than six directional open house signs may be placed within the city limits for any one open house on any two consecutive days. All signs must
be placed on private property with approval of the property owner.
(3) Sold signs. Such signs of a size not greater than 25 percent of the sign on which it is placed, may be placed at a rate of one per lot or tract, per
company. All real estate signs shall be removed from the lot or tract within 30 days of the sale or within 30 days after the sold sign has been placed.
(4) Real estate sign building permits. Real estate signs as outlined in this section shall not require sign building permits.
(Ord. No. 987,  5.8, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-89. Fuel price informational signs.
Signs advertising the price of motor fuels sold from a fuel pump located on the premises shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions:
(1) Only one fuel price changeable copy sign shall be affixed directly and firmly to a fuel pump. Such sign shall be limited in size to an area of
216 square inches; or
(2) Fuel price changeable copy signs for each type of fuel sold shall be affixed directly and firmly to the free standing informational sign as
allowed in section 6-84. Size and area of said fuel price signs shall be limited to 16 square feet per fuel grade with a total of 64 square feet
maximum allowed; or
(3) One freestanding changeable copy sign is allowed in addition to the main free standing sign as addressed in section 6-84. The size of the
freestanding fuel price sign shall be the same as in subsection (2) above. The height of said sign shall be in accordance with section 6-84.
(4) Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit the use of other signs meeting the requirements of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 57/444
(Ord. No. 977,  5.7, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.9, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1310,  4, 12-14-04)
Sec. 6-90. Barber poles.
Nothing contained in this division shall prohibit or restrict on-premises barber poles. Barber poles shall be permitted on the public right-of-way provided
that the poles are permanently attached to the structure or building.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.8, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.10, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-91. Freestanding bulletin boards.
No freestanding bulletin board shall exceed 16 square feet in display surface area.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.9, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.11, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-92. Signs on windows or doors.
Signs on or affixed to glass surfaces of windows or doors shall be allowed without a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.10, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.12, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-93. Directional signs.
Directional signs as allowed in this article shall be limited to wall or freestanding signs. Sign size, number and information limitations for directional signs
shall be regulated as specified in section 6-45.
(Ord. No. 987,  5.13, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-94. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1310,  5, adopted Dec. 14, 2004, deleted  6-94, which pertained to identification and informational signs and derived from Ord. No. 977,  5.11, adopted July
12, 1994; Ord. No. 987,  5.14, adopted Nov. 22, 1994.
Sec. 6-95. Church signs.
All signs for churches in commercial districts shall have permission from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.12, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.15, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-96. Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit organizations.
Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit organizations containing no commercial message and located on private nonresidential property are allowed
without a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.13, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.16, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-97. Banner signs.
Banner signs shall be prohibited except when used as follows:
(1) Election campaigns. Election campaign banner signs may be placed on private property only, and removed within ten days following the
election to which the banner sign applies. The banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the banner sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible
for removal of the banner sign. Election banner signs over eight square feet shall require a sign building permit.
(2) Public events. Public event banner signs shall be placed no earlier than 60 days prior to and removed within ten days following the event to
which the banner sign applies. This type of banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the banner sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible
for removal of the banner sign. Public event banner signs may be installed across public streets with permission of the city council.
(3) Commercial sale events. Banner signs placed on private property for advertising a special sales event or grand opening are exempt only on
the following conditions:
a. The banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to support banner signs must be
securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
b. Two banner signs may be permitted for each 200 linear feet of street frontage. A maximum of four banner signs shall be allowed for any
commercial business.
c. On property subject to master signage plan requirements as specified in section 6-142, banner signs must be included in the master
signage plan.
d. All banner signs must be maintained in good condition at all times. Torn, improperly installed or deteriorated banner signs must be
repaired, replaced or removed. Failure to correct such conditions shall be subject to enforcement and remedies as specified in division 5 and
division 6 of this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 58/444
(Ord. No. 977,  5.14, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.18, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1371,  5, 2-27-07)
Sec. 6-98. Building marker.
Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible materials are allowed. Maximum size for building markers shall be eight square feet. Building markers shall not require a sign building
permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.15, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.19, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-99. Outdoor menu board.
Outdoor menu boards are only allowed on lots which have been approved for restaurants with drive-through windows and under the following conditions:
(1) Only one outdoor menu board shall be permitted, per order station, on a lot.
(2) Display surface area shall not exceed 32 square feet.
(Ord. No. 977,  5.16, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  5.20, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  4, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-100. Changeable copy signs.
(a) Only one changeable copy sign shall be allowed for movie theaters in addition to a freestanding sign permitted under section 6-84. Maximum sign
size and height shall be in accordance with required regulations applicable under section 6-84.
(b) Only one changeable copy sign shall be allowed as part of a freestanding sign permitted under section 6-84.
(c) Electronic changeable copy signs may be permitted as addressed in subsections (a) and (b) above, provided the electronic message shall appear and
remain static for a period of no less than 60 seconds (time and temperature signs being the exception), whereas such message shall immediately be
replaced by another message or symbol. Such message or symbol shall meet the criteria as addressed in sections 6-42 and 6-44 of this article. The intensity
of electronic illumination shall be lessened during the night time hours of operation in accordance with the city's light nuisance ordinance. This provision
does not apply to any traffic signalization device or highway information sign regulated by local, state or federal law.
(d) A changeable copy sign or electronic message board sign shall not be allowed as a wall sign.
(Ord. No. 1310,  6, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1326,  3, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 1432,  4, 5-27-08)
Sec. 6-101. Rockport Heritage District Signs.
(a) Free-standing signs, commonly known as "Sandwich Boards", are permitted on the Austin Street sidewalks in the Rockport Heritage District only as
provided by this section.
(b) A business may place one sandwich board sign on a city sidewalk when the sign advertising its wares, services, or location on a permissible city
sidewalk if the sign meets all of the following conditions:
(1) A maximum of three feet high and two feet wide in size;
(2) Contains the name of the business;
(3) Is weighted down securely;
(4) Is positioned entirely within two feet of the business's building front when the sidewalk is a six feet or wider concrete sidewalk and does not
otherwise interfere with pedestrian traffic;
(5) Does not use movable lettering except for chalk boards; and
(6) During such business's open hours of operation.
(c) No business may place a sign advertising its wares, services or location on the Austin Street sidewalks unless such business is located on said streets
or such business is located within 150 feet of Austin Street.
(d) The city may remove any permitted sign that is found in violation of this section, or is otherwise considered a pedestrian hazard.
(Ord. No. 1504,  1, 6-8-10)
Secs. 6-1026-105. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. INDUSTRIAL SIGNAGE
Sec. 6-106. Purpose.
This division will deal with the issuance of sign building permits in areas that are zoned industrial. Signage is allowed in industrial zoned areas as follows
in this division and for those services only if properly allowed and legally offered on the premises. However, a sign building permit is required as
explained in division 5 of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.1, 11-22-94)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 59/444
Sec. 6-107. Construction signs.
On-site building construction signs shall have a total, combined maximum display surface area not to exceed 64 nonilluminated square feet for industrial
lots. These signs shall be attached to a single or double post, or a single freestanding sign as long as they are collectively grouped together. Only necessary
signage will be allowed and must be erected in an orderly manner. Before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the builder/contractor shall be
responsible for removing all signs.
(Ord. No. 987,  6.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-108. Roof signs.
Roof signs are permitted in industrial districts under the following conditions:
(1) Overall height of the roof sign and the structure on which it is mounted may not exceed 35 feet.
(2) Roof signs must meet all building and electrical codes.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-109. Freestanding signs.
On-site freestanding signs are subject to the following:
(1) Industries adjoining the "sign corridor zone" may have a permanently constructed sign, installed in the ground and located on the same lot as
the business establishment to which it refers. The total sign area shall not exceed two square feet for each lineal foot of highway frontage of the lot
or 300 square feet, whichever is smaller, and not to exceed 35 feet in height. Signs shall be set back sufficiently not to overhang the right-of-way
boundary. Signs shall be engineered to meet applicable wind loads as prescribed in the International Building Code.
(2) Businesses along other thoroughfares in industrially zoned districts may have a permanently constructed sign, installed in the ground and
located on the same lot as the business establishment to which it refers. Such signs shall be no higher than:
a. Eight feet above grade when sign is located within 20 feet of the property line.
b. Twenty feet above grade when sign is completely located between 20 and 150 feet of a property line.
c. Thirty-five feet above grade when sign is completely located in excess of 150 feet from a property line.
d. The height limits in a., b. and c. above do not apply to shopping centers. Shopping centers however, shall have signs no higher than 35
feet above grade.
e. For all other industrial sign applications the height limits in a., b. and c. above may be waived by the city council upon recommendation
from the city's code official in charge of administering sign regulations. The code official shall make such recommendation only when it is
determined that such sign height may constitute a traffic hazard, interfere with prevention of crime and/or interfere with landscape/tree
requirements.
(3) In addition, on-site free standing sign are subject to the following:
a. Only one on-site freestanding sign shall be permitted for each 200 linear feet of street frontage. Where more than one sign is allowed, the
signs shall be spaced at least 200 feet apart;
b. Display surface area shall be calculated as allowing one square foot of signage for each linear foot of street frontage, up to a maximum of
200 square feet;
c. A freestanding sign erected on property at intersecting public streets or on property in which private drives intersect public streets and
within a vision triangle formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at a point 20 feet from the corner lot lines shall have a vision
window of not less than seven feet under the sign nor more than three feet above the sign as measured from street level.
Sign shall be set back sufficiently not to overhang the street right-of-way.
(4) Industrial off-site. Off-site signs of any type, except business directional signs as permitted in this article, are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.4, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  5, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1310,  7, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1326,  2, 4-26-05)
Sec. 6-110. Projecting signs.
Projecting signs are allowed over public property only in the downtown B-2 central business district in accordance with the prescriptive sign requirements
of the International Building Code.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.4, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.5, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  5, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-111. Wall signs.
(a) Wall signs shall not project more than 18 inches from the surface upon which they are mounted; provided, the upper edge of a wall sign mounted on
a mansard roof may project more than 18 inches so long as the sign is perpendicular to the ground.
(b) The total signage allowed on any wall shall not be more than 20 percent of the linear wall's square footage. Where a building houses more than one
industry, wall signs shall be limited in number to one wall sign per industry on each wall. Maximum display surface for any one industry wall sign shall be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 60/444
32 square feet. The total display surface for all industries in the building shall not exceed the 20-percent rule on any wall.
(c) Reference should be made to the master signage plan set out in section 6-142.
(d) Off-site wall signs are prohibited.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.6, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-112. Area identification signs.
(a) The size and location of the structure which will contain the area identification sign, must be approved by the building official, who will approve
such structure upon the criterion of traffic safety sight lines.
(b) The maximum display surface area of each area identification signs shall not exceed 32 square feet and will require a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.7, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-113. Real estate signs.
Real estate signs are permitted in industrial zones for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease of a specific piece of property under the following
conditions:
(1) Number, type, display area permitted. A maximum of two real estate signs may be placed on a lot or tract, provided such signs shall be
limited to wall and freestanding signs with a maximum display surface of 32 nonilluminated square feet.
(2) Temporary open house signs. Such signs, of a size not greater than eight nonilluminated square feet, may be placed at a rate of one per
company per intersection, on the days of the open house only. There shall be only one route designated by signs to a particular open house. No
more than six directional open house signs may be placed within the city limits for any one open house on any two consecutive days. All signs must
be placed on private property with approval of the property owner.
(3) Sold signs. Such signs of a size not greater than 25 percent of the sign on which it is placed, may be placed at a rate of one per lot or tract, per
company. All real estate signs shall be removed from the lot or tract within 30 days of the sale or within 30 days after the sold sign has been placed.
(4) Real estate sign building permits. Real estate signs as outlined in this section shall not require sign building permits.
(Ord. No. 987,  6.8, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-114. Signs on windows or doors.
Signs on or affixed to glass surfaces of windows or doors shall be allowed without a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.7, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.9, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-115. Directional signs.
Directional signs as allowed in this article shall be limited to wall or freestanding signs. Sign size, number and information limitations for directional signs
shall be regulated as specified in section 6-45.
(Ord. No. 987,  6.10, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-116. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1310,  8, adopted Dec. 14, 2004, deleted  6-116, which pertained to identification and informational signs and derived from Ord.
No. 977,  6.8, adopted July 12, 1994; Ord. No. 987,  6.11, adopted Nov. 22, 1994.
Sec. 6-117. Church signs.
All signs for churches in industrial districts shall have written permission from the owner of the property on which the sign is to be placed.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.9, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.12, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-118. Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit organizations.
Collection boxes for charitable or nonprofit organizations containing no commercial message and located on private nonresidential property are allowed
without a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.10, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.13, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-119. Banner signs.
Banner signs shall be prohibited except when used as follows:
(1) Election campaigns. Election campaign banner signs may be placed on private property only, and removed within ten days following the
election to which the banner sign applies. The banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the banner sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible
for removal of the banner sign. Election banner signs over eight square feet shall require a sign building permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 61/444
(2) Public events. Public event banner signs shall be placed no earlier than 60 days prior to and removed within ten days following the event to
which the banner sign applies. This type of banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to
support banner signs must be securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
Permission must be obtained from the owner of the property on which the banner sign is to be placed. The property owner shall also be responsible
for removal of the banner sign. Public event banner sign may be installed across public streets with permission of the city council.
(3) Private sales events. Banner signs placed on private property for advertising special services, a sales event or grand opening are exempt only
under the following conditions:
a. The banner sign must be attached to a building or permanent structure. Stakes of any material used to support banner signs must be
securely installed in the ground. Each stake must have a minimum cross section area of three square inches.
b. Two banner signs may be permitted for each 200 linear feet of street frontage. A maximum of four banner signs shall be allowed for any
industrial business.
c. On property subject to master signage plan requirements as specified in section 6-142, banner signs must be included in the master
signage plan.
d. All banner signs must be maintained in good condition at all times. Torn, improperly installed or deteriorated banner signs must be
repaired, replaced or removed. Failure to correct such conditions shall be subject to enforcement and remedies as specified in division 5 and
division 6 of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.10, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.15, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  5, 9-23-03; Ord. No. 1371,  5, 2-27-07)
Sec. 6-120. Building marker.
Memorial signs or tablets, names of buildings and date of erection when cut into any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
incombustible materials are allowed. Maximum size for building markers is eight square feet. Building markers shall not require a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  6.11, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  6.16, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1263,  5, 9-23-03)
Sec. 6-121. Fuel price informational signs.
Signs advertising the price of motor fuels sold from a fuel pump located on the premises shall be the same as prescribed in section 6-89.
(Ord. No. 1310,  9, 12-14-04)
Sec. 6-122. Changeable copy signs.
Changeable copy signs for industrial areas shall be the same as prescribed in section 6-100.
(Ord. No. 1310,  9, 12-14-04)
Secs. 6-1236-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. PERMITS AND FEES
Sec. 6-131. General permit procedures.
(a) If a sign requiring a permit under the provisions of this article is to be placed, constructed, erected or modified on a lot, the owner of the lot,
authorized agent or contractor shall secure a sign building permit prior to the construction, placement, erection or modification of such a sign.
(b) No signs shall be erected in the public right-of-way except in accordance with this article.
(c) No sign building permit shall be issued for modification or repair of an existing or proposed sign unless such modification or repair or proposed sign
is consistent with the requirements of this article in every respect and with the master signage plan in effect for that property. Minor routine maintenance
shall not require a sign building permit.
(d) The procedures set out in this division shall govern the application for and issuance of all sign building permits under this article, and the submission
and review of master signage plans.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-132. Applications.
All applications for sign building permits of any kind and for approval of a master signage plan shall be submitted to the building official on an approved
form.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.1, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-133. Fees.
A sign building permit fee as stated in chapter 22, article IX shall be required for the construction, placement, erection or modification of each sign.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-134. Review for completeness.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 62/444
The building official shall review an application for a sign building permit or for a master signage plan for completeness. If the application is complete,
then it shall be processed within ten working days. If it is found to be incomplete, the building official shall not issue a sign building permit, but shall
provide the applicant written notice of the deficiencies, with appropriate references to the applicable sections of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-135. Drawings and specifications.
The building official may require detailed drawings, computations, stress diagrams and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and
the basis of calculations.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.4, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.4, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-136. Action, time frame.
The building official shall act upon an application for a sign building permit within ten working days.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.5, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-137. Refusal to issue sign building permit.
The building official shall not issue a sign building permit if the application fails to conform with the requirements of this article, any applicable master
signage plan or other ordinance of the city. Such refusal shall be in writing and shall contain the reason for refusal.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.1.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.1.6, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-138. Sign building permits to construct or modify signs.
(a) Sign building permit for new sign or for sign modification. Signs shall be erected, installed, constructed or modified only in accordance with a duly
issued and valid sign building permit. Minor routine maintenance shall not require a sign building permit.
(b) Inspection. The building official shall cause an inspection of the permitted sign construction upon request of the sign building permit holder or his
agent. If the sign construction is complete and in full compliance with this article and other ordinances of the city, the building official shall approve the
construction and accept the sign as complete. If the sign is not in full compliance, the building official shall refuse to approve the construction and shall
notify the applicant in writing of the deficiencies and shall allow 14 days for correction of the deficiencies and reinspection.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-139. Design and construction.
All signs erected after the date of adoption of Ordinance No. 987 or an existing nonconforming sign damaged more than 60 percent of the replacement cost
as designated in section 6-45 shall comply with the applicable provisions of this article, the building code, electrical code, and any other applicable
ordinance of the city. Except for banner signs, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all
signs shall be permanently attached to the ground or to a building or other structure by direct attachment to a rigid wall, frame or structure. The conversion
of signs from one type or classification to another shall require a sign building permit.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.3, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-140. Sign maintenance.
All signs shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, safe and structurally sound condition.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.4.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.4, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-141. Unsafe and unlawful signs.
If any sign is found to be unsafe, insecure, a hazard to the public, abandoned, maintained in a dilapidated condition or otherwise constructed in violation of
the provisions of this article, the building official shall give written notice to the sign permittee or to the property owner to either abate or repair said sign
in accordance with the provisions contained herein and with the city's building code. If the permittee and/or property owner fails to remove or alter the sign
or advertising structure so as to comply with the standards set forth in this article within ten days of the date of written notice, such sign or other
advertising structure may be removed by the city. Any expense incidental to such removal shall be charged to the owner of the property upon which the
sign is located and shall constitute a lien upon the property.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.4.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.5, 11-22-94; Ord. No. 1175,  3, 2-27-01)
Sec. 6-142. Master signage plan, commercial and industrial zoning.
No sign building permit shall be issued for an individual sign requiring a sign building permit in a commercial and/or industrial zoning district, where
more than one business or industry will be located, unless and until a master signage plan for the lot on which the sign will be erected has been submitted
to the building official and approved as conforming to this section:
(1) Contents of master signage plan. For any commercial or industrial zoned lot on which the owner proposes to erect one or more signs
requiring a sign building permit, the owner shall submit to the building official a master signage plan containing the following:
a. An accurate plot plan of the lot, at such scale as the building official may reasonably require.
b. Location of buildings, parking lots, driveways and landscaped areas on the lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 63/444
c. Computation of the maximum total sign area, the maximum area for individual signs, the height of signs and the number of freestanding
signs allowed on the lot(s) included in the plan under this article.
d. An accurate indication on the plot plan of the proposed location of each present and future sign of any type, whether requiring a sign
building permit or not, except that incidental signs need not be shown.
(2) Window signs. A master signage plan including window signs may simply indicate the areas of the windows to be covered by window signs
and the general type of the window signs (e.g., paper affixed to window, painted, etched on glass, or some other material hung inside window) and
need not specify the exact dimension or nature of every window sign.
(3) Limit on number of freestanding signs. The master signage plan, for all lots with multiple uses or multiple users, shall limit the number of
freestanding signs by providing for shared or common usage of such signs (see section 6-84(1) or section 6-109(1)).
(4) Other restrictions. The master signage plan may contain such other restrictions as the owners of the lots may reasonably determine.
(5) Consent. The master signage plan shall be signed by all owners or their authorized agents.
(6) Included with other procedures. A master signage plan shall be included in any development plan, site plan, planned unit development plan or
other official plan required by the city for the proposed development and may be processed simultaneously with such other plan.
(7) Amendment. A master signage plan may be amended by filing a new master signage plan. Additions and changes in the amended plan must
conform with all requirements of the ordinance then in effect.
(8) Binding effect. After approval of a master signage plan, no sign shall be erected, placed, painted or maintained in operation, except in
conformance with such plan, and such plan may be enforced in the same way as any provision of this article. In case of any conflict between the
provisions of such a plan and any other provisions of this article, this article shall control.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.5, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.6, 11-22-94)
Cross referenceZoning, ch. 118.
Sec. 6-143. Sign building permit revocable.
(a) Misrepresentation of application. The building official may revoke a sign building permit or approval in case there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to the material fact in the application or plans on which the permit or approval was based.
(b) Violation of provisions. The building official may revoke a sign building permit upon determination that the construction, erection, alteration or
repair for which the sign building permit was issued is in violation of, or not in conformity with, the provisions of this article.
(c) Expiration. Sign building permits shall expire 60 days after issuance if work has not commenced. A sign building permit also expires if work is
discontinued or abandoned for a period of 30 days.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.6, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.7, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-144. Stop work orders.
Upon notice from the building official, work on any sign that is being done contrary to the provisions of this article or in a dangerous or unsafe manner,
shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property or his agent and shall state the conditions under
which work may be resumed.
(Ord. No. 977,  7.7, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  7.8, 11-22-94)
Secs. 6-1456-155. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES
Sec. 6-156. Violations.
Any of the following shall be a violation of this article and shall be subject to the enforcement remedies and penalties provided by this article or by other
applicable ordinances or state laws:
(1) To install, construct, erect or maintain in operation any sign in a way that is inconsistent with any plan or sign building permit governing such
sign or the lot on which the sign is located.
(2) To install, construct, erect or maintain in operation any sign requiring a sign building permit without such a sign building permit.
(3) To fail to remove any sign that is installed, constructed, erected or maintained in operation in violation of this article.
(4) To continue any such violation. Each such day of a continued violation shall be considered a separate violation when applying the penalty
portions of this article.
(5) Each sign installed, constructed, erected or maintained in violation of this article shall be considered a separate violation when applying the
penalty portions of this article.
(Ord. No. 977,  8.1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  8.1, 11-22-94)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 64/444
Sec. 6-157. Enforcement, remedies.
Any violation of this article or of any condition or requirement adopted pursuant to this article may be restrained, corrected or abated, as the case may be,
by injunction or other appropriate proceedings pursuant to state law. The remedies of the city shall include following:
(1) Issuing a stop work order for any and all work on any sign on the same lot.
(2) Seeking an injunction or other order of restraint of abatement that requires the removal of the signs or the correction of the nonconformity.
(Ord. No. 977,  8.2, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  8.2, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-158. Penalties.
(a) Criminal. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article, shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of up to
$500.00.
(b) Civil. The city may file a civil action in the district court seeking an injunction and civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 per day for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued.
(Ord. No. 977,  8.3, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 987,  8.3, 11-22-94)
State law referenceEnforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54.
Sec. 6-159. Provisions declared to be minimum requirements.
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health,
safety and general welfare. Whenever the requirements of this article are at variance with the requirements of any other city ordinance or state law the
highest or most restrictive standard shall apply.
(Ord. No. 987,  8.4, 11-22-94)
Sec. 6-160. Grievances.
Recourse for grievances involving interpretations and applications of this article shall be to the city manager. Such grievances shall be presented to the city
manager, in writing, within ten days from the date of the disputed interpretation or application of this article.
(Ord. No. 987,  8.6, 11-22-94)
Chapters 7-9 RESERVED
Chapter 10
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES*
Sec. 10-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words, terms, and phrases, are as defined in the Alcoholic
Beverage Code of the State of Texas.
(Ord. No. 1591,  1, 2, 10-23-12)
Sec. 10-2. Local permit fee.
(a) There is hereby levied upon the permittee of a required state permit to sell, manufacture, store or deliver liquor, wine or beer from any premises
located within the city a local fee equal to one-half of the state fee.
(b) The following are exempt from the fee authorized in this section:
(1) Agent's, airline beverage, passenger train beverage, industrial, carrier's, private carrier's, private club registration, local cartage, storage, and
temporary wine and beer retailer's permits;
(2) A wine and beer retailer's permit issued for a dining, buffet, or club car; and
(3) A mixed beverage permit during the three-year period following the issuance of the permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 65/444
(c) A permittee who sells an alcoholic beverage without first having paid a fee levied under this section commits a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of
not less than $10.00 nor more than $200.00.
(Ord. No. 1591,  1, 2, 10-23-12)
Sec. 10-3. Consumption of alcoholic beverage in a public place.
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to consume any alcoholic beverages in any public place or for any person to possess any alcoholic
beverage in any public place for the purpose of consuming the alcoholic beverage in such public place, at any time on Sunday between the hours of 2:15
a.m. and 12:00 noon, and on all other days at any time between the hours of 2:15 a.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(Ord. No. 1591,  1, 2, 10-23-12)
Secs. 10-410-20. Reserved.
Chapters 11-13 RESERVED
Chapter 14
AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 14-1. Permit for shows, performances, other amusements.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to give, conduct, exhibit, maintain or procure any show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement of any
character whatsoever within the corporate limits of the city, unless such person first obtains a permit to do so from the city secretary. Application for such
permit shall be filed at least 24 hours in advance of the proposed opening date of the show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement.
(b) The fee for a permit under this section shall be $50.00; provided, however, that the city council may, in its discretion, waive the payment of the fee.
(c) A permit shall be issued under this section upon such terms and conditions as shall be deemed advisable by the city council for the protection of the
public from fire and traffic hazards, disease, loud and unusual noises, unsanitary conditions and public inconvenience.
(d) The city manager, with the approval of the council, shall have the power to revoke a permit issued under this section and prohibit the further giving,
conducting, showing, exhibiting or maintaining such show, performance, exhibition or place of amusement for the violation of any city ordinance or
gaming law of the state, or for the creation, maintenance or permitting the creation or maintenance of any fire or traffic hazard, unsanitary condition, or for
permitting loud noises upon the premises used for such show or exhibition. Upon such revocation, the permittee shall not be entitled to any sum in refund
for the fee paid by him.
(e) This section shall apply to all shows, performances, exhibitions, medicine shows, panoramic or view shows, menageries, carnivals, circuses, wild
west or rodeo shows, acrobatic performances, wax shows, dramatic or theatrical productions or skating rinks held in or exhibited upon any lot or parcel of
land, upon the streets or under any tent, or in any hall or building within the city limits.
(Code 1972,  4-1)
Secs. 14-214-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. POOL HALLS
Sec. 14-26. Application of article.
This article shall apply to all pool halls operated for a profit within the city.
(Code 1972,  4-12)
Sec. 14-27. Hours of operation.
Pool halls shall be operated only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. of any weekday, and between the hours of 1:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m. on
Sunday. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or keep open any such place during any other hours.
(Code 1972,  4-13)
Sec. 14-28. Duty of proprietor to keep order.
It shall be the duty of every proprietor or keeper of any pool hall to keep good order within the pool hall, and to prevent all persons who may be therein
from disturbing the peace.
(Code 1972,  4-14)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 66/444
Sec. 14-29. Minors under 16 prohibited; sign required.
(a) No person operating or having the control of any pool hall shall permit or allow any minor under the age of 16 years to play pool or to use any
billiard or pool table, or to be or remain in or frequent such pool hall.
(b) It shall be the duty of any person who is the proprietor or keeper of a pool hall to post conspicuously in his place of business the following sign:
"Minors under the age of 16 years not allowed here."
(Code 1972,  4-15)
Chapters 15-17 RESERVED
Chapter 18
ANIMALS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 18-1. Cruelty to animals.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to wantonly or cruelly or unmercifully beat or abuse any horse, mule, jack, jennet,
cattle, sheep, goat, dog or any other domesticated animal or bird.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person within the limits of the city to knowingly ride, work or use any horse, mule or ass which is suffering from any
disease, lameness or other physical defect or injury rendering the animal unfit for such service.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person:
(1) To sell, offer for sale, barter or give away baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three weeks old or rabbits under two months old.
(2) To color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of any chickens, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits, or to possess any of the above
mentioned animals which have been so colored.
(Code 1972,  5-4; Ord. No. 1270,  1, 11-18-03)
State law referenceCruelty to animals, V.T.C.A., Penal Code  42.09.
Secs. 18-218-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ANIMAL CONTROL*
Sec. 18-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Abandon means to forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or possession of a person without making reasonable arrangement for its
proper care, sustenance and shelter.
Agent means any peace officer acting in official capacity under the representation of his or her official duties, representing on behalf of the animal control
officer.
Animal means any living vertebrate creature, domestic or wild, other than Homo sapiens, including but not limited to mannals, birds, fowl, reptiles and
fish, except when referring specifically to the control of rabies where the meaning of the word "animal" shall be limited to mammals, domestic and wild.
Animal control officer means the person or persons employed by the animal control department as its enforcement officer.
Animal establishment means any facility operated for the sale, care, grooming, breeding, display, training, keeping or boarding or raising of animals. This
definition does not apply to veterinary medical facilities or to shelters or facilities operated by municipalities or other governmental entity.
Animal fancier means a person owning, keeping, or harboring more than four animals (dogs, cats or any combination thereof), more than four months old.
By city ordinance, an animal fancier shall maintain animals and property in such a way that it does not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding occupants
or residents in terms of odors, noise, or pose a danger.
Animal shelter means a facility that keeps or legally impounds stray, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals and complies with the standards and
requirements of animal shelters prescribed in chapters 823 and 826 of the Texas Health & Safety Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 67/444
At-large or running at-large means that any any animal without physical restraint and beyond the property of the animal's owner or keeper. (Hunting dogs,
stock dogs and show dogs and cats or other animals, while being worked or shown under the supervision and control of their owner's or the agent's or
employees of said owners, are exempt from this definition.)
Bite means the breaking of the skin by an animal's teeth, mouth, claws or beak.
Cat means a domesticated member of the Felidae (feline) family, other than a lion, tiger, bobcat, jaguar, panther, leopard, cougar, ocelot, margay or cat
hybrid.
Circus means a commercial variety show featuring animal acts for public entertainment.
Collar means a band, choke chain, harness or other device worn around the neck of an animal in a humane way to which a vaccination tag and license may
be affixed.
Commercial livery stable means any establishment where one or more horses are boarded for a fee.
County animal shelter means a place operated by or for the county, whether county facilities or by contract, for the detention of dogs and other animals, as
prescribed by law.
County Health officer means that the director of environmental health authority is designated as the county health officer for the purposes of this order.
Cruelly-ill treat means every act or failure to act whereby unjustifiable physical or mental pain or suffering is caused or permitted.
Dangerous animal means any animal that bites or scratches or attacks any other animal or any human being within the city limits without provocation.
(V.T.C.A. Health & Safety Code 822.031)
Dog means a domesticated member of the Canidae (canine) family other than a wolf, jackal, fox, dingo, coyote or dog hybrid.
Exposed to rabies. A dog or cat has been exposed to rabies within the meaning of this article if it has been bitten by or been exposed to any animal known
or suspected to have been infected with rabies.
Horse means any horse, any, donkey or mule of the Equidae family.
Hybrid means the offspring produced by crossing two animals of different races, varieties or species or unlike genetic constitution, including but not
limited to dog-wolf crosses and cat-ocelot crosses.
Impound means to take into custody or to place in the county animal shelter.
Kennel. Any place of business at which more than four animals (dogs, cats, or any combination thereof), more than four months of age, are kept for the
sale, breeding, boarding, training, or other commercial purposes to include, but not limited to, retail or wholesale trade. By city ordinance, a kennel shall
maintain animals and property in such a way that it does not constitute a nuisance to the surrounding occupants or residents in terms of odors, noise, or
pose a danger.
Licensed veterinarian means a veterinarian licensed by the Texas Board of Veterinary Medical Examiners.
Livestock means horses, mules, jacks, jennies, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats and similar animals.
Nuisance by an animal means the damaging, soiling, defiling, urinating or defecating upon, or repeatedly trespassing upon property other than its owner's.
Excessive, continuous or unreasonable, unwarranted whining, howling, barking or annoying noise making so as to disturb the peace and repose of persons
living or working nearby. Molesting, threatening, attacking or interfering with persons on private or public property, chasing motor vehicles or bicycles,
attacking other domestic animals, or disturbing or turning over garbage or trash containers, or causing unsanitary conditions or odors on or about the
premises of its owner by urination or defecation. Is at large beyond the property of its owner or is a dangerous animal within V.T.C.A. Health & Safety
Code.
Owner means any person, who has a right of property in an animal, or who keeps an animal in his care, harbors an animal, acts as custodian for an animal,
or who permits an animal to remain on or about his premises. An animal is harbored if it is fed or sheltered.
Peace officer means any commissioned officer acting on behalf of the state: Police officers, sheriff deputies, state troopers, game wardens and all other
state commissioned officers.
Physical restraint means an animal will be deemed under restraint in the following circumstances:
(1) If the animal is within the property limits of its owners; or
(2) Is secured by leash of sufficient strength to control the animal, and under the effective control of its owner or keeper while the animal is
outside its owners' property or in a public place.
Proper food means providing each animal with daily food of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal.
Property shelter means providing each animal with adequate shelter from the elements, as required, to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain
or suffering by the animal.
Proper water means providing each animal with daily, continuous water of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering
by the animal.
Provocation means any purposeful act that causes an animal to bite, scratch or attack in protection of self, owner, or owners property.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 68/444
Public nuisance all of the following conditions, situations or occurrences are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and constitute a failure of the owner
to exercise proper care and control of his animal and/or the premises where said animals are or have been kept:
(1) Animals. Any animal turning over garbage containers or scattering garbage or which otherwise damages private or public property;
a. Any dog or livestock at large or free-roaming off of private property owned or controlled by the owner, keeper, or the person in charge of
said dog or livestock;
b. Any animal barking, whining, howling, or making other sounds or noises in an excessive or continuous fashion; or
c. Any building, room, cage, kennel, yard, run, stable, shed, pen, fenced pasture, or any other place or facility where animals are kept or
harbored which is not being maintained in a clean and sanitary condition so as to prevent obnoxious odors, the attraction, breeding or potential
breeding of flies, the attraction, harboring or breeding of rodents or potential breeding of rodents, or the creation of any other public nuisances.
Releasing agency means the Aransas County Animal Control.
Restraint a dog is under restraint within the meaning of this chapter if it is physically controlled by a leash, physically restrained within an open area or
confined within a vehicle being driven or parked on the streets, or confined within the property limits of its owner or keeper and shall also be kept in such
a manner as will be reasonably calculated not to become a nuisance or a threat to adjacent neighbors or to the public.
Sanitary means condition of good order and cleanliness which precludes the possibility of disease transmission.
Spayed female means any bitch dog or cat, which has been operated upon to prevent conception.
Stray means any animal for which an owner has not been identified or does not have tags affixed to its collar indicating current rabies inoculation and
current licensing.
Vaccination against rabies means the injection subcutaneously or otherwise by a licensed veterinarian, or by a person under his/her supervision, of
licensed animal rabies vaccine.
Vaccination certificate means a certificate bearing the vaccination tag number, signed by the veterinarian or his representative, stating the name of the
owner of the dog or cat to which issued and a description of the dog or cat to which issued indicating the year for which issued, certifying that such dog or
cat was inoculated or vaccinated against rabies, and stating the date thereof.
Vaccination tag means a suitable tag, bearing the same number as the vaccination certificate and indicating the year for which it was issued.
Veterinary hospital means any establishment maintained and operated by a licensed veterinarian for surgery, diagnosis and treatment of disease and
injuries to animals.
Working days means Mondays through Fridays, excluding legal holidays recognized by the Aransas County Commissioner's Court.
(Ord. No. 888,  1, 21, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  2, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 1590,  1, 9-25-12)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
State law referenceDefinitions pertaining to dangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  822.041; definitions pertaining to rabies, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 
826.002.
Sec. 18-27. Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any dog or cat to be at-large, dangerous, a public nuisance or vicious, all as defined herein. Any individual or corporation who
knowingly or intentionally allows their dog or cat to be in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and
subject to a fine, as provided herein.
(Ord. No. 888,  2, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
State law referenceDangerous dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  822.041 et seq.
Sec. 18-28. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine not exceeding $200.00; and if such violation be
continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 888,  23, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-29. Licensing and registration.
(a) Licensing required for all dogs and cats.
(1) No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat over the age of four months within the city limits unless such dog or cat is licensed as
provided in this section. Written application for such license shall be made to the animal control department and shall state the name and address of
the owner and the name, breed, color, age and sex of the dog or cat and shall be accompanied by a current rabies certificate issued by a licensed
veterinarian or anti-rabies clinic. The license fee shall be paid at the time of making application; a numbered receipt given to the applicant and a
numbered metallic tag shall be issued to the owner.
(2) There shall be a yearly license fee for each dog or each cat over the age of four months. A lower fee may be accessed for spayed and neutered
animals. Note: If veterinarians are allowed to provide license tags within their facilities, they shall retain a portion of said fee from each licensing
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 69/444
transaction.
(3) Every person, group of person or corporation affiliated with any place of business at which more than four dogs and/or cats, more than four
months of age, are kept for the sale breeding, boarding, training, or other commercial purposes to include, but not limited to, retail or wholesale
trade, shall pay an annual permit fee.
a. Every person, owning, keeping, or harboring more than four dogs and/or cats, more than four months old, shall pay an annual animal
fancier permit fee, and in addition shall pay a license fee for each individual dog and/or cat as provided in subsection (2) above.
(4) All dog or cat licenses and kennel licenses shall be issued for one calendar year and renewed each January. If a metallic license tag issued for
a dog or cat shall be lost, the owner may obtain a replacement tag for a nominal fee.
(5) If there is a change in ownership of a dog or cat or kennel during the license year, the new owner may have the current license transferred to
his name upon the payment of a transfer fee.
(6) No person shall use for any dog or cat a license receipt of license tag issued for another dog or cat.
(b) Registration of livestock and their habitat required. All pastures, feed lots, or other facilities where livestock is kept as well as all livestock kept in
the city limits are required to be registered. Written application for such registration shall be made to the city or such agents of the animal control
department as shall be designated by the city, and shall state name, address and notification telephone number of the landowner and description of the
exact legal location of the facility to be registered as well as all livestock kept at the facility and shall include color, breed, identification markings, (tattoos,
brands, ear tags), and sex (altered/unaltered) of livestock. The registration fee shall be paid at the time of making application; a numbered receipt given to
the applicant and a numbered metallic tag shall be issued to the owner.
(1) There shall be an annual registration fee accessed per facility per year to be renewed each January.
(2) The agents of the animal control department prior to issuance of registration must inspect all livestock.
(3) Any person, firm or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
(Ord. No. 888,  3, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  3, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 1510,  1, 8-17-10; Ord. No. 1590,  2, 9-25-12)
Cross referenceTaxation, ch. 94.
State law referenceLocal rabies control program, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.015; registration of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.031.
Sec. 18-30. Issuance, wearing of tag and collar.
(a) Upon complying with the provisions of section 18-29, there shall be issued to the owner a numbered metallic tag stamped with the number and the
year for which issued. The shape or design of the tag shall be changed from year to year.
(b) Every owner is required to see that the tag is securely fastened to a dog's choke chain, collar or harness, which must be worn by the dog at all times.
Cats shall not be required to wear tags, but the owner shall keep such tag with the written license.
(Ord. No. 888,  4, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-31. Unauthorized removal of collar or tag.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the owner or keeper of a dog, to remove the collar or license tag attached to such dog as required by this
article.
(Code 1972,  5-49; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-32. Restraint of animals while off property of owner; responsibility for and removal of canine waste.
(a) The owner or keeper of a dog in the city which is not on the premises of the owner or keeper or upon the premises of another with the permission of
said person shall restrain said dog with a chain or leash of sufficient material and strength as necessary to restrain the dog, and said dog shall be held by a
person capable of controlling the movements of the dog. The chain or leash shall be of a length that prohibits the dog from being a nuisance to persons
nearby or causing damage to public or personal property. No owner or keeper of a dog shall allow it on public school property during school hours without
the permission of the school principal, unless it is in a vehicle and kept in such a way as to prevent contact with passersby.
(b) Owners responsible for removal of canine waste.
(1) It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog on any
sidewalk, street or other public area. It shall further be the duty of each person who owns, possesses or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any
feces left by his/her dog on any private property neither owned nor occupied by said person.
(2) No person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street or other public area without the
means of removal of any feces left by such dog. Furthermore, no person who owns, possesses or controls such dog shall appear on any private
property neither owned nor occupied by said person without the means of removal of any feces left by said dog.
(3) For the purposes of this regulation, the means of removal shall be any tool, implement, container or other device carried for the purpose of
picking up and containing such feces, unexposed to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by transporting such feces to a
suitable depository.
(4) Any person found in violation of this section by an animal control officer or agent shall cause a complaint to issue in the court of jurisdiction.
The penalty for violation of this section shall apply to each offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 70/444
(5) This regulation shall not apply to a dog accompanying any handicapped person who, by reason of his/her handicap, is physically unable to
comply with the requirements of this section.
(Ord. No. 888,  5, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1590,  3, 9-25-12)
State law referenceRestraint of dogs, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.033, 826.034.
Sec. 18-33. Impoundment.
(a) Unlicensed dogs or cats found running at-large shall be taken up by the agents of the animal control department and impounded in the shelter
designated as the city animal shelter, and there confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than four days, and may thereafter be disposed of in a
humane manner if not claimed by their owner. Dangerous animals shall be confined in a humane manner for a period of not less than three days. Dogs and
cats not claimed by their owners shall become the property of the animal control department and be disposed of at the discretion of the department, except
as provided in the cases of certain dogs and cats. In calculating the length of this time period, the day of impoundment shall not be considered day one.
(b) The animal control department may transfer title of all animals held by its animal shelter to the Humane Society after the legal detention period has
expired and the animal has not been claimed by its owner. In the event of such transfer of title, it is expressly understood that the Humane Society shall pay
for each animals' food until it shall be removed from the animal shelter.
(c) When dogs are found running at-large and their ownership is known to the agents of the animal control department, such dogs need not be
impounded; but the agent may, at his discretion, cite the owner of the dog to appear in court to answer to charges of violation of this article.
(d) Immediately upon impounding dogs or other animals, the agents of the animal control department shall make every reasonable effort to notify the
owners of such dogs or other animals so impounded, and inform the owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of the animals.
(e) No unspayed or unneutered dog or cat which has been impounded by reason of its being a stray shall be allowed to be adopted from the animal
shelter unless the prospective owner shall agree to have such animal spayed or neutered, or the Humane Society agrees to do so.
(Ord. No. 888,  6, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Cross referenceUnclaimed property,  58-31 et seq.
State law referenceImpoundment of dogs and cats, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.033; dog and cat sterilization, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 828; estrays,
V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 142.
Sec. 18-34. Redemption of impounded animals.
(a) The owner shall be entitled to resume possession of any impounded dog or cat, except as provided in the cases of certain dogs, upon compliance with
the license provisions in section 18-29 and the payment of impoundment fees set forth in this article.
(b) Any other animal impounded under the provisions of this article may be reclaimed by the owner upon the payment of impoundment fees set forth in
this article.
(c) Any animal not reclaimed by its owner, other than dangerous or wild animals, may be humanely euthanized by the animal control department after
being impounded for four days, after a reasonable effort has been made to identify and notify the owner of such dogs or other animals impounded and
inform such owners of the conditions whereby they may regain custody of such animals, or placed in the custody of some person deemed to be a
responsible and suitable owner who will agree to comply with the provisions of this article and such other regulations as shall be fixed by the animal
control department. Provided, if the animal is one as to which the respective rights of the owner and the person in possession or custody are determined by
state law, such law shall be complied with. In calculating the length of this time period, the day of impoundment shall not be considered day one.
(Ord. No. 888,  7, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-35. Fees set by Aransas County Animal Control Department.
The Aransas County Animal Control Department will provide the animal control services to the City and will charge recipients for said services by
establishing a permitting, registration, and fee system where appropriate.
(Ord. No. 888,  8, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1590,  4, 9-25-12)
Sec. 18-36. Confinement of certain dogs and other animals.
(a) The owners shall confine within a building or secured enclosure every fierce, dangerous dog, and not take such dog out of the building or secured
enclosure unless the dog is securely muzzled.
(b) Every female dog or cat in heat shall be kept confined in a building or secured enclosure or in a veterinary hospital or boarding kennel in such
manner that such female dog or cat cannot come in contact with another animal, except for breeding purposes.
(c) No wild animal may be kept within the city limits except under such conditions as shall be fixed by the animal control department; provided,
however, that wild animals may be kept for exhibition purposes by circuses, zoos and educational institutions, in accordance with such regulations as shall
be established by the city council.
(d) Any animal described in subsection (c) of this section found at large shall be impounded by the animal control department.
(e) Any dog, cat or other animal impounded for being a public nuisance may not be redeemed unless such redemption is authorized by any court having
jurisdiction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 71/444
(f) When in the judgment of the animal control department or its agents an animal should be destroyed for humane reasons, such animal may not be
redeemed.
(g) A dangerous dog, or a dog having caused the death of a person, ordered destroyed by a governmental agency responsible for animal control, under
authority of V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.033, shall be humanely euthanized as provided by regulation; or any other disposition deemed to be
consistent with the protection of public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. No. 888,  9, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-37. Rabies control.
(a) Every animal which bites a person shall be promptly reported to the animal control department and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the
direction of the animal control department for a period of ten days, and shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the
animal control department. Such quarantine may be at the shelter designated as the city animal shelter or at the owner's option and expense, in a veterinary
hospital of his choice. In the cases of stray animals or in the cases of animals whose ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter
designated as the city animal shelter.
(b) The owner, upon demand made by the animal control department, shall forthwith surrender any animal which has bitten a human or which is
suspected as having been exposed to rabies for supervised quarantine, which expenses shall be borne by the owner, and may be reclaimed by the owner if
adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees set forth in section 18-35 and upon compliance of licensing provisions set forth in section 18-29.
(c) When an animal under quarantine has been diagnosed as being rabid or suspected by a licensed veterinarian as being rabid and dies while under such
observation, the animal control authority shall immediately send the head of such animal to the state department of health for pathological examination,
and shall notify the proper public health officer of reports of human contacts and the diagnosis made of the suspected animal. The animal control
department shall have the authority to contact a licensed veterinarian to permit the animal for shipping.
(d) When a report gives a positive diagnosis of rabies, the animal control department shall recommend a citywide quarantine for a period of 30 days and,
upon the invoking of such quarantine, no animal shall be taken into the streets or permitted to be in the streets during such period of quarantine. During
such quarantine, no animal may be taken or shipped from the city without written permission of the animal control department.
(e) During such period of rabies quarantine as mentioned in this section, every animal bitten by an animal adjudged to be rabid shall be forthwith
destroyed or, at the owner's expense and option, shall be treated for rabies infection by a licensed veterinarian or held under 30 days' quarantine by the
owner in the same manner as other animals are quarantined.
(f) If there are additional positive cases of rabies occurring during the period of the quarantine, such period of quarantine may be extended for an
additional six months.
(g) No person other than the animal control officer or any police officer shall kill or cause to be killed any rabid animal; any animal suspected of having
been exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided; nor remove it from the city limits without written permission from the
animal control department. The animal control officer and any police officer of this city shall have the right to shoot or kill any rabid animal or any dog or
cat at large, which shall manifest a disposition to bite.
(h) The carcass of any dead animal exposed to rabies, upon demand, shall be surrendered to the animal control department.
(i) The animal control department shall direct the disposition of any animal found to be infected with rabies.
(j) No person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or destruction as required when demand is made thereof by the animal control
department.
(Ord. No. 888,  10, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Cross referenceHealth and sanitation, ch. 54.
State law referenceReports of rabies, quarantine, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.041 et seq.; quarantine and impoundment facilities, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code 
826.051 et seq.
Sec. 18-38. Reports of bite cases.
It shall be the duty of every physician or other practitioner to report to the animal control department the names and addresses of persons treated for bites
inflicted by animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.
(Ord. No. 888,  11, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-39. Responsibilities of veterinarians.
It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report to the animal control authority his diagnosis of any animal observed by him as a rabies suspect.
(Ord. No. 888,  12, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-40. Exemptions.
(a) Hospitals, clinics and other premises operated by licensed veterinarians for the care and treatment of animals are exempt from the provisions of this
article, except where such duties are expressly stated.
(b) The licensing and vaccination requirements of this article shall not apply to any dog or cat belonging to a nonresident of the city and kept within the
city for not longer than 30 days; provided, all such dogs or cats shall at all times while in the city be kept within a building, enclosure or vehicle, or be
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 72/444
under restraint by the owner. If a dog or cat is picked up and impounded, the owner must show certification of vaccination before the animal will be
released; or, if not vaccinated, make arrangements to do so upon release of the animal.
(Ord. No. 888,  13, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-41. Investigations.
The owner, upon demand made by the animal control department, shall forthwith produce evidence that an animal is properly licensed and/or registered by
the city by producing a current license receipt and, [as] required, the properly tagged animal. It is further provided that on receiving a report of an animal
being kept in a reportedly cruel or inhumane manner, any agent of the animal control department may demand that the owner or person in control of such
animal produce the animal for examination. Two or more violations of this chapter may result in revocation of licensing or registration.
(Ord. No. 888,  14, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  4, 11-18-03)
Sec. 18-42. Interference with enforcement.
No person shall interfere with, hinder or molest any agent of the animal control department in the performance of any duty of such agent, or seek to release
any animal in the custody of the animal control department or its agents, except as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 888,  15, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-43. Records.
(a) It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the licensing, impoundment and
disposition of all animals coming into its custody.
(b) It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all bite cases reported to it, and its
investigation of same.
(c) It shall be the duty of the animal control department to keep or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of all monies which records shall be
open to inspection at reasonable times by such persons responsible for similar records of a governmental entity and shall be audited annually in the same
manner as other government records are audited.
(Ord. No. 888,  16, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1590,  5, 9-25-12)
State law referenceUse of fees, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  826.033(d).
Sec. 18-44. Small animal traps.
The animal control officer is authorized to provide a small animal trap from the animal control department for persons who wish to utilize this service and
providing that sufficient traps are available. A deposit will be required, and the maximum time period for which the trap may be utilized is ten days.
Extensions of the time period are available is approved in advance; otherwise, the trap will be picked up by the animal control officer. The animal control
officer is also instructed to secure a release agreement with persons utilizing this service. If a trap is lost or stolen while under the control of such person,
the person utilizing same shall pay its full value to the city.
(Ord. No. 888,  17, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1590,  6, 9-25-12)
Sec. 18-45. Fowl running at-large.
It shall be unlawful for any person raising or keeping chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons or other fowl to permit or allow them to run atlarge
within the limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 888,  18, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
Sec. 18-46. Pens, coops or enclosures for fowl.
It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guineas, pigeons or other fowl to keep them in a pen, coop or
enclosure, and such pen, coop or enclosure shall be a distance of at least 100 feet from every building or structure used for sleeping, dining or living, and
shall be kept in a sanitary condition, not to create any public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 888,  17, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  5, 11-18-03)
Sec. 18-47. Pens, coops or enclosures for rabbits, guinea pigs and other small animals.
It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping rabbits, guinea pigs, white rats, white mice, hamsters and other small animals to keep such animals
in a pen, coop or enclosure, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition and not create any public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 888,  20, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  5, 11-18-03)
Sec. 18-48. Location, maintenance of stables and other enclosures.
(a) As used in this section, the term "large livestock" shall mean and include horses, mules, jacks, jennies, cows, cattle, hogs, sheep, goats, and similar
animals. Any stable, shed, pen or other enclosure for livestock shall be a distance of at least 100 feet form every occupied building or structure used for
sleeping, dining, living, or business, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and not create any public nuisance.
(b) As used in this section, the term "small livestock" shall mean and include all types of domesticated swine, sheep, goats and other than miniature
livestock. Any stable, shed, pen, or other enclosure for livestock shall be a distance of at least 100 feet from every occupied building or structure used for
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 73/444
sleeping, dining, living, or business, and shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and not create any public nuisance
(c) As used in this section, the term "miniature livestock" shall mean and include swine, sheep, goats and horses that have been specifically bred to be
significantly smaller at maturity than all other breeds of similar animals. Miniature livestock includes, but is not limited to, pot-bellied pigs, pygmy goats,
and miniature horses. Any miniature livestock shall be kept in a sanitary condition and not create any public nuisance.
(d) No livestock shall be kept in any stable, shed, pen or other enclosure less than 4,000 square feet.
(1) A person may not keep more than one head of livestock unless at least 4,000 square feet of space is available per head in any stable, shed, pen
or other enclosure.
(2) This subsection shall not apply to calves under one year of age that were born on the premises to livestock kept continuously on the premises
for six months or longer before the birth.
(e) Livestock or small and/or large animals that are kept as part of a project for a youth organizations are excepted some certain provisions of this
section upon registration and notification to the director of environmental health or his designee in the Aransas County Animal Control Department.
(Ord. No. 888,  21, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00; Ord. No. 1270,  5, 11-18-03; Ord. No. 1281,  1, 3-9-04; Ord. No. 1590,  7, 9-25-12)
State law referenceRiding stables, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 827.
Sec. 18-49. Livestock running at-large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, keeper or person in charge of any livestock to allow or permit the livestock to run at-large within the limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 888,  22, 3-26-91; Ord. No. 1118,  1, 7-25-00)
State law referenceFences, range restrictions, V.T.C.A., Agriculture Code ch. 143.
Sec. 18-50. Applicability of chapter.
This chapter shall apply to all persons owning or keeping animals within the City of Rockport, irrespective of circumstances existing prior to the adoption
and effective date of this chapter or any amendments hereto.
(Ord. No. 1281,  2, 3-9-04)
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1281,  2, adopted Mar. 9, 2004, added provisions designated as  18-49, Applicability of chapter. Inasmuch as other provisions bore the same section number
and no specific repealer was given therefor, the applicability provisions were redesignated by the editor as  18-50
Sec. 18-51. Keeping of wild and exotic animals prohibited.
(a) Exotic animals are prohibited within the city limits.
(b) As used in this section, the term "exotic animals" shall mean and include non-native species of animal, including, but not limited to, non-poisonous
reptiles which, when mature, are over six feet in length, ostriches, any member of the Ratite Family or exotic livestock as defined by the Texas Animal
Health Commission or so deemed wild or exotic by the Director of Environmental Health or his designee in the Aransas County Animal Control
Department.
(c) No person shall keep or permit to be kept on his premises any dangerous wild, or exotic animal for display or for exhibition purposes whether
gratuitously or for a fee.
(d) No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild or exotic animal as a pet as defined in this article.
(e) No person may offer for sale a wild or exotic animal as defined in this article.
(Ord. No. 1590,  8, 9-25-12)
Sec. 18-52. Right of entry for inspection.
Representatives of the Aransas County Animal Control Department shall have the right of entry upon the premises of all animal establishments, circuses or
commercial livery stables and into all areas thereof where animals are kept and maintained, for inspection to ascertain whether the animal establishment
circus, or commercial livery stable is in compliance with the provisions of this article, and the standards and regulations established under the same.
(Ord. No. 1590,  8, 9-25-12)
Chapters 19-21 RESERVED
Chapter 22
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 74/444
BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 22-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall govern:
Applicable jurisdiction means the limits or territory (ETJ) within which the city's authority may be exercised.
Apprentice electrician means a person who is learning the trade of an electrician and who works under the direct supervision of a master, journeyman or
residential wireman electrician and who is licensed as an apprentice as provided in this chapter.
Approved or approval means inspected and accepted by the electrical inspector as having met the requirements of this chapter.
Assessment means the determination of the amount of the maximum impact fees per service unit which can be imposed on new development.
Building means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. (Reference: The International Building Code.)
Building official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of the city's building code. (Reference:
The International Building Code.)
Building permit means an official document or certificate issued by the authority having jurisdiction which authorizes performance of a specified activity.
(Reference: Permit in the International Building Code.)
Capital construction cost of service means the costs of constructing capital improvements or facility expansions, including and limited to the construction
contract price, surveying and engineering fees, land acquisition costs (including land purchases, court awards and costs, attorneys fees, and expert witness
fees), and the fees actually paid or contracted to be paid to an independent qualified engineer or financial consultant preparing or updating the capital
improvements plan who is not an employee of the city.
Capital improvements advisory committee (advisory committee) means the advisory committee, appointed by the city council, consisting of at least five
members, not less than 40 percent of whom shall be representatives of the real estate, development, or building industries, who are not employees of the
city, and, if impact fees are to be applied within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city, including one member representing the extraterritorial
jurisdiction; or consisting of the planning and zoning commission, including one regular or ad hoc member who is not an employee of the city and who is
representative of the real estate, development, or building industry, and, if impact fees are to be applied within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the city,
one representative of the extraterritorial jurisdiction area; which committee is appointed to regularly review and update the capital improvements program
in accordance with the requirements of chapter 395.
Capital improvements plan (CIP) means the plan adopted in section 22-407 which identifies wastewater treatment and water supply, pump and storage
facilities capital improvements or facility expansions pursuant to which impact fees may be assessed. The capital improvements plan may be composed of
a separate wastewater improvements plan and water improvements plan.
City council means the governing body of the City of Rockport.
City means the City of Rockport, Texas, and all areas within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ).
City public works director means the public works director for the city.
Commercial development means all development which is neither residential nor industrial.
Comprehensive plan (master plan) means the comprehensive long-range plan, adopted by the city council, which is intended to guide the growth and
development of the city, which may include analyses, recommendations and proposal for the city regarding such topics as population, economy, housing,
transportation, community facilities and land use.
Contractor means all persons or organizations that offer services for compensation for new construction, re-model work or repair work, including but not
limited to building, debris removal, demolition, electrical, irrigation, landscaping, mechanical, plumbing, pool, roofing, and signs.
Council means the governing body of the City of Rockport.
CPTED means crime prevention through environmental design.
CPTED section refers to the section of the police department working with the city's building and development department that is responsible for
reviewing and approving all plans submitted pursuant to this article.
Credit means the amount of the reduction of an impact fee for fees, payments or charges for the same type of capital improvements for which the fee has
been assessed.
Development means any subdivision, acreage, lots or such other parcels of land which are developed for a particular use or usage.
Electrical experience means active and practical experience during which not less than two-thirds of one's time, exclusive of normal periods of rest and
recreation, has been spent in the installation, alteration, and repair of electrical equipment and conductors.
Electrical inspector means the city employee designated by the building official to be responsible for the administration of the electrical code. Said
employee shall be, or has the ability to be, certified in accordance with the International Association of Electrical Inspectors (AIEI) or the International
Code Council (ICC).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 75/444
ETJ means the extraterritorial jurisdiction and is anywhere within one mile of the city limits of the City of Rockport as provided by state law.
Existing development means all development within the service area which has a water or wastewater tap on the city's water or wastewater system.
Electrical work means any labor or material used in installing, maintaining, or extending an electrical wiring system and the appurtenances, apparatus, or
equipment used in connection with the use of electrical energy in, on, outside, or attached to a building, residence, structure, property, or premises. The
term includes service entrance conductors as defined by the National Electrical Code.
Enclosure device means a continuously joined structure which is constructed so as not to have openings, holes or gaps larger than four inches in width
except for doors and gates, including but not limited to fences, walls, buildings or similar constructions.
Facility expansion means the expansion of the capacity of an existing facility, which serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital
improvement in order that the existing facility may serve new development. Facility expansion does not include the repair, maintenance, or modernization,
of an existing facility to better serve existing development.
Final subdivision plat means the map, drawing or chart meeting the requirements of the city's subdivision ordinance on which is provided a subdivider's
plan of a subdivision, and which has received final approval of the planning and zoning commission or city council and which is recorded with the office
of the county clerk.
Growth-related costs means capital construction costs of service related to providing additional service units to new development, either from excess
capacity in existing facilities, from facility expansions or from new capital facilities. Growth-related costs do not include: (1) construction, acquisition, or
expansion of public facilities or assets other than capital improvements or facility expansions identified in the capital improvements plan; (2) repair,
operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facility expansions: (3) upgrading, updating, expanding, or replacing existing capital
improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency, environmental, or regulatory standards; (4) upgrading, updating,
expanding, or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; (5) administrative and operating costs of the city;
and (6) principal payments and interest or other finance charges on bonds or other indebtedness, except for such payments for growth-related facilities
contained in the capital improvements program.
Guidelines refers to those guidelines that are distributed by the building and development department of the city for use by applicants, planners and
developers of property within the city to assist them in obtaining approved plans under this chapter.
Impact fee means a fee to be imposed upon new development, calculated based upon the costs of facilities in proportion to development creating the need
for such facilities. Impact fees do not include dedication of rights-of-way or easements, or construction or dedication of on-site or off-site water
distribution or wastewater collection facilities required by other ordinances of the city and necessitated by and attributable to the new development; lot or
acreage fees placed in trust funds for the purpose of reimbursing developers for over sizing or construction of water or wastewater mains or lines; or other
pro-rata fees for reimbursement of water or sewer mains or lines extended by the city.
Industrial development means development which will be assigned to the industrial customer class of the water or wastewater utilities; generally
development in which goods are manufactured, or development which is ancillary to such manufacturing activity.
Journeyman electrician means a person licensed as a journeyman electrician as provided in this chapter, who works for and under the general supervision
of a master electrician and who does not hold himself out to the public as being qualified to contract for the doing of electrical work.
Land use assumptions means the description of the service area and projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities, and population therein over
at least a ten-year period, adopted by the city council, as may be amended from time to time, upon which the capital improvement plan is based.
Landscaping means any tree, shrub, ground cover, vine or other organic and inorganic materials, or combination of any of these elements, placed on a site
or exterior of a building to enhance appearance. Public art, water features, plazas, patios, decorative courtyards and lighting may also be considered
landscape elements.
Living unit equivalent (LUE) means the basis for establishing equivalency among and within various customer classes based upon the category of use and
service.
Maintenance means the repair, replacement, general upkeep, painting, trimming, pruning, watering, or other ongoing activities that are associated with
providing a safer site in conformance with this article.
Master electrician means a person licensed as a master electrician as provided in this chapter, who holds himself out to the public as being qualified to do
the kind of electrical work, by him or by the employment of licensed electricians, which his license authorized him to do.
Meter loop, generally means the electrical service equipment comprised of the service entrance conductors, meter base, over current devices, service
disconnects, and the system and equipment grounding.
New development means for the purpose of article IX of this chapter, the subdivision of land; or the construction, reconstruction, redevelopment,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; or any use or extension of the use of land; any of which increases the number
of service units for water supply or wastewater service. New development includes the sale of water taps resulting from the conversion of an individual
well to the city's water utility and includes the sale of wastewater taps resulting from the conversion of an individual septic or other individual waste
disposal system to the city's wastewater utility.
O.C.L. means outside the city limits.
On-site facility means an improvement or facility which is for the primary use or benefit of a new development and/or which is for the primary purpose of
safe and adequate provision of water or wastewater facilities to serve the new development, and which is not included in the capital improvements plan,
and for which the developer or property owner is solely responsible under subdivision and other applicable regulations.
Private residential pool means any swimming or wading pool situated on any premises as an appurtenance to a single-family dwelling for the use of the
residents or guests of such dwelling.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 76/444
Public pool means any swimming or wading pool operated by the city, county, state, United States, or any public agency; or any privately owned
swimming or wading pool which is open to the general public for a fee.
Residential development means a lot developed for use and occupancy as a residence or residences, according to the city's zoning ordinance.
Residential wireman electrician means a person licensed as a residential wireman electrician in accordance with state law who works for and under the
general supervision of a master electrician and who may only perform electrical installations in single-family and multifamily dwellings not exceeding
four stories.
Rough-in work means the initial rough work of installing, altering, or repairing of electrical wires, conduits, apparatus, or other electrical installation
performed so that all such work is easily visible and may be corrected or changed before being covered.
Semi-public pool means any swimming or wading pool serving a private club, motel, hotel, apartment building, duplex or other similar activity or
structure, the use of which is limited to members or residents and their guests.
Service area means as area within the corporate boundaries, extraterritorial jurisdiction and other areas served by the city's water and wastewater system to
be served by the capital improvements or facilities expansion specified in the capital improvements plan applicable to the service area.
Service unit means the standardized measure of consumption, use, generation, or discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards and based on historical data and trends applicable to the political subdivision in
which the individual unit of development is located during the previous ten years, expressed in living units equivalent.
Single-family dwelling means a building designed exclusively for occupancy as one dwelling.
Swimming pool means any structure or excavation more than 24 inches in depth, either indoors or outdoors, used or suitable to be used for bathing or
swimming purposes, together with buildings, equipment and appurtenances used in connection therewith.
System-related facility means a capital improvement or facility expansion which is designated in the capital improvements plan and which is not an on-site
facility. A system related facility may include a capital improvement, which is located offsite, within or on the perimeter of the development site.
Tap purchase means the filing with the city of a written application for water or wastewater tap and the acceptance of applicable fees by the city. The term
tap purchase shall not be applicable to a meter purchased for and exclusively dedicated to fire protection.
Two-family dwelling means a building designed exclusively for occupancy as two dwellings on an individual lot.
Vacant commercial building means a nonresidential building located within the city limits of the City of Rockport of which 51 percent or more of the floor
space is unoccupied and has been the subject of two or more documented violations of any city ordinance.
Vendor means all persons or organizations that provide products for compensation directly to consumers for new construction, re-model work or repair
work including but not limited to building, debris removal, demolition, electrical, irrigation, landscaping, mechanical, plumbing, pool, roofing, and signs.
Wading pool means an artificial pool with a maximum depth of 24 inches intended primarily for use by children.
Wastewater improvements plan means the portion of the capital improvements plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the wastewater
treatment facilities or wastewater treatment facility expansions and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new
development, and for a period not to exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of wastewater impact fees.
Wastewater treatment facility expansion means expansion of the capacity of any existing wastewater treatment facility for the purpose of serving new
development, not including the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing wastewater treatment facility to serve existing
development.
Wastewater treatment facility means improvements for providing wastewater treatment, including, but not limited to, land or easements necessary for
same.
Water facility expansion means expansion of the capacity of any existing water facility for the purpose of serving new development, not including the
repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an existing water facility to serve existing development.
Water facility means the improvements for providing water supply service, including, but not limited to, pumping facilities, and storage facilities, and
necessary land or easements.
Water improvements plan means the portion of the capital improvements plan, as may be amended from time to time, which identifies the water facilities
or water facilities expansion and their associated costs which are necessitated by and which are attributable to new development, and for a period not to
exceed ten years, and which are to be financed in whole or in part through the imposition of water impact fees pursuant to this article.
Zoning ordinance refers to the city zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1272,  1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 1306,  1, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1312,  1, 12-14-04; Ord. No. 1446,  1, 10-21-08; Ord. No. 1697,  1, 9-19-17; Ord.
No. 1702,  1, 1-9-18)
Sec. 22-2. Inspections outside city limits.
Inspections required:
(1) When at such times certain developments within the city's applicable jurisdiction apply for, make extension, or make connection onto any
water line or wastewater line, as provide for by the city, shall become subject to applicable construction codes; namely, building, plumbing,
electrical and signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 77/444
(2) Permits and fees for such required inspections shall be paid in accordance with the fee schedule as established by article IX of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 728,  1, 7-8-86; Ord. No. 1272,  1, 12-9-03)
Secs. 22-322-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BUILDING RELOCATION
Sec. 22-26. Permit required.
A building or part of any building meeting Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) standards for Oversize/Overweight Vehicles and Loads, 43 Texas
Administrative Code, Chapter 28, Subchapters A through G, shall not be moved through or across any sidewalk, street, alley or highway within the city
limits of the city without first obtaining a permit from its building official.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-27. Written application.
Any person desiring to move a building shall first file with the building official a written application setting forth the following information:
(1) Type and kind of building to be moved.
(2) Its present location and proposed new location by lot, block, subdivision and street numbers, including a map or route description showing
the proposed plan of travel.
(3) The extreme dimensions of the length, width and height of the building.
(4) The approximate weight of the building, if required.
(5) The approximate time and date such building will be upon the streets.
(6) A copy of a state issued moving permit from the Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) if subject building is to be moved upon a state
controlled highway.
(7) Proof of current liability insurance in the minimum amounts of $500,000.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-28. Permit refusal.
(a) If in the opinion of the building official, the moving of any building may cause serious injury to persons or property or serious injury to the streets or
other public improvements, or the building to be moved has deteriorated more than 50 percent of its original value by fire or other element, or the moving
of the building will violate any of the requirements of this code or of the zoning regulations, the permit shall not be issued and the building shall not be
moved over the streets.
(b) Appeal to city manager. A permittee may appeal decisions referred to in subsection (a) above by filing a written appeal with the city manager within
seven working days of receipt of denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis
for the aggrieved party's challenge to the city's authority under this article.
(c) Issuance of decision by city manager. Decisions of the city manager shall be issued within five working days of receipt of the written appeal.
Decisions of the city manager shall be final.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-29. Bond required.
The building official, as a condition precedent to the issuance of a moving permit, shall require a bond to be executed by person desiring such permit, with
corporate surety to his satisfaction. Such bond shall be made payable to the applicable governing body in the amount of $15,000.00. It shall indemnify the
applicable governing body against any damage caused by the moving of such building to streets, curbs, sidewalks, shade trees, highways and any other
property, which may be affected, by the moving of a building. Such surety bond shall also be conditioned upon and liable for strict compliance with the
terms of said permit, as to route to be taken and limit of time in which to effect such movement and to repair or compensate for the repair and to pay said
applicable governing body as liquidated damages an amount not exceeding $250.00 for each and every day's delay in completing such removal or in
repairing any damages to property or public improvement or in clearing all public streets, alleys or highways of all debris occasioned thereby.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03; Ord. No. 1259,  1, 8-26-03)
Sec. 22-30. Notice of permit.
Prior to the issuance of said moving permit, the building official shall cause notice to be given to the city manager, fire marshal, chief of police, public
works director, telephone or light companies, or others whose interests may be affected by such movement. The building department shall set forth in all
notices the route that will be taken, time started (as noted in 22-27), and approximate time of completion.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-31. Issuance of permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 78/444
A moving permit is valid for 30 days from the date of issuance, and any building being moved for which permit was granted shall not be allowed to remain
in or on the streets for more than 48 hours.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-32. Delayed movement.
If the anticipated time and date of movement or the plan of travel differs as originally stated in the application (see section 22-27), the mover shall notify
the building official, or any city official, or police officer at least 48 hours prior to movement. Extensions of time to the moving permit shall be noted and
extended accordingly.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-33. Public safety requirements.
(a) While moving upon public streets or highways within the corporate city limits the building moving vehicle(s) must be preceded and followed by a
marked emergency equipment equipped Rockport Police Department unit.
(b) In the event of unforeseen accidents, every moved building or building moving equipment which occupies any portion of public property after
sundown shall have sufficient lights or other warning indicators, as approved, continuously burning between sunset and sunrise for the protection of the
public.
(c) When in the opinion of the chief of police, flagmen are necessary to divert or caution traffic, the owner or person moving such building shall employ
at their expense, two flagmen, one at each street intersection beyond the building.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-34. Improvements by owner.
The owner of any house, building, or structure proposed to be moved shall make all necessary improvements required in order for said house, building or
structure to comply with the requirements of the most current city building codes within 90 days from the date of the issuance of the moving permit.
Extensions of such time as deemed reasonable may be granted by the building official upon a showing of delay caused by matters beyond the control of the
owner or house mover. The application for the moving permit shall be the same as used for an application for a building permit. Said application shall,
when necessary, be accompanied by plans and specifications showing the changes or conditions of said house, building, or structure as the same is
proposed to be when moving, and all contemplated improvements, signed by the owner or the owner's agent.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Sec. 22-35. Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for each violation, and each day that such violation shall continue to exist constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 1246,  1, 5-13-03)
Secs. 22-3622-55. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. BUILDING/RESIDENTIAL CODES*
Sec. 22-56. Building code adopted, amended.
(a) Adopted. A certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the International
Building Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters C, F, H, and J as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as
the building code of the city for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the
standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for
occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of such structures is herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees, therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said building code on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section
with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b).
(b) Amendments. Affected sections from the 2012 International Building Code are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section 105.3 Insert: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of
building safety for that purpose. The applicant shall be the owner or an authorized agent (builder, building contractor), as the case may be, and shall
be responsible to install all or part of any building system.
Section 109.2 Insert: On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each
permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority (refer to fee schedule in
Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances).
Section 109.4 Insert: Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before
obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 400% of the usual permit fee, in addition to the required permit fees but not less than
$250.00.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 79/444
Section 114.4 Insert: Any person who violates a provision of this code or fails to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1-7, General penalty for
violations of Code; continuing violations, City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
Section 1612.3 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section 1612.3 Insert: [March 4, 1985].
Section 3301.2 Insert at end: Construction equipment and materials shall be stored and placed so as not to endanger the public, the workers or
adjoining property for the duration of the construction project. Construction debris/litter shall be placed in containers acceptable for the purpose.
Section 3412.2 Insert: [May 24, 1982].
(Ord. No. 973, 5-24-94; Ord. No. 1103,  1, 11-24-98; Ord. No. 1144,  2, 2-22-00; Ord. No. 1180,  3, 4, 4-24-2001; Ord. No. 1288,  13, 3-23-04;
Ord. No. 1374,  1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1481,  1, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1604,  1, 5-28-13)
Sec. 22-57. Residential code adopted, amended.
(a) Adopted. That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the
International Residential Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B, C, G, H and J as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be
and is hereby adopted as the residential code of the city for regulating and governing the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement,
repair, equipment, location and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than
three stories in height with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and
all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said residential code on file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this section, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsections (b).
(b) Amendments. Affected sections from the 2012 International Residential Code are hereby amended as follows:
Section R101.1 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section R105.3 Insert: To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application therefor in writing on a form furnished by the department of
building safety for that purpose. The applicant shall be the owner or an authorized agent (builder, building contractor), as the case may be, and shall
be responsible to install all or part of any building system.
Section R108.2 Insert: On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each
permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority (refer to fee schedule in
Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances).
Section R108.6 Insert: Any person who commences work requiring a permit on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of 400% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees,
but not less than $250.00.
Section R113.4 Insert: Any person who violates a provision of this code or falls to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who erects,
constructs, alters or repairs a building or structure in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the building official, or of a
permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1-7, General penalty for
violations of Code; continuing violations, City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
Table R301.2(1) Insert: [Flood Insurance Rate Map; dated March 4, 1985; Community-Panel Numbers 485504 0001-0005].
Chapter 11 Amendment: Chapter 11 of the 2012 International Residential Code shall be deleted in its entirety and Chapter 11 of the 2009
International Residential Code be substituted therefor.
Section P2603.5.1 Insert: [6 inches (150mm)], unless otherwise approved by the code official; [12 inches (300mm)], unless otherwise approved by
the code official.
Section P2903.9.1 Insert at the end: ...Additionally, the water service shall be valved at the curb or lot line in accordance with local requirements.
Said valve shall be adjacent to and on the discharge side of the city water meter, property side, inside an approved valve box with cover.
Section P3005.2.2 Insert: Cleanouts shall be installed not more than 100 feet (30480mm) apart in horizontal drainage lines measured from the
upstream entrance of the cleanout. In addition, there shall be a clean-out on the property side, at or near the connection of the building sewer to the
public sewer system, and shall be brought to grade in an approved manner.
(Code 1972,  7-2; Ord. No. 1180,  5, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1290,  1, 2, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 1374,  2, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1415,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No.
1481,  2, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1604,  2, 5-28-13)
Sec. 22-58. Safeguards during construction.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any contractor, or other person in charge of the construction, to leave the jobsite in an unsafe or unsanitary condition at the
end of each days work, as hereinafter provided.
(b) At the end of each work day the contractor, or other person in charge of the construction, shall be responsible for and see that i) all equipment and
materials are stored and placed in neat order and/or safe location so as not to endanger the public, the workers or the adjoining property; and ii) the
construction site is cleaned up such that all debris and/or litter is placed in enclosed containers or trash bins (which shall not be located in a public right-ofway
unless pre-approved in writing).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 80/444
(c) The contractor, or other person in charge of the construction, shall dispose of all cut brush, trees and/or tree limbs prior to framing of the project.
However, firewood for future use may be stored on the property in a neat manner behind the front building set back line.
(Ord. No. 1415,  1, 12-11-07)
Secs. 22-5922-79. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1180,  6, repealed former  22-58, Permit and deposit or bond required for house moving, which derived from the 1972 Code,  703. Secs. 22-5922-79 were
nonsubstantive.
ARTICLE IV. ELECTRICAL CODE*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 22-80. Reserved.
Editor's noteFormerly,  22-80 pertained to definitions and derived from Ord. No. 1165,  2, Art. II of Exhibit A, adopted Oct. 18, 2000. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1272,
 2, adopted Dec. 9, 2003. For current provisions pertaining to similar subject matter, see  22-1.
Sec. 22-81. Title.
This article shall be known as the, "Rockport Electrical Ordinance" and may be cited as such and it will be referred to in this article as "this code".
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-1), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-82. Purpose and scope.
(a) Purpose. To reduce and eliminate, where possible, hazards to persons and property arising from electrical causes. To accomplish this end, the
provisions set forth are intended to provide a minimum standard for electrical work.
(b) Scope. This code shall cover all installations of electrical conductors or equipment hereafter made, and all existing installations, which are altered
within the corporate limits of the City of Rockport and also within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) where there is a connection to the city's water
or wastewater system.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-2, 1-3), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  2, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1322,  2, 3-12-05)
Sec. 22-83. Exclusion.
This code shall not apply to that work done by authorized employees of the city in the installation of electrical circuits and equipment related to city
operations and services.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-4), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-84. National Electrical Code adopted.
The National Electrical Code, 2011 edition, is hereby adopted as part of this Code of Ordinances to the same effect as if it were copied verbatim herein and
shall be in effect except as it may be in conflict with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-5), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1289,  1, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 1381,  1, 5-8-07; Ord. No. 1481,  3, 10-13-09; Ord. No.
1604,  3, 5-28-13)
Sec. 22-85. Low energy circuits.
Permits and license requirements of this code shall not apply to low voltage electrical conductors or equipment installation meeting the requirements of
article 720 and article 725 of the National Electric Code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-6), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-86. Responsibility for safe work.
This code shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any person owning, operating, or installing electrical conductors,
devices, appliances, fixtures, apparatus, motors, or equipment for damages to persons or buildings caused by any defect therein; nor shall the city be held
liable for any damages by reason of enforcement of this code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-7), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-87. Rights of property owners.
Nothing contained within this Code shall ever be construed to prevent any person from actually performing their own electrical work on their own property
or premises, provided the permit is paid for and obtained, and that the materials and equipment and the work be in strict accord with the rules and
regulations of this Code, and that the city electrical inspector's approval can be obtained upon inspection in regular order; and further provided, that the
property owner must actually perform the work, and that no other than the actual owner shall do any part of the work, unless the other person or persons
are licensed in full compliance with all of the provisions of this Code. "Own property or premises", as designated herein, shall refer to work to be done in a
building occupied by a person or persons as their homestead (having such homestead exemption registered with the Aransas County Appraisal District)
and not property held for business, second home, and/or recreational or rental purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 81/444
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. I,  1-8), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  1, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  2, 9-28-04)
Secs. 22-8822-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 22-91. Office of electrical inspector created.
There is hereby created the office of the city electrical inspector, who shall work under and be directly responsible to the building official. The electrical
inspector is hereby designated by the building official as the person responsible for the administration and enforcement of this code, and who shall
discharge the duties and have authority hereafter provided. Should there be no one designated as the electrical inspector, the duties and responsibilities
shall fall to the building official.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. III,  3-1), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-92. Authority and duties of the electrical inspector.
[The electrical inspector shall have the following authority and duties:]
(1) To enforce the provisions of this code to the best of his knowledge and ability.
(2) To issue such permits and collect such fees for the installation, extension, or alteration of electrical wiring, which comply with this code.
(3) To make inspections and reinspections provided in this code.
(4) To enter any house or premises during reasonable hours to examine any electrical wiring or installation of electrical wiring, fixtures, or
equipment therein, in the performance of his official duties.
(5) To order the electric service disconnected where improper or defective wiring exists, or where electrical construction or equipment has been
installed without a permit as required by this code, or is occupied without a certificate of occupancy; neither the city or the electrical utility shall be
held liable for any damage or loss that might be caused by any disconnections or discontinuances of electrical service.
(6) To disconnect electrical service or services in cases of emergency, where necessary for safety of persons or property or where electrical
equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department.
(7) To attach to electrical equipment or electrical meters any official notice or seal to prevent the use of electricity. It shall be unlawful for any
person to use any such seal or break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover or otherwise deface or injure any such official notice or seal posted by
the electrical inspector.
(8) To order persons to cease or desist any work being done without a permit where a permit is required or where such work is otherwise being
done in violation of this code.
(9) To make special rulings to govern electrical work for a particular occupancy, building or installation not covered by this code or by the
National Electrical Code, or where special circumstances exist.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. III,  3-2), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-93. Interference with electrical inspector.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with the electrical inspector in the discharge of his duties or to prevent or in any manner attempt to prevent
him from carrying out the provisions of this code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. III,  3-3), 10-18-00)
Secs. 22-9422-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. EXAMINATION AND LICENSING
Sec. 22-101. License required.
Except as otherwise provided in this Code, it shall be unlawful for any person to do electrical work in the city or, when applicable, in the city's E.T.J.
unless such person carries the appropriate electrical license as issued by the Texas Department of Licensing & Regulation or as otherwise authorized by
V.T.C.A., Occupations Code, Chapter 1305 "Electricians".
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-1), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1381,  2, 5-8-07)
Sec. 22-102. Exceptions.
The following types of electrical work may be carried out by persons who are not licensed electricians:
(1) Electrical work on one's own residence as provided for in section 22-87.
(2) The replacement of fuses, lamps, wall switches, receptacles, and connection of portable devices to suitable receptacles, which have been
permanently installed.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 82/444
(3) The installation, alteration, or repair of electric wiring devices, appliances, and equipment installed by or for an electrical public service
corporation operating under a franchise from the city when for use of such corporation in the generation, transmission, distribution or metering of
the electrical energy or for the use of such a corporation in the operation of signals or the transmission of communications or messages.
(4) Any work involved in the manufacture or test of electrical materials, devices, appliances or apparatus, but not including any installation of
wiring than that required for testing purposes.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-2), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-103. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  3, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed  22-103, which pertained to persons not to be licensed and derived from Ord. No.
1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-3), adopted Oct. 18, 2000.
Sec. 22-104. Application for license.
Every application for a license, as required by this Code, shall be made upon a form furnished by the Texas Department of Licensing & Regulation and
every application shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the Texas Department of Licensing & Regulation regarding such applications.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-4), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04)
Secs. 22-105, 22106. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  3, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed  22-105, 22-106 which pertained to qualifications of applicants; examination of
applicants, respectively and derived from Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-5, 4-6), adopted Oct. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 1228,  2, adopted Oct. 29,
2002; Ord. No. 1243,  1, adopted Apr. 22, 2003.
Sec. 22-107. Renewal of existing City of Rockport license.
This section shall apply to all licensed electricians prior to September 1, 2004. Upon payment of the required fee, the city electrical inspector may continue
to renew to each person the class of City of Rockport electrical license which such person is qualified to have received under prior provisions of this Code.
Each license shall bear a number assigned to the licensee, the licensee's full name and address and signature of the authorized city staff person issuing said
license. A space shall also be provided for the licensee's usual signature with pen and ink. No license shall be valid until it has been signed by the licensee.
(Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04)
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  3, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, amended  22-107 to read as herein set out. Former  22-107, pertained to reciprocity agreement,
and derived from Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-7), adopted Oct. 18, 2000.
Sec. 22-108. License fees.
Craft License Fee Duplicate/Replacement Fee *
Master License $100.00 $10.00
Journeyman 40.00 10.00
Residential Wireman 25.00 10.00
Apprentice 10.00 5.00
NOTE* In the event that an existing City of Rockport License issued under the provisions of this Code is lost or destroyed, the person to whom the same
was issued may obtain a duplicate upon furnishing satisfactory identification to the city electrical inspector and upon payment of a fee as prescribed herein.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-8), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  2, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1429,  1, 5-13-08)
Sec. 22-109. Expiration and renewal.
All existing or renewed City of Rockport electrical licenses issued under this Code shall expire at midnight on December 31 of the year of issue. License
renewals issued within 60 days prior to the expiration date shall be issued next year's license. Any person failing to renew their license within 60 days of
expiration shall be considered as an applicant for an original license and shall thereafter be licensed only by the Texas Department of Licensing &
Regulation.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-9), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  2, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-110. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  3, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed  22-110 which pertained to duplicates and derived from Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A,
Art. IV,  4-10), adopted Oct. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 1228,  2, adopted Oct. 29, 2002.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 83/444
Sec. 22-111. Change of address, name, etc.; notification.
Any license holder whose address changes or whose name changes or whose name changes from that given on his license should notify the city electrical
inspector as soon as possible of such changes.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-12), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  2, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-112. Certain acts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed or any unlicensed person to do any of the following acts:
(1) To lend or knowingly permit the use of any license for the doing of any electrical work to any person not entitled thereto under the provisions
of this Code;
(2) To display or to represent as one's own license for the doing of any electrical work when such license has not been lawfully issued to the
person so displaying the same;
(3) To fail or refuse to surrender to the city electrical inspector any license issued by the city which has been suspended or revoked;
(4) To employ or contract with any person to perform electrical work who does not possess a valid electrical license;
(5) To perform any character of electrical work, for which a license is required by this Code, when such license is suspended or canceled; and
(6) To perform any electrical work in violation of this Code, and then fail or refuse to make corrections necessary for the work to conform to this
Code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  4-13), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  2, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04)
Secs. 22-113, 22114. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  3, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed  22-113, 22-114 which pertained to suspension, revocation of license; surrender and
return of license, respectively and derived from Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV,   4-14, 4-15), adopted Oct. 18, 2000; Ord. No. 1228,  2, adopted
Oct. 29, 2002.
Sec. 22-115. Right of appeal.
Any person aggrieved by a decision or ruling of the electrical inspector shall have a right to file a petition within ten days thereafter for a hearing before
the building and standards commission.
(1) Such appeal shall be perfected by giving to the city secretary a written statement containing the following:
a. Name and address of the person filing such appeal.
b. The facts of the case in which appeal is sought.
c. The ruling, if any, of the electrical inspector.
(2) The reason why such ruling, if granted, should be set aside; or, if a ruling was refused, why such ruling as requested should be made.
(3) The person or persons making the appeal shall send copies thereof to the electrical inspector if the appeal results from action or inaction on
his part or to the city attorney.
(4) Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city secretary shall note the time of receipt of such notice and shall call same to the attention of the
building and standards commission at its first available meeting immediately following receipt of such notice. The building and standards
commission shall then examine the facts of the case and the action of the building and standards commission thereon shall be final.
(5) During the pendency of the appeal, the ruling of the electrical inspector shall remain in full force and effect.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. V,  5-1), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1228,  2, 10-29-02; Ord. No. 1306,  3, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1529,  1, 1-25-11)
Secs. 22-11622-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
Sec. 22-121. Permits required.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this code, it shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed any electrical wiring or
equipment within the city's jurisdiction, or to make any alterations, additions, changes or repairs within the scope of this code, without first obtaining a
permit to do so from the electrical inspector. There shall only be one permit outstanding at the same time for any installation of electrical work.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-1), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-122. Permit not required.
No permit shall be required for the following:
(1) The replacement of fuses, lamps, wall switches, receptacles, sockets, or other similar items.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 84/444
(2) The connection of portable electrical equipment to existing or permanently installed receptacles.
(3) The installation of electrical conductors or equipment to be installed by or for a public utility corporation in the generation, transmission,
distribution or use of electrical energy as outlined in their franchises; nor for the use of such corporation in the transmission of messages.
(4) The replacement of a motor by another motor of the same horsepower and rating, solenoid valves, low pressure controls, or other controls
when the electrical supply to the same is or has been installed by a licensed electrician.
(5) Any work involved in the manufacturing, testing or servicing, altering or repairing of electrical equipment or apparatus, except that this
exemption shall not include any permanent wiring.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-2), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-123. Application for permits.
Application for permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the electrical inspector. Where deemed necessary, the electrical inspector may
require diagrams or plans showing the kind of work to be done and the manner in which the electrical installation is to be made. The application shall be
accompanied by the prescribed fees as provided in the city's permit and license fee schedule.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-3), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-124. Permits, to whom issued.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, permits shall be issued only to the following persons:
(1) The holder of a valid Rockport Master Electrician's License or a valid state electrical contractor's license for the doing of electrical work
which is authorized under such license; and that such electrician assumes all and full responsibility for that electrical work which is permitted. Said
master electrician or state licensed electrical contractor may authorize one employee to obtain permits in the master's or company's name. Such
authorization shall be on company letterhead or, if no letterhead, on plain paper and notarized, and kept on file in the office of the electrical
inspector. Should the status of the authorized person change, new authorization shall be submitted to the office of the electrical inspector prior to
permits being issued.
(2) A person performing electrical work or maintenance work with their own hands in a dwelling owned, occupied and registered in the state tax
rolls as their homestead as outlined in section 22-87.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-4), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  4, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-125. Permits for part jobs.
When an electrician completes the rough work, in whole or in part, on any electrical work and a second electrician is called upon to complete the work in
whole or in part, then a separate permit is required for which regular fees shall be paid for the work installed by him. Before the second permit is issued,
the holder of the first permit shall be notified, if he can be found, that the second permit is proposed to be issued. Issuance of the second permit shall
cancel the first permit and no refund of fees for such canceled permit shall be made.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-5), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-126. Time limitation.
Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days after its issuance, or if the work
authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. No work shall be done until a new
permit is issued and all necessary fees paid. No refund shall be made for permits that have become invalid. One or more extensions of time, for periods not
more than 90 days each, may be allowed. Such extensions shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be in writing
by the electrical inspector.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-6), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  4, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-127. Revocation of permits.
The electrical inspector shall have the right to declare a permit null and void if, there has been a misrepresentation of facts. No work shall be performed
until a new permit is issued and all fees have been paid.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-7), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-128. Inspections required.
All new electrical work, and such portions of existing circuitry or fixtures as may be affected by new work or any changes, shall be inspected to insure
compliance with the requirements of this code. The required inspections are as follows:
(1) Rough inspection. When the rough wiring or installation work is being completed, the permit holder shall notify the electrical inspector that
the job is ready for inspection. The inspector shall then make an inspection of the installation no later than the following day from the time of
notification; excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
a. If the installation passes inspection, the electrical inspector shall sign the inspection certificate, noting thereon the date of approval.
b. If the installation does not pass inspection, the inspector shall notify the permit holder of any violations and such violations shall be
corrected and reinspected.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 85/444
(2) Final inspection. When the entire installation of electrical wiring, fixtures or equipment has been completed on any premises, the permit
holder shall notify the electrical inspector that such work is ready for final inspection. The inspector shall then make an inspection of the
installation no later than the following day from the time of notification; excluding Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
a. If the installation passes inspection, the electrical inspector shall sign the inspection certificate, noting thereon the date of approval.
b. If the installation does not pass inspection, the inspector shall notify the permit holder of any violations and such violations shall be
corrected and reinspected.
(3) Periodic inspection. Due to the nature or complexity of certain electrical work, more than one rough inspection may be made without charge
when the progress of construction requires such inspections. Notification shall be given when phases of electrical work are completed and ready for
inspection.
(4) Service connection. No electrical work for which a permit is required shall be connected to a source of energy until such electrical work has
been inspected and approved by the electrical inspector. The inspector shall then make the necessary records to allow the utility company to
connect such electrical work to a source of supply.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-8), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-129. Correction of violations.
After correcting any violations found during the required inspections, the permit holder shall notify the electrical inspector that such violations have been
corrected. The inspector shall then make the necessary reinspection. If the permit holder fails to correct such violations within an allotted time, the
electrical inspector shall refuse to issue to the person any further permits until said work in question is corrected and approved.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI,  6-9), 10-18-00)
Secs. 22-13022-140. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. ELECTRICAL STANDARDS
Sec. 22-141. Safety standards.
Only standard parts and materials approved by the Underwriters Laboratories, Inc., National Electrical Safety Code, or electrical provisions of other safety
codes, which have been approved by the American National Standards Institute, shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to
persons and property.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-1), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-142. Requirements, general.
Due to climatic conditions prevailing in and about the Rockport area, certain special rules covering electrical wiring and equipment installations are set
forth herein, and certain exceptions are taken to the rules and regulations of the National Electrical Code to raise the safety level of electrical installations
and to prevent the rapid deterioration of electrical materials and equipment from severe atmospheric and underground corrosive action; all of which
exceptions are set forth in this code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-2), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-143. Aluminum wire.
The installation of aluminum wire for general wiring methods is prohibited, except for:
(1) Temporary services (T-poles, T-posts);
(2) Permanent services when installed from the line side of the meter to the service drop tap or splices, or when installed from the line side of the
meter to the point of connection of an underground service lateral; or
(3) Sub-feeders in non-residential applications when sized #2 AWG or larger.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-3), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  5, 9-28-04; Ord. No. 1381,  4, 5-8-07)
Sec. 22-144. Electrical metallic tubing.
Electrical metallic tubing (EMT) shall not be installed in any exposed outside location, or underground. All circuits using electrical metallic tubing as a
raceway without compression connectors shall have an equipment grounding conductor run with the other conductors.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-4), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  5, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-145. Spare raceway.
There shall be installed at least one spare raceway from the service panel(s), sub-panel(s) or both, to an accessible location (i.e.: attic, crawl space, etc.).
Such spare raceway shall be sized no less than one inch in diameter with the end taped or sealed.
Exception: Panels, which are surface mounted and or are fully accessible.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-5), 10-18-00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 86/444
Sec. 22-146. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1306,  5, adopted Sept. 28, 2004, repealed  22-146 which pertained to wiring in concrete and derived from Ord. No. 1165, 
2(Exh. A, Art. IV,  7-6), adopted Oct. 18, 2000.
Sec. 22-147. Made electrodes.
Made electrodes shall be rod electrodes and shall be made of brass, copper, or copper clad steel and shall be at least five-eights-inches in diameter and
eight feet long.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-7), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  5, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-148. Flexible conduit.
An equipment grounding conductor shall be included in each installation of flexible conduit, liquid tight or other such flexible raceway when the
grounding of equipment is necessary.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-8), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-149. Meters and meter loops.
The installation of meters and meter loops shall be in accordance with the electrical provider's specifications as outlined in their publication for meter
installation standards and to include the following:
(1) Meter loops shall include an approved means of disconnect located at an accessible place outside the building or structure that will effectively
disconnect each ungrounded conductor before it shall enter the building or structure.
(2) Where two or more meter outlets are grouped or are on the same building, each meter outlet shall be neatly and permanently marked to show
the location it services.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-9), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  5, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-150. Temporary wiring installations.
All temporary services and circuits at construction sites shall be installed to meet N.E.C. requirements and all grounding conductors shall be either green,
bare or marked as such. The grounding conductor shall be connected to all devices. Grounding through metal conduit or metal enclosures shall not be
allowed.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-10), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1381,  5, 5-8-07)
Sec. 22-151. Wiring methods.
The following types of occupancies as defined in the latest adopted editions of the city's building code may use any wiring method recognized as suitable
by this code, except those methods provided by article 320, Opening Wiring on Insulators, and article 324, Concealed Knob-and-Tube Wiring:
(1) Group R-3 occupancies (one- and two-family dwellings and their accessory uses).
(2) Group R-2 occupancies (multiple dwellings, not transient, and their accessory uses) that are not more than three stories tall.
The following types of occupancies as defined in the latest adopted editions of the city's building code may use any wiring method recognized as suitable
by this code, except those methods provided by article 320, Open Wiring on Insulators; article 324, Concealed Knob-and-Tube Wiring; article 336,
Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable; article 338, Service Entrance Cable; and article 339, Underground Feeder and Branch-Circuit Cable:
(1) Group B occupancies (Business).
(2) Group F occupancies (Factory-Industrial).
(3) Group M occupancies (Mercantile).
(4) Group R-1 occupancies (Residential, transient).
(5) Group S occupancies (Storage).
If approved by the electrical inspector and conducted in compliance with any conditions imposed, minor repairs and extensions of not more than 15
percent of the existing wiring methods may be made to the aforementioned five types of occupancies, with the same wiring methods existing at the time of
construction.
The following occupancies as defined in the latest adopted editions of the city's building code may use any wiring method recognized as suitable by this
code, except those methods provided by article 320, Open Wiring on Insulators; article 324, Concealed Knob-and-Tube Wiring; article 332, Electrical
Nonmetallic Tubing; article 336, Nonmetallic-Sheathed Cable; article 338, Service Entrance Cable; and article 339, Underground Feeder and Branch-
Circuit Cable:
(1) Group A occupancies (Assembly).
(2) Group E occupancies (Educational).
(3) Group H occupancies (Hazardous).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 87/444
(4) Group I occupancies (Institutional).
If approved by the electrical inspector and conducted in compliance with any conditions imposed, minor repairs and extensions of not more than 15
percent of the existing wiring methods may be made to the aforementioned four types of occupancies, with the same wiring methods existing at the time of
construction.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-11), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-152. Common area branch circuits.
No general purpose branch circuit shall have more than ten outlets per circuit.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-12), 10-18-00)
Sec. 22-153. Reconnection of existing electrical services.
Whenever the meter has been removed by the electrical provider or the drop has been cut, a service inspection is required. Whenever a service inspection
is required, a permit shall first be obtained by a City of Rockport registered electrician.
Exceptions:
(1) By homeowners as defined in section 22-87.
(2) When an electrician inspects the service and no work is necessary the electrician shall inform the electrical inspector and furnish the
necessary information for the service release. No permit is required.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-13), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  5, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-154. Approval given.
The electrical inspector shall approve for such use electrical equipment, materials, conductors, apparatus or appliances as are reasonably safe to persons
and property. Conformity of such equipment and materials with the standards of the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. shall be prima facie evidence that
such equipment is reasonably safe to persons and property.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII,  7-13), 10-18-00)
Secs. 22-15522-160. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. PENALTIES
Sec. 22-161. Penalty for violation of electrical code.
Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who
shall erect, install or repair electrical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the electrical inspector, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of
no more than $2,000.00; and each day during which such violation continues shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VIII,  8-1), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  6, 9-28-04)
Sec. 22-162. Conviction.
Conviction under the provisions of this Code shall be deemed just cause for the revocation of any existing City of Rockport license which said person,
firm, association or corporation may have and/or hold under the provisions of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1165,  2(Exh. A, Art. VIII,  8-2), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1306,  6, 9-28-04)
Secs. 22-16322-225. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MECHANICAL CODE
Sec. 22-226. Adoption; amendments.
(a) Adopted. That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the
International Mechanical Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapter A as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the mechanical code of the city for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration,
repair, location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of mechanical systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said mechanical code on file in the office
of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b).
(b) Amendments. Affected sections from the 2012 International Mechanical Code are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section 106.4.1 Insert: REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE in place of APPROVED.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 88/444
Section 106.5.1 Insert: Any person who commences work on a mechanical system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a
penalty of 400% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, but not less than $250.00.
Section 106.5.2 Insert: [refer to fee schedule in Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances.]
Section 106.5.3 Insert: This section is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with: The code official is authorized to establish a refund policy.
Section 108.4 Insert: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair mechanical work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1-7, General penalty for violations of
Code; continuing violations, City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 975, 5-24-94; Ord. No. 1108,  1, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1180,  7, 8, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1294,  13, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 1377,  1, 4-10-07; Ord.
No. 1481,  4, 10-13-09; Ord. No. 1604,  4, 5-28-13)
State law referenceEnforcement of ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54.
Secs. 22-22722-245. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. PLUMBING CODE*
Sec. 22-246. Adoption; amendments.
(a) Adopted. That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the
International Plumbing Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters E and F as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the plumbing code of the city for regulating and governing the design, construction, quality of materials, erection, installation, alteration, repair,
location, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of plumbing systems as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and
collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said plumbing code on file in the office of the
city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes,
if any, prescribed in subsection (b).
(b) Amendments. Affected sections from the 2012 International Plumbing Code are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section 106.5.1 Insert: REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE in place of APPROVED.
Section 106.6.1 Insert: Any person who commences work on a plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty
of 400% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, but not less than $250.00.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: [refer to fee schedule in Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances.]
Section 106.6.3 Insert: This subsection is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with: The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy.
Section 108.4 Insert: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
erect, install, alter or repair plumbing work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or
certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1-7, General penalty for violations of
Code; continuing violations, City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
Section 305.4.1 Insert: [6 inches (150mm)], unless otherwise approved by the code official; [12 inches (300mm)], unless otherwise approved by the
code official.
Section 606.1 Insert: Full-open valves shall be installed in the following locations:
1. On the building water service pipe from the public water supply near the curb (see 3 below).
3. On the discharge side of every water meter. Said valve shall be inside an approved valve box with cover.
Subsection 708.3.2 Insert at the end: There shall be a clean-out on the property side, at or near the connection of the building sewer to the public
sewer system, and shall be brought to grade in an approved manner.
(Ord. No. 980, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 1180,  9, 10, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1292,  13, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 1379,  1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1481,  5, 10-13-09;
Ord. No. 1604,  5, 5-28-13)
Secs. 22-24722-265. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. GAS CODE
Sec. 22-266. Adoption; amendments.
(a) Adopted. That a certain document, one (1) copy of which is on file in the office of the city secretary, being marked and designated as the
International Fuel/Gas Code, 2012 edition, including Appendix Chapters A, B and C as published by the International Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby
adopted as the fuel/gas code of the city for regulating and governing fuel gas systems and gas-fired appliances as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said fuel gas code on
file in the office of the city secretary are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this article, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in subsection (b).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 89/444
(b) Amendments. Affected sections from the 2012 International Fuel/Gas Code are hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1 Insert: [City of Rockport, Texas].
Section 106.5.1 Insert: REVIEWED FOR CODE COMPLIANCE in place of APPROVED.
Section 106.6.1 Insert: Any person who commences work on an installation before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty of
400% of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, but not less than $250.00.
Section 106.6.2 Insert: [refer to fee schedule in Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances.]
Section 106.6.3 Insert: This subsection is hereby repealed in its entirety and replaced with: The code official is authorized to establish a refund
policy.
Section 108.4 Insert: Persons who shall violate a provision of this code, fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or erect, install, alter or
repair work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the
provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as prescribed in section 1-7, General penalty for violations of Code; continuing violations,
City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 978, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 1180,  11, 12, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1293,  13, 4-13-04; Ord. No. 1378,  1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1481,  6, 10-13-09;
Ord. No. 1604,  6, 5-28-13)
State law referenceEnforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54.
Secs. 22-26722-285. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. SWIMMING POOLS*
Sec. 22-286. Reserved.
Editor's noteFormerly,  22-286 pertained to definitions, and derived from Ord. No. 690,  1, adopted July 9, 1985. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1272,  3, adopted Dec. 9,
2003. For current provisions pertaining to similar subject matter, see  22-1.
Sec. 22-287. Building permit required.
No swimming pool, whether private residential, privately owned, public or semipublic, and no enclosure device, shall be erected, constructed or
structurally altered within the city without a permit therefor from the building official. Application for such permit shall be submitted to the office of the
building official accompanied by two detailed sets of plans and specifications for such swimming pool and enclosure device, when required; and,
additionally, the building official may require the submission of other necessary plans, specifications and data, including capacity, rate of filtration,
skimming devices and facilities for draining. Insofar as practicable, plans and specifications for all swimming pools shall comply with the current design
standards of the state board of health for public swimming pool construction; provided, that where such standards are at variance with this article or any
ordinance of the city, such ordinance will govern in all cases.
(Ord. No. 690,  2, 7-9-85)
State law referenceSwimming pool sanitation, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code  341.064.
Sec. 22-288. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article may be enforced by the building official under the penal provisions of this article against the owner, rental agent (in the case
of rental properties handled by such agent), resident manager or any person engaged in the actual operation of a swimming or wading pool.
(Ord. No. 690,  3, 7-9-85)
Sec. 22-289. Enclosure devices.
(a) No outdoor private single-family residential swimming pool shall be erected, constructed or structurally altered within the city without an enclosure
device of a minimum height of 42 inches, which completely surrounds the swimming pool. Enclosure devices for all other pools shall be a minimum
height of 48 inches, which completely surrounds the pool.
(b) All gates or doors opening through such enclosure device shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door
securely closed at all times when not actually used; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling or structure which forms a part of the enclosure
device need not be so equipped.
(Ord. No. 690,  4(a), (b), 7-9-85; Ord. No. 1183,  1, 5-22-01)
Sec. 22-290. Penalties.
If any person shall violate any provision of this article, such person shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine as
provided in section 1-7(b).
(Ord. No. 690,  5, 7-9-85)
Secs. 22-29122-310. Reserved.
ARTICLE IX. PERMIT AND LICENSE FEES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 90/444
Sec. 22-311. Building.
(a) Contractor and vendor registration program and fee. Contractor and vendor registration shall be required of all contractors and vendors desiring to
perform development work inside the city limits and parts of the extraterritorial jurisdiction, including but not limited to building, electrical, irrigation,
mechanical, plumbing, pool, roofing, sign, landscaping, demolition, and debris removal. Registration shall be required prior to soliciting or commencing
work. Registration shall be on forms furnished by the city. No registration is required for the owner of a one- or two-family dwelling who acts as their own
general contractor for improvements to their existing residence.
(1) The general contractor or vendor registration fee shall be $100.00 annually.
(2) There shall be no fee assessed to registrations made during disaster declaration(s).
(3) All registrations expire on January 31st of the calendar year following their year of issue, except for registrations issued in 2017, which shall
expire on January 31, 2019.
(4) Each registrant shall prominently display on their person the contractor registration identification badge provided by the city. The badge shall
include a picture of the face of the registrant; the registrant's name, the registrant's company, the type of work the registrant performs, a quick
response code or address to the appropriate city webpage with more information, and a unique badge number. Other information may be included at
the direction of the city manager or his designee. The design color and effective year shall be different from one calendar year to the next and match
the windshield decal.
(5) Only registrants wearing their registration identification badge provided by the city may solicit in person to a potential customer.
(6) Each vehicle used by the contractor/vendor for use at a customer's location shall display a current city contractor registration decal above the
vehicle's state inspection and registration decal on the driver's side of the front windshield. Each decal shall carry the badge number of the
registrant. The design color and effective year shall be different from one calendar year to the next and match the identification badge.
(7) All identification badges and decals remain the property of the city and shall be surrendered upon demand of the city.
(8) Contractors must have current state licenses appropriate for the work they are performing.
(9) Contractors must carry insurance or bonding appropriate for the work they are performing.
(10) Registration may be revoked or suspended if the contractor fails to obtain three required permits or inspections in a rolling twelve-month
period, or if the contractor's required license, bond, or insurance has expired or been suspended or revoked.
(11) The city manager or his designee shall develop and maintain the appropriate ministerial processes to implement the registration program.
(12) The registration required herein shall not affect the requirement to obtain all permits required under the city ordinances.
(13) Contractors and vendors shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor for each solicitation while not registered; for each day of each job while
not registered, and/or for each employee engaged on a job while not registered. For each day a contractor or vendor is in violation of this section, it
shall be a separate offense. Punishment shall be in accordance with section 22-316 of this code.
(14) City shall have the right to seek injunctive relief against any contractor or vendor who violates this section and to recover attorney fees,
expert fees, and court costs incurred in the enforcement of the provisions herein.
(b) Building permit fees. Building permit fees shall be in accordance with Table 22-311A:
TABLE 22-311A: Building Permit Fees
Total valuation Fee
$1,000.00 and less $ 25.00
$1,001.00 to $50,000.00 $25.00 for the first $1,000.00 plus $5.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $50,000.00.
$50,001.00 to $100,000.00 $270.00 for the first $50,000.00 plus $4.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $100,000.00.
$100,001.00 to $500,000.00 $470.00 for the first $100,000.00 plus $3.00 for each
additional thousand or fraction thereof, to and
including $500,000.00.
$500,001.00 and up $1,670.00 for first $500,000.00 plus $2.00 for each
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 91/444
additional thousand or fraction thereof.
(c) Mobile home permit fees. For compliance inspection, mobile home permit fees shall be $50.00 per unit.
(d) Fence and sign permit fees. Fence and sign permit fees shall be the same as those outlined in subsection (b) of this section.
(e) Swimming pool permit fees. Swimming pool permit fees shall be the same as those outlined in subsection (b) of this section.
(f) Driveway and paving permit fees. Driveway and paving permit fees shall be the same as those outlined in subsection (b) of this section.
(g) Moving fees. For the moving of any building or structure, which is greater than 120 square feet in size, the fee shall be $50.00. This is in addition to
any fees prescribed in section 22-315 for the relocation of buildings from outside the city.
(h) Demolition fees. For the demolition of any building or structure which is greater than 120 square feet in size, the fee shall be $50.00.
(i) Re-inspection fee. The fee for first re-inspection necessary for the correction of work shall be no charge. Second time re-inspection shall be charged
at $50.00; third time re-inspection shall be charged at $100.00; and over three re-inspections may constitute issuance of a stop-work-order or revocation of
building permit or both. Re-inspections may be scheduled for the next business day but not until all required fees are paid.
(j) Plan review fees. When a plan is required to be submitted, a plan review fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and
specifications for review.
(1) The plan review fee shall be $40.00 for one- and two-family dwellings. The plan review fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit
fee for multifamily and nonresidential construction.
(2) Plans classified in the following occupancy groups in Table 22-311B may be sent to the International Code Council (ICC) for either total plan
review or specific plan review by their plan review staff if the plan review cannot be accomplished by city staff.
TABLE 22-311B: Occupancy Group
Occupancy Group Description
A Assembly - occupant capacity greater than 300; over
10,000 sq. ft. or over one story.
B & M Business/Mercantile - occupant capacity greater than 500;
over 10,000 sq. ft. or over two stories.
E Educational - for use of six or more persons for
instructional purposes.
F Factory/Industrial - over 50,000 sq. ft. or over one story.
H Hazardous - any.
I Institutional (both restrained and unrestrained) - occupant
capacity greater than 100; over 10,000 sq. ft. or over one
story.
R-4 Nursing Homes - any.
S Storage - over 50,000 sq. ft. or over one story.
HPM Any occupancy group involving hazardous production
material facilities.
All Occupancies Any single occupancy building over three stories or any
mixed use occupancy over two stories.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 92/444
(3) The cost of such plan review shall be paid by the permit applicant. Fees shall be based upon the ICC's published plan review fees in effect at
the time of plan submittal, and shall include all related mailing or shipping expenses.
(k) Floodplain development permit fees. Development permits required by the flood damage prevention requirements in article II, Chapter 50, Rockport
Code of Ordinances shall be $10.00 per acre or fraction thereof if no building permit is required for development as defined herein. However, for any
development requiring a building permit, the permit fees established in Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances shall apply, and no floodplain
development permit fee is required. Development permits are required for any development of property located in a flood hazard zone, and are in addition
to other construction permits.
(l) Special fees. Permit fees for public schools and governmental taxing entities shall be charged 50 percent of the normal fees (including city staff plan
review fees; excluding out-sourced plan review fees) for such construction.
(Ord. No. 861, art. 1, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 1107,  1, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1200,  1, 12-11-2001; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08; Ord. No. 1518,  1, 9-28-10;
Ord. No. 1697,  1, 9-19-17; Ord. No. 1702,  1, 1/9/18)
Sec. 22-312. Electrical.
(a) Electrician's license renewal fees shall be in accordance with Table 22-312A:
TABLE 22-312A: Electrician's License Renewal Fees
Electrician License Renewal Fee
Master electrician license renewal $50.00
Late renewal, up to and including 60 days No penalty
Late renewal, after 60 days New application to Texas Department of License
& Regulation
(b) Electrical permit fees shall be in accordance with Table 22-312B:
TABLE 22-312B: Electrical Permit Fees
Electrical permit Fee
Construction loop $10.00 ea.
Services: up through 125 amp. $10.00 ea.
126 through 225 amp. $15.00 ea.
226 through 400 amp. $25.00 ea.
over 400 amp. $40.00 ea.
Outlets, fixtures or switches $0.85
Panels (other than service) $6.00 ea.
Appliances $6.00 ea.
Fixed heating equipment $10.00 ea.
Fixed air conditioning equipment $10.00 ea.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 93/444
Motors: One hp and smaller $4.00 ea.
Over 1 hp to 10 hp $8.00 ea.
Over 10 hp. $16.00 ea.
Equipment: Gas pumps, welders, projectors, elevators,
X-ray machines
$20.00 ea.
General repairs $20.00
Permit issuing fee $10.00
(c) Alternate electrical permit fees. Alternate fee schedule for residential construction may be calculated at $0.08 per square foot.
(d) Re-inspection fee. The fee for first re-inspection necessary for the correction of work shall be no charge. Second time re-inspection shall be charged
at $50.00; third time re-inspection shall be charged at $100.00; and over three re-inspections may constitute issuance of a stop-work-order or revocation of
building permit or both. Re-inspections may be scheduled for the next business day but not until all required fees are paid.
(e) Special fees. Permit fees for public schools and governmental taxing entities shall be charged 50 percent of the normal fees (including city staff plan
review fees; excluding out-sourced plan review fees) for such construction.
(Ord. No. 861, art. 2, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 1107,  2, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08)
Sec. 22-313. Plumbing.
(a) Plumbing permit fees shall be in accordance with Table 22-313A:
TABLE 22-313A: Plumbing Permit Fees
Plumbing Permit Fee
Water service or water service including piping system, and water treating
equipment
$20.00 ea.
Building sewer $20.00 ea.
Gas service or gas service including piping system $20.00 ea.
Water heater including vent $20.00 ea.
Plumbing fixture (i.e. water closet, sink faucet, drain or trap) $5.00 ea.
Interceptor $10.00 ea.
Backflow prevention device $10.00 ea.
Lawn sprinkler system including backflow prevention device $20.00 ea.
Permit issuing fee $10.00 ea.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 94/444
(b) Re-inspection fee. The fee for first re-inspection necessary for the correction of work shall be no charge. Second time re-inspection shall be charged
at $50.00; third time re-inspection shall be charged at $100.00; and over three re-inspections may constitute issuance of a stop-work-order or revocation of
building permit or both. Re-inspections may be scheduled for the next business day but not until all required fees are paid.
(c) Special fees. Permit fees for public schools and governmental taxing entities shall be charged 50 percent of the normal fees (including city staff plan
review fees; excluding out-sourced plan review fees) for such construction.
(Ord. No. 861, art. 3, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 1107,  3, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08)
Sec. 22-314. Mechanical.
(a) Mechanical permit fees shall be in accordance with Table 22-314A:
TABLE 22-314A: Mechanical Permit Fees
Mechanical Permit Fee
Permit issuing fee: $10.00
Fee for inspecting new heating (including boilers),
ventilating, ductwork, air-conditioning and
refrigeration systems:
$25.00 for the first $1,000.00 valuation
plus $5.00 for each additional thousand or
fraction thereof.
Fee for inspecting repairs, alterations and additions
to an existing system:
Same as above.
(b) Re-inspection fee. The fee for first re-inspection necessary for the correction of work shall be no charge. Second time re-inspection shall be charged
at $50.00; third time re-inspection shall be charged at $100.00; and over three re-inspections may constitute issuance of a stop-work-order or revocation of
building permit or both. Re-inspections may be scheduled for the next business day but not until all required fees are paid.
(c) Self-contained units less than two tons. In all buildings, except one- and two-family dwellings, where self-contained air conditioning units of less
than two tons are to be installed, the fee charged shall be that for the total cost of all units combined (see (a) above for rate).
(d) Special fees. Permit fees for public schools and governmental taxing entities shall be charged 50 percent of the normal fees (including city staff plan
review fees; excluding out-sourced plan review fees) for such construction.
(Ord. No. 1180,  13, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08)
Sec. 22-315. Land development fees.
The following land development fees in Table 22-315A shall apply.
TABLE 22-315A:
Service Description Fee
Tree plan Review proposed tree plan; $50.00
plus per acre. $20.00
Relocation inspection Performing inspections on
structures proposed to be
relocated (moved) into the city,
for the first 50 mile radius;
$100.00
Each 30 miles thereafter; $50.00
plus mileage, round trip from
Rockport City Hall.
Most current state reimbursement
rate
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 95/444
Re-zoning, special
permit or P.U.D.
application
Requested zoning change or
special permit;
$150.00 +*
*plus per acre or portion thereof. $10.00
P.U.D. or P.U.D. revision; $200.00 +*
*plus per acre of portion thereof $10.00
Platting application Concept Plan. $100.00
Plat; $100.00 +*
*plus per acre or portion thereof. $10.00
Administrative plat/re-plat. $100.00
Certificate of occupancy
without building permit
Certificate plus inspection. $60.00
Land preparation permit Brush, exempt tree removal. Fees shall be the same as building
permit fees in Chapter 22.
(Ord. No. 1278,  1, 1-27-04; Ord. No. 1299,  1, 8-24-04; Ord. No. 1362,  1, 10-10-06; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08; Ord. No. 1518,  2, 9-28-10)
Sec. 22-316. Penalty.
(a) Where work for which a permit is required by any code or ordinance is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining any required permit, the fees
specified in this article shall be assessed a penalty of 400 percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fees, but not less than $250.00.
(b) The payment of such penalty fee shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that are prescribed by law.
(c) For each day in which a person is in violation of any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined as provided in
section 1-7(a), Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 861, art. 4, 9-11-90; Ord. No. 1180,  13, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1422,  1, 2-26-08)
Secs. 22-31722-335. Reserved.
ARTICLE X. UNSAFE BUILDING ABATEMENT*
Sec. 22-336. Codes adopted.
The Standard Housing Code and the Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, latest editions, are hereby adopted in their entirety, save and except for
those sections which may be in conflict with the provisions of the article. In cases of such conflict, the provisions of this article shall govern.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-337. Designation of official.
The official designated by the city to administer this article shall be the building official and shall be known by this article as the "code official" and those
who he authorizes and designates to act under his authority. The code enforcement officer and the fire marshal are hereby authorized and designated to aid
the code official in enforcement of this article and shall act as directed by the code official.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-338. Right of inspection.
The code official shall cause to be inspected any building or structure, within or without the city as defined herein, for the purpose of determining whether
conditions exist which render such place substandard or dangerous within the terms of this article. Cause for inspection may be based on any of the
following:
(1) A compliant filed by any person;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 96/444
(2) A report filed by the police department, fire department, or any other city department of any building or structure which is or may be
uninhabitable or substandard within the terms of this article; or
(3) General information or knowledge about the building or structure.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-339. Official notice of violation required.
(a) The code official shall give notice of a violation of this article. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be served by personal delivery or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, to the record title holder(s) of the affected property, and each holder of a recorded lien against the affected property as
shown by the official public records of the Aransas County Clerk's office; and by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each affected
improvement situated on the property or as close to the front door as practicable. It is not necessary that any notice to the occupant of the property listed
any occupant by name. Service of the notice may be accomplished by personal delivery to the last know address as shown by current records of the
Aransas County Clerk's office, and may also be given by personal delivery to any occupant of the property who is above the age of 14 years of age.
(b) The notice(s) required by this section shall direct the owner to repair, vacate, or demolish such buildings or otherwise comply with the article.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-340. Required contents of violation.
The notice shall contain the following:
(1) The name(s) of all persons pursuant to this article.
(2) The street address and legal description of the premises;
(3) A general description of the building, structure improvements or condition deemed substandard or otherwise in violation of this article;
(4) An itemized statement of violations(s);
(5) Whether or not repair or correction of the violation(s) may be made so that the structure(s) will comply with the terms of this article, and if
so, a list of the required repairs, or whether the structure(s) shall be demolished;
(6) Whether or not the building shall be vacated by the occupants and, if so the date by which such vacation shall be effected; and
(7) A statement of the time considered reasonable for the party receiving notice to commence to vacate and/or make repairs or otherwise comply
with the requirements of the notice. A reasonable time shall not exceed 30 days, except in cases of unusual or extenuating circumstances. The time
to commence may be extended by the code official for an additional period of 60 days; provided, however, an application for an extension is made
by the owner, occupant, or some other person interested in the property at least five days before the expiration of the time to commence vacation,
repairs or demolition or otherwise comply with the notice. A reasonable time to complete the vacation, repair or demolition or otherwise comply as
provided in the notice and such reasonable time for completion shall not exceed 90 days from the date of notice unless the time is extended by
action of the building and standards commission.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-341. Service of notice when owner absent from city.
When the owner or occupant, or mortgagee, or other interested party, is absent from the city, all notices or orders provided for herein shall be sent, via
registered mail or certified mail to the owner or occupant, or mortgagee, or all other persons having an interest in the dwelling or building, to the last
known address of each. Such mailing and, in the case of substandard and dangerous buildings, the below described posting shall be deemed adequate
service.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-342. Posting of placard on substandard, dangerous buildings.
(a) If the code official shall find any building or structure within or without the city as defined herein to be substandard or dangerous, a placard shall be
placed on the substandard or dangerous building reading as follows:
WARNING
This building has been found to be a SUBSTANDARD OR DANGEROUS STRUCTURE by the Code Official of the City of Rockport, Texas. This
building is to be vacated and all openings secured immediately. This placard is to remain on the structure until it is repaired, moved or demolished in
accordance with the notice dated ____________ which has been mailed to all known persons having an interest in this building or property as shown by
Aransas County public records. It is a violation of the Substandard Building Abatement ordinance punishable by a fine up to $2,000.00, for anyone to
remove this placard until further notice has been complied with.
Signed: ____________
Code Official or Designee
(b) No person shall occupy any building posted with such placard nor shall any person deface, destroy, or remove any such placard.
(c) A copy of such notice shall be posted on the front door or as near to the front door as practicable on the substandard or dangerous building to which
it relates.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 97/444
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-343. Placard building to be secured.
When the placard authorized by this article has been posted on any building in the city found to be a violation of this article, the owner or occupant thereof
shall render it secured from entry by unauthorized persons.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-344. Elimination of substandard and dangerous buildings.
All substandard and dangerous buildings as defined herein are hereby declared to be public nuisances, and shall be repaired, vacated or demolished
pursuant to the guidelines herein.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-345. Vacation of substandard, dangerous buildings.
Where any building or portion thereof, fails to comply with the provisions of this article because of the particular use of such building, it shall be unlawful
for any persons to make such use or allow such use to be made of such building or portion thereof. Whenever a building is found in violation and to
present an immediate danger requiring vacation of the premises because of potential injury to the occupants, the code official shall order the immediate
evacuation of the building and it shall remain vacated until the danger is eliminated.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-346. Emergency cases.
In cases where it reasonably appears that there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any person unless a substandard and dangerous building is
immediately repaired, vacated or demolished, the code official shall cause the immediate repair, vacation or demolition of such substandard and dangerous
building. The costs of such emergency repair, vacation or demolition or other compliance shall be collected in the same manner as provided in this article.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-347. Conditions constituting a substandard or dangerous building.
In addition to the standards adopted, a substandard or dangerous building or structure is defined as any building or structure:
(1) Whose walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle in excess of one-eighth-inch horizontal measurement for each one foot
of vertical measurement;
(2) Which, including the foundation, shows 25 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting member or members, or 50 percent
or more of damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or covering;
(3) Which has been damaged by fire, explosion, wind, vandalism or elements of nature so as to have become dangerous to life, safety or the
general health and welfare of the occupants thereof or the people of the city;
(4) Which has inadequate facilities for egress in case of fire or panic or which constitutes a fire hazard, or is otherwise dangerous to human life,
or, which in relation to existing use, constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, or abandonment;
(5) Which has parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall and injure members of the public or property;
(6) Which, because of its condition, is unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community, so as to
constitute a public nuisance; or
(7) Which exists in violation of any material provision of the city's building code, plumbing code, fire prevention code, electrical code or the
statutes of the state as revised, or that fail to comply with any material provision of this article. For the purposes of this section, VIOLATION OF
ANY MATERIAL PROVISION is a violation of any section that involves a significant risk of personal injury, health, safety or property damage.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-348. Guide for repair, vacation or demolition of substandard and dangerous buildings.
The following guide shall be followed by the code official in determining whether to repair, vacate or demolish any substandard and dangerous buildings:
(1) Repair. If the code official determines that a building can reasonably be repaired so that it will no longer exist in violation of the terms of this
article, the code official shall order it repaired within a reasonable time frame. A reasonable time frame as defined in this article. If the owner or
occupant fails to make such repairs within the time frame allowed, the code official shall recommend that the building and standards commission
order repairs, impose fines, order the demolition of the building, or take other appropriate action to implement this subsection.
(2) Vacation. If the code official determines that a building is in such condition as to make it a danger to the health, safety or general welfare of
its occupants or the citizens of the city or if deemed necessary for the abatement of the nuisance, the code official shall order it vacated. If the
owner or occupant fails to vacate a building after proper notice, the code official shall recommend that the building and standards commission order
the vacation of the building, impose a fine, or take other appropriate action to implement this subsection.
(3) Demolition. The code official shall recommend that the building and standards commission order a building demolished, if:
a. It is at least 50 percent or more damaged or deteriorated, on either a structural or current market value;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 98/444
b. Is in immediate danger to life or safety of any person and is not immediately corrected to eliminate the danger and therefore made "not an
immediate danger";
c. Is in need of repair and is not repaired within the reasonable time;
d. Is in such condition to make it a nuisance to the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or the public, has been ordered vacated
by the code official, and has not been cured of the defects within the reasonable time as set forth in this article; or
e. Is in need of repair and has all utilities disconnected or physically severed and has been vacant and uninhabited in excess of six months.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-349. Demolition of building; lien.
If, at the expiration of the time allowed for compliance with the provisions of this article, a building ordered demolished under the provisions of this
chapter has not been demolished, it shall be demolished by the city or its agents or a contractor at the expense of the owner. The city shall have a lien
placed upon the real property on which the building has been situated for expenses incurred for said demolition.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-350. The city council to appoint a building and standards commission.
The City Council of the City of Rockport, Texas, shall appoint a building and standards commission for the purpose of hearing and making determinations
as to substandard or dangerous conditions of buildings and structures as herein provided.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09; Ord. No. 1508,  1, 8-24-10)
Sec. 22-351. Building and standards commission authority.
The building and standards commission shall have all powers, duties and responsibilities authorized by state law pursuant to Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter
54, Subchapter C, including specifically the authority to hear and determine cases concerning alleged violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-352. Building and standards commission procedures.
(a) The building and standards commission shall give notice and provide an opportunity for the presentation of evidence and testimony by respondents
or any person(s) opposing the code official's determination of any violation(s) of this article.
(b) If the building and standards commission finds after a hearing that a violation has occurred, the commission may:
(1) Order the repair, within a fixed period, of buildings found to be in violation of a provision of this article or any applicable ordinance of the
city.
(2) Declare a building substandard in accordance with the powers granted by Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C;
(3) Order, in an appropriate case, the immediate removal of persons or property found on private property, enter on private property to secure the
removal of persons or property if it is determined that the conditions exist on the property that constitute a violation of an ordinance, and order
action to be taken as necessary to remedy, alleviate or remove any sub-standard building found to exist.
(4) Issue orders or directives to any peace officer of the state, including a sheriff or constable or the police chief, to enforce and carry out the
lawful orders or directives of the commission; and
(5) Determine the amount and duration of a civil penalty the city may recover in an amount permitted by state law.
(c) Procedures for removal of substandard structures.
(1) In cases involving the condemnation or removal of substandard structures, the code official shall request, and the building and standards
commission shall conduct, a hearing prior to ordering the removal of a structure. The commission shall hold an initial hearing not less than 45 days
after the code official notifies the required parties that a building is condemned as a substandard structure, and posts a notice to that effect on the
structure.
(2) At the initial hearing, if removal of the substandard structure is contested by any party of record with an interest in the property, the building
and standards commission shall, if it finds that the structure should be condemned, order the property owner to appear at a future date, not less that
45 days from the date of the first hearing, and show cause why the commission shall not order the removal of the substandard structure.
(d) All cases to be heard by the commission must be heard by at least four members with the concurring vote of four members of the commission
necessary to take any action under Tex. Loc. Gov't Code Chapter 54, Subchapter C.
(e) The commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member on each question or the fact that a member is absent or fails
to vote. The commission shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions. The minutes and records shall be filed immediately in the office
of the commission as public record.
(f) Meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the chairperson (mayor or mayor pro tem) and at other times as determined by the
commission. All of the meetings shall be open to the public. The chairperson may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 99/444
Sec. 22-353. Notice of building and standards commission public hearings.
(a) The code official shall give notice of all proceedings before the commission by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the record owners of the
affected property, and to each holder of a recorded lien against the property, as shown by the Aransas County Appraisal District records. The code official
shall give notice to all unknown owners, by posting a copy of the notice on the front door of each improvement situated on the affected property or as close
to the front door as practical.
(b) The code official shall mail and post each required notice at least ten days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing before the commission. The code
official shall also cause to be published at one occasion, at least ten days prior to the hearing, notice of the hearing in the official newspaper of the city.
(c) Notice required to be mailed, posted or published under this section shall state the date, time and place of the hearing. Such notice may be in the
form of a charging instrument, and shall contain:
(1) The name of the owner(s), occupant(s), and other persons interested in the building;
(2) The street address or legal description of the premises;
(3) A general description of the improvements;
(4) A list of defects on the property; and
(5) A brief statement of the action to be considered by the commission.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-354. Appeals; finality of decisions.
In each case, the code official shall mail by first class mail, certified return receipt requested, to all parties entitled to notice of the original hearing, a copy
of the final decision of the commission. All persons aggrieved of a decision of the building and standards commission may present a petition to any district
court in Aransas County, duly verified, setting forth that the decision is illegal, in whole or part, and specifying the grounds of the illegality. A petition of
review must be presented to a district court within 30 calendar days of the date copies of the final decision are sent to interested parties. If no appeals are
taken from a decision of the building and standards commission within the required period, the decision of the commission is, in all things, final and
binding.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Sec. 22-355. Penalty.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation which violates any provision of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
shall be fined not less than $50.00 nor more than $2,000.00 for each offense, and each violation hereof shall be deemed a separate offense for each of the
days and shall be punishable as such.
(Ord. No. 1455,  2, 4-28-09)
Secs. 22-35622-399. Reserved.
ARTICLE XI. WASTEWATER AND WATER IMPACT FEE
Sec. 22-400. Purpose.
This article is intended to impose impact fees for wastewater treatment and water supply, pumps and storage facilities as established in this article, in order
to finance public facilities, the demand for which is generated by new development (please see definition) in the designated service area or areas.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-401. Authority.
The city council is authorized to enact this article by chapter 395 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, which authorizes home-rule cities,
among others, to enact or impose impact fees on land within their corporate boundaries or extraterritorial jurisdictions, and to persons with whom they
have a wastewater or water supply service contract, as charges or assessments imposed against new development (please see definition) in order to
generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital improvements or facility expansions necessitated by and attributable to such new
development (please see definition). The provisions of this article shall not be construed to limit the power of the city council to adopt such ordinance
pursuant to any other source of local authority, including the City Charter, nor to utilize any other methods or powers otherwise available for
accomplishing the purposes set forth herein, either in substitution of or in conjunction with this article. Guidelines may be developed by resolution or
otherwise to implement and administer this article.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-402. Reserved.
Editor's noteFormerly,  22-402 pertained to definitions, derived from Ord. No. 1128,  1, adopted Nov. 9, 1999; Ord. No. 1162,  2, adopted Sept. 26,
2000; and Ord. No. 1203,  1, 1-8-2002. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1272,  4, adopted Dec. 9, 2003. For current provisions pertaining to
similar subject matter, see  22-1 and  22-408
Sec. 22-403. Applicability of impact fees.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 100/444
(a) This article shall be uniformly applicable to new development (please see definition), which occurs within the corporate limits of the city and its
extraterritorial jurisdiction, and other areas serviced by a city wastewater treatment facility or water facility.
(b) No new development (please see definition) shall be exempt from the assessment of impact fees as defined in this article.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-404. Impact fees as conditions of development approval.
No application for new development (please see definition) shall be approved within the city without assessment of impact fees pursuant to this article, and
no water and wastewater tap shall be issued and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fees imposed by and calculated
hereunder.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-405. Establishment of water and wastewater service areas.
(a) The water and wastewater service areas are established as shown on the service area map, which is attached hereto as Exhibit D to this article.
(b) The service areas shall be established consistent with any facility service area defined in the CIP for each utility or facility. Additions to the service
area may be designated by the city council consistent with the procedure set forth in chapter 395.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-406. Land use assumptions
Land use assumptions used in the development of the impact fees are contained in Exhibit A to this article. These assumptions may be revised by the city
council according to the procedure set forth in chapter 395.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-407. Capital improvements plan.
The capital improvements plan for the city is hereby adopted as Exhibit C to this article. The capital improvements plan may be amended from time to
time, pursuant to the procedures set forth in chapter 395.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-408. Service units.
(a) Service units are established in accordance with generally accepted engineering and planning standards.
(b) The water and wastewater impact fees per service unit shall be calculated based on living unit equivalents as determined by the category of service
for the development, or alternatively, as approved by the city council, based on the recommendation of the director as a result of an engineering report
prepared by a qualified professional engineer licensed to perform such professional engineering services in the state, which demonstrates that the number
of LUE's of service for the new development (please see definition) will be different than those indicated by the category of service.
(c) No impact fee shall be assessed or collected from properties utilizing water service through fire flow connectors or fire demand meters only.
(d) If a fire demand meter (tap) is purchased for a property, the number of service units shall be calculated based only upon the demand for regular
residential, commercial or industrial service to the property.
(e) Living unit equivalent (LUE) established are as follows:
Category Service Unit LUE Water CIF Wastewater
CIF
Restaurant 1 person (based on
maximum)
0.07 $47.13 $29.83
Cocktail Lounge 1 person (based on
maximum)
0.04 26.93 17.05
Store/shop 1 restroom 0.50 336.64 213.08
Convenience Store 1 store 2.78 1,871.72 1,184.70
Self-service laundry 1 washing machine 0.66 444.36 281.26
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 101/444
Bath house 1 water fixture 0.06 40.40 25.57
Hospital 1 bed 0.50 336.64 213.08
Warehouse 1 restroom 0.50 336.64 213.08
Service station 1 station 2.30 1,548.54 980.15
Classroom (church or school) 1 student 0.05 33.66 21.31
Office building 150 square feet 0.05 33.66 21.31
Car wash 1 stall 2.50 1,683.20 1,065.38
Movie theater 1 seat 0.02 13.47 8.52
Recreational vehicle park 1 space 0.40 269.31 170.46
Motel/hotel (unit without
kitchen)
1 unit 0.50 336.64 213.08
Commercial boat docks 1 slip 0.16 107.72 68.18
Church sanctuary 1 fixture 0.13 87.53 55.40
Dwelling unit* 1 unit 1.00 673.28 426.15
Efficiency dwelling 2 bedroom
or less*
1 unit 0.75 504.96 319.61
Motel with kitchen 1 unit 0.75 504.96 319.61
Nursing home/assisted care
facility
1 bed 0.50 336.64 213.08
*NOTE: Dwelling units include manufactured homes, apartments, condominiums and all other residential dwelling structures not listed above.
New Calculations (1/9/02) Capital Recovery
Fee
Maximum %
allowed
Impact Fee per
LUE
Water Living Unit Equivalent (LUE) $1,356.56 0.50% $674.28
Wastewater Living Unit Equivalent
(LUE)
852.30 0.50% 426.15
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 1272,  5, 12-9-03)
Sec. 22-409. Impact fees per service unit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 102/444
(a) The maximum impact fee per service unit shall be computed by subtracting the credit for a portion of ad valorem tax and utility service revenues
generated by new service units during the program period that is used for the payment of improvements, or the credit equal to 50 percent of the total
projected cost of implementing the capital improvement plan, whichever is applicable, from the growth-related capital construction cost in the capital
improvements plan for that category of capital improvements, and dividing that amount by the total number of projected service units anticipated within
the service area which are necessitated by and attributable to new development (please see definition), based on the land use assumptions for that service
area. Maximum assessable impact fees per service unit shall be established by category of capital improvements and shall be set forth in Exhibit B to
Ordinance No. 1203.
(b) Maximum assessable impact fees in Exhibit B may be amended by the city council according to the procedure set forth in chapter 395.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 1203,  2, 1-8-2002)
Editor's noteExhibit B referenced in subsection (a) above is not set out at length in this Code, but is on file in the office of the city secretary.
Sec. 22-410. Assessment of impact fees.
(a) The approval of any subdivision of land or of any new development (please see definition) shall include as a condition the assessment of the impact
fees applicable to such development.
(b) Assessment of the impact fees for any new development (please see definition) shall be made as follows and shall be based upon the impact fee per
service unit set forth in Exhibit B at the time of assessment:
(1) For a new development (please see definition), which has received final plat approval prior to the effective date of this article and for which
no replatting is necessary prior to water or wastewater tap purchase, assessment shall be upon the effective date of this article.
(2) For a development, which is final platted pursuant to the city's subdivision regulations following the effective date of this article, assessment
shall be at the time of final plat recordation.
(c) Because fire protection is of critical concern to the community as a whole, water demand related solely to fire protection is not subject to assessment
of an impact fee. However, if the fire protection capacity of the fire demand meter is routinely utilized for regular residential, commercial or industrial
purposes as evidenced by the record of consumption recorded on the city's meter-reading and billing systems, the then current impact fee should be
assessed and collected from the current owner of the property for the routine usage as domestic capacity.
(d) Following assessment of the impact fees pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, no additional impact fees or increases thereof shall be assessed
against that development unless the number of service units increases.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-411. Calculation of impact fees.
(a) Following a request for a building permit or tap purchase for new development (please see definition), the director shall compute impact fees due for
the new development (please see definition) in the following manner:
(1) The number of LUE's shall be determined by the category of service or as otherwise determined by the city council as provided in subsection
(b) of section 22-408; and
(2) The total service units shall be multiplied by the appropriate per-unit fee value determined as set forth in section 22-409.
(b) The value of each impact fee due for a new development (please see definition) shall not exceed the values shown in Exhibit B.
(c) Separate impact fees shall be calculated for water and wastewater service.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-412. Collection of impact fees.
(a) No water or wastewater tap shall be allowed until all impact fees have been paid in full to the city, except as provided otherwise by this section.
(b) Except as provided in subsections (c) below, impact fees shall be collected at the time of issuance of the building permit. For land platted outside this
city's corporate limits, the city shall collect impact fees at the time an application for an individual meter connection to the city's water and/or wastewater
system is filed. If the city lacks authority to issue building permits in the area where the impact fees applies, the city shall collect the impact fees at the
time an application is filed for an individual meter connection to the political subdivision's water or wastewater system.
(c) The city may enter into an agreement with the owner of a tract of land for which a plat has been recorded providing for payment of the impact fees in
up to 18 monthly payments.
(d) Impact fees paid overtime shall accrue interest of six percent APR and monthly payments shall not be less than $100.00.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 1148,  1, 5-11-00; Ord. No. 1162,  3, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 1203,  3, 1-8-2002; Ord. No. 1238,  1, 1-28-03)
Sec. 22-413. Establishment of accounts and records.
(a) The director shall establish separate interest-bearing accounts, in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds, for each major category of
capital facility for which an impact fee is imposed pursuant to this article.
(b) Interest earned by each account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the purposes specified for funds authorized in section
22-414.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 103/444
(c) The director shall establish adequate financial and accounting controls to ensure that impact fees disbursed from the account are utilized solely for
the purposes authorized in section 22-414. Disbursement of funds shall be authorized by the director at such times as are reasonably necessary to carry out
the purposes and intent of this article; provided, however, that any fee paid shall be expended within a reasonable period of time, but not to exceed ten (10)
years from the date the fee is deposited into the account.
(d) The director shall maintain and keep adequate financial records for each such account, which shall show the source and disbursement of all revenues,
which shall account for all monies received, and which shall ensure that the disbursement of funds from each account shall be used solely and exclusively
for the provision of uses specified in the capital improvements plan as system-related capital projects.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-414. Use of proceeds of impact fee accounts.
(a) The impact fees collected pursuant to this article may be used to finance or to recoup capital construction costs of service. Impact fees may also be
used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such
capital improvements or facilities expansions.
(b) Impact fees collected pursuant to this article shall not be used to pay for any of the following expenses:
(1) Construction, acquisition or expansion of capital improvements or assets other than those identified for the appropriate utility in the capital
improvements plan;
(2) Repair, operation, or maintenance of existing or new capital improvements or facilities expansions;
(3) Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to serve existing development in order to meet stricter safety, efficiency,
environmental or regulatory standards;
(4) Upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements to provide better service to existing development; provided however, that
impact fees may be used to pay the costs of upgrading, expanding or replacing existing capital improvements in order to meet the need for new
capital improvements generated by new development; or
(5) Administrative and operating costs of the city.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-415. Appeals.
(a) The property owner or applicant for new development (please see definition) may appeal the following decisions to the director or his/her designee:
(1) The applicability of an impact fee to the development;
(2) The value of the impact fee due;
(3) All appeals shall be filed with the city secretary within 30 days of notice of the action from which the appeal is taken.
(b) The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the fee is not applicable or that the value of the fee or the value of the offset or
credit was not calculated according to the applicable impact fee schedule or the guidelines established for determining offsets and credits.
(c) The appellant may appeal the decision of the director to the city council. The applicant must file a notice of appeal to the city council with the city
secretary within 30 days following the director's decision. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the city
attorney in an amount equal to the original determination of the impact fee due, the development application or tap purchase or building permit issuance
may be processed while the appeal is pending.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-416. Updates to plan and revision of fees.
The city shall review the land use assumptions and capital improvements plan for wastewater treatment and water supply, pumps and storage facilities at
least every five years, the first five-year period to commence from the date of adoption of the capital improvements plan referenced herein. The city
council shall accordingly then make a determination of whether changes to the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan or impact fees are needed
and shall, in accordance with the procedures set forth in chapter 395, either update the fees or make a determination that no update is necessary.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99; Ord. No. 1203,  4, 1-8-2002)
Sec. 22-417. Functions of advisory committee.
(a) The functions of the advisory committee are those set forth in chapter 395 and shall include the following:
(1) Advise and assist the city council in adopting land use assumptions;
(2) Review the capital improvements plan regarding wastewater treatment and water supply, pumps and storage facilities capital improvements
and file written comments thereon;
(3) Monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital improvements plan;
(4) Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 104/444
(5) File a semiannual report evaluating the progress of the city in achieving the capital improvement plan and identifying any problems in
implementing the plan or administering the impact fees.
(b) The city council shall make available to the advisory committee any professional reports prepared in the development or implementation of the
capital improvement plan.
(c) The city council shall adopt procedural rules for the advisory committee to follow in carrying out its duties.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-418. Use of other financing mechanisms.
(a) The city council may finance wastewater treatment and water supply, pumps and storage facilities, and capital improvements or facilities expansions
designated in the capital improvements plan through the issuance of bonds, through the formation of public improvement districts or other assessment
districts, or through any other authorized mechanism, in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be provided by law, in addition to the use of
impact fees.
(b) Except as herein otherwise provided, the assessment and collection of an impact fee shall be additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any other tax, fee, charge or assessment which is lawfully imposed on and due against the property.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-419. Impact fees as additional and supplemental regulation.
(a) Impact fees established by this article are additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution of, any other requirements imposed by the city on
the development of land or the issuance of building permits or the sale of water or wastewater taps or the issuance of certificates of occupancy. Such fees
are intended to be consistent with and to further the policies of the city's comprehensive plan, capital improvements plan, zoning ordinance, subdivision
regulations and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by which the city seeks to ensure the provision of adequate public facilities in conjunction
with the development of land.
(b) This article shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of property, density of development, design, and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of public improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations or
other regulations of the city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ord. No. 1128,  1, 11-9-99)
Sec. 22-420. Certification of compliance.
The city shall submit a written certification verifying compliance with chapter 395 to the attorney general each year not later than the last day of the city's
fiscal year. The certification shall be signed by the mayor and include the statement:
"This statement certifies compliance with Chapter 395, Local Government Code."
(Ord. No. 1203,  5, 1-8-2002)
Sec. 22-421. Capital improvements plan.
The capital improvements plan (Exhibit C) is included for the sole purpose of enumerating a plan for awarding credits as set forth in section 22-409 and
shall not be considered to be an update of the capital improvements plan as provided in section 22-416.
EXHIBIT C
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN
It is the intent of this capital improvement plan to include only improvements, which are "system wide improvements" in the service area for wastewater
facilities and water supply facilities. A description of the existing capital improvements for each type of service and the associated cost is provided in the
following:
(1) Wastewater facilities:
a. Treatment facilities. The existing Rockport Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) will have a rated average daily capacity of 2.5 million
gallons per day (MGD) after the 1999 improvements are completed. The plant has been expanded and upgraded over the last 15 years to
provide treatment capabilities to meet the city's needs, improve safety and efficiency of operation and to meet the Texas Natural Resources
Conversation Commission's (TNRCC) and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's ever-changing regulatory standards.
The Rockport WWTP total average daily flow capacity, prior to the present expansion, was 1.57 MGD. The level of current usage is an average
wastewater flow of 1.2 MGD. With the completion of construction in late 1999 the plant total average daily flow capacity will be 2.5 MGD. Present
TNRCC standards require that the owner must initiate engineering and financial planning for expansion when the flow rate reaches 75 percent of the
average daily flow for three consecutive months and begin construction of the expansion when the flow rate reaches 90 percent of the average daily flow.
This means there is a reserve capacity of 0.675 MGD until the flow rate reaches 75 percent of the plant capacity and the city has to begin planning for the
next expansion. Demand of new service units over the next ten years will utilize a portion of the existing reserve capacity constructed.
There have been five construction projects performed at the Rockport WWTP over the last 15 years. These projects were undertaken to provide the
necessary flow capacity to meet the needs of the city and to meet the periodically updated standards of the regulatory agencies. Impact fees can be assessed
to recoup the cost of constructing facilities, which will serve new development. A detailed cost analysis for each project is shown in Attachment No. 1 to
this exhibit. Line item costs were reviewed to determine whether they were eligible and ineligible to be included in the capital improvements plan. The
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 105/444
eligible construction cost for each project was totaled and divided by the plant capacity gained or affected by the construction. A summary of the unit cost
per gallon is present in the following:
SUMMARY OF WASTEWATER COST PER GALLON
1984 Expansion (1.0 MGD to 2.5 MGD) $1.15/gallon
1989 Dechlorination Facilities 0.05/gallon
1992 New Permit Parameters 0.09/gallon
1993 Emergency Generator 0.02/gallon
1998 Expansion (1.57 MGD to 2.5 MGD) 1.45/gallon
2000 Chlorination/Dechlorination Improvements 0.07/gallon
TOTAL $2.83
The calculations show that the capital cost for the improvements at the existing plant to
be $2.83 per gallon. This equates to $849.00 per connection ($2.83/gallon X 3
persons/connection X 100 gallons/person/day).
(2) Water supply facilities: The city has a water certificate of convenience and necessity to serve potable water to the population in a large portion
of the Live Oak Peninsula of Aransas County. The facilities required to provide this service include water supply lines, storage tanks, pumping
plants and a water distribution system. The city maintains the existing system and constructs improvements as necessary to meet the potable water
demand and to stay in compliance with the TNRCC regulatory standards.
The maximum demand on the city's water system has been 106 million gallons per month. This value includes an average unaccounted loss
rate of 11 percent. The amount of water sold ranges from a high of 96 million gallons per month (equates to 3.2 MGD) to an average of 75
million gallons per month (equates to 2.5 MGD). February 1999, the city's system had 8,164 total connections. A breakdown of the
connections is as follows:
Active taps 6,141
Water company connections 891
Apartments 1,132
Total Connections 8,164
The maximum water demand per connection, including losses, has been 431 gallons/connections/day (106,000,000 gallons/30 days per
month/8,164 connections). The water use per person, based on water sold, is provided in the following:
Maximum Months 3,200,000 gpd = 392 gallons/connections
8,164 connections
392 gallons/connections = 130.66 gallons/capacity/day
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 106/444
3 persons/connection
Average Months 2,500,000 gpd = 306 gallons/connections
8,164 connections
306 gallons/connections = 102.00 gallons/capacity/day
3 persons/connections
a. Water Pumping and Storage
In 1995 the FM 188 pump station was constructed to increase the potable water delivery system capacity from the San Patricio Water
District. The project included a pump station and ground storage reservoir. The construction of this pump station increased the available
water supply by 567,000 gallons per day (gpd). This represents 1,316 new connections based on peak demand (567,000 gpd/431
gallons/connections/day). The cost per connection for adding the additional capacity calculates to $480.34/connections
($632,132.00/1,316 connections).
The Ivy Lane pump station is another of the City's potable water facilities. This pump station has a total pumping capacity of7.2 mgd
(5,000 gpm). During 1998 there were demands put on this pump stations, which reached the limits of available peak capacity leaving the
station with no reserve capacity. The ground storage facility at this site includes two 1.5 million gallon reservoirs. During the 1998 peak
even water supply/storage was a limiting factor to demand/use in the city. The existing available peak storage volume, based on the 1998
peak event, amounts to 367 gallons/connections (3,000,000 gallons/8,164 connections). The volume per connection figure was used to
determine future storage volumes.
The capital improvements plan includes the expansion of the Ivy Lane pump station. The improvements to the pumping facilities
includes, the upsizing of pump impellers and the necessary work to the electrical controls to accommodate the additional pump load. The
improvements will cost $21,000.00 and will increase pumping capacity by 1,000,000 gallons per day and will serve 2,320 new
connections. This equates to $9.05/connection. Also contemplated at the Ivy Lane station is a new 1.5 million gallon ground storage tank,
which is projected to cost $540,000.00 and will serve 4,087 new connections. The per connection cost for these facilities is
$132.12/connection.
b. Water Transmission/Distribution
The city has constructed or identified water system improvement projects necessary to provide service to new customers expected over
the next ten years. The cost to construct these improvements has been estimated at $1,804,382.00. Although not fully utilized within the
next ten years the ultimate cost per LUE is estimated at $721.75/LUE ($1,804,382.00/2,500).
(3) Other eligible costs: Costs associated with developing the capital impact program are also eligible. They can be charged to the rate. The
following is an estimate of these costs and a per connection charge for the same.
Legal and Engineering $25,000.00
Land Use Planning 7,500.00
Publication and Printing 500.00
TOTAL $33,000.00
The number of connections over the next ten-year planning period is estimated to be 5,000. Therefore, the per connection soft cost charge is
$6.60.
A summary of the unit cost per gallon is presented in the following:
Summary of Capital Impact Charges
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 107/444
a. Sewer Treatment
Existing plant capacity $849.00/connection
Other eligible cost 3.30/connection
Maximum Assessable Sewer CIF $852.30/connection
b. Water Supply
Water pumping and storage $ 621.51/connection
Water transmission 721.75/connection
Other eligible cost 3.30/connection
Maximum Assessable Water CIF $1,346.56/connection
(Ord. No. 1203,  6, 1-8-2002)
Secs. 22-42222-439. Reserved.
ARTICLE XII. CRIME PREVENTION THROUGH ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN (CPTED)
Sec. 22-440. Purpose.
The city's crime prevention through environmental design (CPTED) is intended to assist in the creation and maintenance of a built environment that
decreases the opportunity for crime and increases the perception of public safety. This article, along with the guidelines that accompany this CPTED
article, provide standards to safeguard property and public welfare through appropriate design, construction, quality of materials, location and maintenance
of all buildings and structures.
(Ord. No. 1312,  2, 12-14-04)
Sec. 22-441. Applicability; exceptions.
(a) Applicability. This article shall apply to the following:
(1) All sites, landscaping, buildings, structures, walls and signs which are defined by the city zoning ordinance;
(2) All new construction and to buildings or structures to which additions or alternations are made excepted as specifically provided herein.
When additions or alterations are made within any 12-month period and exceed 50 percent of the value of the existing building(s) or structure(s), or
the use of the property is expanded or enlarged by 50 percent, such entire site shall be made to conform to this article; and
(3) Existing multifamily dwelling units which are converted to privately owned family units, such as, but not limited to, condominiums.
(b) Exceptions. This article shall not apply to individual lots used for single-family or two-family dwellings, unless otherwise specifically stated in this
article.
(Ord. No. 1312,  2, 12-14-04)
Sec. 22-442. Procedure.
(a) All plans and applications to which this article applies shall be submitted for CPTED review and reviewed for compliance with this article.
(b) The building and development department shall have the power to approve, conditionally approve, or deny any application based upon the criteria
set for in this article.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 108/444
(c) Prior to issuance of a building permit, the building and development department shall determine that the submitted plans for the building permit are
in conformance with those approved by the CPTED section and that the time period for approvals has not expired. The stamping of the plans and the
signature of the director of building and development, or his designated representative, and the date of the signature, shall indicate that the plans are in
conformance.
(d) Noncompliance with approved plans and conditions shall be grounds for either stopping work on the project or denial of a certificate of occupancy.
(e) Any sites, landscaping, buildings, structures, walls and signs which have been approved by the building and development department and
constructed or installed in accordance with the approved plans shall be maintained by the owner or person in possession of the property to insure continued
compliance with the approved plans and conditions.
(f) Lack of maintenance of any details approved by the building and development department shall constitute a violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 1312,  2, 12-14-04)
Sec. 22-443. Criteria.
In reviewing any application for approval, the following elements shall be considered:
(1) Interior spaces. Interior designs may be reviewed for CPTED recommendations to minimize risk and opportunity for crime;
(2) Lighting. All exterior lighting must provide for appropriate and desirable nighttime illumination for all uses on and related to the site. The
lighting of all exterior areas shall be designed to maximize surveillance and reduce conflicts with building design, mature landscaping and
minimize glare or intrusive light and shall conform to Chapter 42, Article IV "Light Nuisance" and amendments thereto. Controls for lights in rest
rooms identified for general public use shall be of the style that cannot be turned off or on by users other than staff;
(3) Landscaping. The design, placement and details of landscaping, regardless of intended or required function, shall be established so as to
provide for natural surveillance of the space and increase security of the area;
(4) Walls and access control gates. In all locations in which walls are either required by the zoning ordinance, or desired by the owner of the
property, the walls shall be designed or built to minimize unauthorized access and increase public safety. Depending upon the location of the
property, this section will apply to all zoning districts on individual lots. Nothing herein is intended to override the specific provisions of the zoning
ordinance with respect to the height of such walls. All gates used at residential, commercial or industrial sites that are otherwise subject to this
article must have police access at all control points;
(5) Identification signs and addresses. Identification signs and site addresses must be visible from public access to the property so as to minimize
confusion as to location and expedite public safety response. This section shall apply to all zoning districts with units on individual lots.
(6) Directories. Properties occupied by more than one structure shall have an internally illuminated directories that shows the layout of the
complex, the location of the viewer, and the unit designations within the complex. Directories shall be in sufficient number and placed in locations
to insure that law enforcement and emergency personnel can easily locate a particular address or individual unit;
(7) Vision panels. All swing employee service exit and entrance doors shall be equipped with a security vision door. Interior passage doors may
be reviewed for CPTED recommendations to ensure that, where appropriate, an opportunity is provided to observe a security risk from outside of a
room before entering the room. This section applies only to new commercial property development. This section does not apply to exterior doors
installed to provide access to building utilities only and
(8) Parking structures. Parking structure designs must minimize risk and opportunity for crime.
(Ord. No. 1312,  2, 12-14-04)
Sec. 22-444. Security plans.
(a) Purpose. Security plans shall be established for particular uses to address vehicular and pedestrian traffic, control disruptive behavior inside and
outside of premises, prevent deterioration of neighborhoods, and assist in providing an environment that enhances safeguarding of property and public
welfare while reducing the necessity for calls for service from law enforcement agencies.
(b) Uses requiring security plans. The following uses, as defined in the zoning ordinance, in addition to any other uses determined by the CPTED
section of the building and development department or police department to be similar to these uses, shall require a security plan prior to issuance of a use
permit or city license:
(1) Bars, cocktail lounges, taverns, discotheques, nightclubs and similar businesses;
(2) Adult-oriented businesses;
(3) Recreational or amusement business, both indoor and outdoor activities, including pool halls and penny arcades;
(4) Entertainment as accessory to restaurant facilities, bars or similar establishments;
(5) Hotels and motels; or
(6) Convenience stores.
(c) Security plan submittal. Every applicant for a use requiring a security plan shall furnish to the CPTED section of the building and development
department the following information:
(1) Plan of operation, program plan and hours;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 109/444
(2) Site/building information;
(3) Safety conditions;
(4) Patron parking, ingress and egress, vehicular and pedestrian traffic control;
(5) Staffing and operations; and
(6) Conditions of plan.
(d) Appeal. The appeal procedure is as follows:
(1) If an applicant for security plan approval is dissatisfied with the decision of the building and development department, the applicant may
administratively appeal any decision of the city's police chief within five days of receipt of the decision. The police chief, or a designated
representative, may modify the conditions of approval of a proposed security plan and shall render a decision within five working days of receipt of
request for review;
(2) If an applicant is dissatisfied with the administrative review by the police department, the applicant may file an appeal in writing with the city
secretary to be heard by the city council. Any appeal shall be filed within ten days of receipt of the decision of the police department, setting forth
the reasons why; and
(3) The city council, acting in its legislative capacity, may modify or remand the decision of the police department.
(Ord. No. 1312,  2, 12-14-04)
Secs. 22-44522-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIII. VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS
Sec. 22-500. General.
This article shall be construed to protect the public's health, safety and welfare insofar as continuous need for maintenance and repairs; and code violations
of commercial vacant structures and premises is detrimental to such. Vacant structures and premises that do not comply with minimum standards of any
city ordinance to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare shall be repaired or maintained as necessary.
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Sec. 22-501. Notice of vacant commercial building; registration.
(a) Upon determination that a building or portion of a building is deemed as a "vacant commercial building", as defined in this chapter, the building
official shall mail a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner giving notice of such determination and requesting registration pursuant
to this article, and shall post a copy of said notice of such determination on the front door of such building.
(b) The owner of a vacant commercial building, upon receipt of the notice, shall register the vacant commercial building and file a vacant commercial
building plan and timetable with the building official not later than ten working days after the owner receives written notice of the determination of a
vacant commercial building. For the purposes described herein, "receives written notice" shall mean actual notice, or shall be deemed received on the fifth
day of mailing the notice pursuant to subsection (a) above.
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Sec. 22-502. Failure to register.
It is a misdemeanor for an owner to fail to register a commercial vacant building in accordance with this article or otherwise fail to secure a commercial
vacant building.
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Sec. 22-503. Vacant building action plan.
(a) The owner of a vacant commercial building shall provide to the building official the following information:
(1) Description of the premises, ownership and contact information;
(2) Time table for expected occupancy; or renovation/demolition of the property, if applicable;
(3) The owner's plan for regular maintenance and security of the building and premises; and,
(4) The owner's plan to monitor and inspect property.
(b) The building official may reject a plan, or portion thereof, which do not comply with section 22-500 of this article.
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Sec. 22-504. Duty to secure property/building.
(a) The owner of a commercial vacant building shall take action to prevent access by trespassers which include the installation and maintenance of
windows, doors, shutters, grills and bars (secured by normal means) for the first floor. Installation and maintenance of boards on windows and doors on the
ground floor is permissible for emergency repairs during that time required to order and replace the window or door with appropriate material.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 110/444
(b) The owner is required to take immediate measures to temporarily secure the building from trespassers and unauthorized entry. The boarding of
windows, doors and other openings will be required for floors other than the first floor (securing by other than normal means).
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Sec. 22-505. Registration and inspection fees.
The owner of a vacant commercial building shall pay to administer an initial vacant commercial building registration fee of $200.00 and an inspection fee
of $100.00 every third month during each year the building is required to be registered. In addition, an annual re-registration fee of $100.00 will be
required for each year such building remains vacant. The registration and inspections fees are transferable to a subsequent owner(s) of the building.
(Ord. No. 1446,  2, 10-21-08)
Secs. 22-50622-521. Reserved.
ARTICLE XIV. METAL BUILDINGS*
Sec. 22-522. Metal buildings.
The purpose of this article is to establish minimum standards to promote the public welfare through the establishment of certain aesthetic qualities to the
built environment. These provisions shall apply to specific architectural building styles used for the construction, use and occupancy of buildings.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-523. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following definitions are defined.
Architectural building styles means those buildings comprised of exterior metal wall material.
Code official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, including a duly authorized
representative of the code official.
Corrugated metal means an industry standard metal panel usually identified as corrugated galvanized iron (CGI) panels. This panel style consists of hot
dipped galvanized mild steel, cold rolled to produce a linear corrugated pattern.
Metal building means the term given to a manufactured structure made solely of metal with metal framework and metal exterior finish. Exterior finishes
are comprised of various industry grade metal panels known as R-Panels.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-524. General.
All architectural building styles comprised of exterior metal wall material shall not be allowed within the City of Rockport except as listed in Table A.
Table A. reflects building styles that are specific to the use category and not to zoning districts.
Table A.
Allowed Metal Building Styles.
Building Use Metal Building Style (cumulative in descending
order)
Residential (including multi-family &
townhouse).
Metal roof systems only. No corrugated metal.
Educational, health care, civic, public use,
office.
The above plus wainscot style w/metal on upper 1/2
of building. No corrugated metal.
General retail, commercial, food service,
entertainment.
The above plus metal on building sides facing nonpublic
spaces (including alleys). No corrugated
metal.
Warehouse, industrial, storage. The above or any metal style except corrugated
metal.
P.U.D. Any approved style.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 111/444
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-525. Mixed uses.
Mixed uses shall contain those styles listed in Table A, with the greater restrictions.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-526. Accessory buildings.
Accessory buildings or structures not exceeding 550 square feet or not visible from a public street shall not be subject to Table A. Accessory buildings
exceeding these parameters shall be consistent with the building style of the existing structure or if the existing building is of metal, shall be consistent
with Table A.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-527. Manufactured buildings.
This article shall not apply to manufactured or industrialized buildings when such structures are compliant with their manufacture and classification.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-528. Design elements.
Dormers, cupolas, chimneys, balconies, porches, bays, colonnades, brackets, stoops and other design elements shall not be subject to Table A.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-529. Building styles.
Building styles not listed in Table A shall be determined by the code official.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-530. Enforcement.
The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article. The code official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this article, and to adopt procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this article.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-531. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, repair or move any building regulated by this article, or cause same to be done, in conflict with
or in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-532. Notice of violations.
The code official shall serve a notice of violation on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, movement or occupancy of a building
or structure in violation of the provisions of this article, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this article. Such notice may
direct the person to cease and desist the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-533. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation failing to comply with the provisions of this article or failing to carry out an order made pursuant of this article or violates
any condition attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by section 1-7, Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 22-534. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by the provisions of this article or aggrieved by orders, decisions or determinations made by the code official relative to the
application and interpretation of this article, shall be heard by the building and standards commission, whose decision shall be final.
(Ord. No. 1463,  1, 8-25-09)
Chapters 23-25 RESERVED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 112/444
Chapter 26
BUSINESSES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 26-126-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. COMMERCIAL SALES
Sec. 26-26. Purpose.
(a) The purpose of this article is to make structures safe, sanitary and fit for human use, to improve the city's ability to attract sources of economic
development and growth, and to secure the beneficial interests of the public for the purposes of health, safety and general welfare.
(b) This article is hereby declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests of the public. All structures within the
corporate limits of the city on the effective date of Ordinance No. 966, or constructed thereafter, shall comply with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 966,  1, 1-25-94)
Sec. 26-27. Scope.
(a) Structure. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, lease, rent, barter or exchange any goods, wares, merchandise or services on a commercial,
wholesale or retail basis, or to offer to do so except out of a permanent structure complying with all construction codes, the zoning ordinance, and all other
applicable ordinances and all regulations of the city.
(b) Sanitary facilities. Food service establishments providing on or off premises food consumption shall provide adequate public restroom facilities in
accordance with the plumbing code and other applicable state laws and city ordinances. All other structures intended for human occupancy or use shall be
provided with adequate sanitary facilities as required by the plumbing code and other applicable state laws and city ordinances.
(Ord. No. 966,  2, 1-25-94)
Editor's noteThe zoning ordinance is on file in the office of the city secretary.
Cross referencePlumbing code,  22-246 et seq.; food services,  54-26 et seq.
Sec. 26-28. Penalty.
(a) Criminal. After having received notice of a violation, any person who continues to violate any provision of this article, or fails to comply with any of
the requirements thereof, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person upon conviction of such violation shall be punished by a fine as provided in
section 1-7(a).
(b) Civil. The city may file a civil action in the district court seeking an injunction and civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 per day for each and every day
or portion thereof during which violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued.
(Ord. No. 966,  6, 1-25-94)
State law referenceEnforcement of municipal ordinances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code ch. 54.
Sec. 26-29. Outdoor display of merchandise, titled items to be sold or repaired.
(a) Setback display of outdoor merchandise. Unless otherwise permitted in this article outdoor displays of permitted merchandise must maintain a
minimum 25-foot setback from any public street or alley.
(b) Food items. No outdoor display of food items of any nature shall be allowed.
(c) Motor vehicles, boats and trailers.
(1) Individual, noncommercial, registered owners of a motor vehicle, boat, trailer or similar titled items may display only one such item at a time
for 14 days, three times per year. If the item is to be displayed on property other than that of the registered owner, the registered owner must have a
written lease from the owner of the property on which the item is to be displayed permitting such display. The lease must be displayed on the item
to be sold. Any such display must be entirely upon private property.
(2) Commercial licensed motor vehicle, boat, trailer and similar titled item dealers are exempt from subsection (a) and subsection (c)(1) of this
section and may display multiple items at any time. Any such display must be entirely upon private property either owned or leased by such
licensed dealer.
(d) Motor vehicles, boats and trailers to be repaired. Motor vehicles, boats and trailers to be repaired, requiring more than 120 hours to be completed
must be stored inside a structure or must be stored inside an enclosure complete with a screening fence to prevent viewing from any public street or alley.
(Ord. No. 966,  3, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 1462,  1, 8-25-09)
Sec. 26-30. Exemptions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 113/444
This article is not applicable to the following:
(1) Garage or yard sales conducted no more than three times each year, for not over 72 hours, on a noncommercial basis.
(2) Nonprofit, charitable, civic or educational events not conducted on a permanent basis.
(3) Vending of food items from separate portable facilities (carts, etc.) if such vending is done in conjunction with promotional activities of the
business and on the same property and such vending is not a continuous or regularly scheduled activity; any activities permitted under this
exemption shall be at least 20 feet from any street or public way.
(4) Sidewalk sales in the B-2 district shall be allowed by special permit from the city council, provided that the displays of merchandise do not
impede pedestrian traffic on sidewalks. Permitted sidewalk sales permits shall not exceed 72 hours in duration.
(5) Coin-operated vending machines, soft drink machines, snack machines, etc.
(Ord. No. 966,  4, 1-25-94; Ord. No. 1566,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 26-31. Notice of violation.
(a) Notice of a violation of the provisions of this article shall be given to the property owner, tenant, employee or occupant of the premises. The notice
shall be in writing and may be served in person or by U.S. mail. The notice shall describe the violation and allow ten calendar days for compliance.
(b) Notice and ten days' compliance shall not be applicable to violations of this article involving food vending or violations resulting from lack of
permanent structures or a lease. These violations shall be subject to immediate abatement.
(Ord. No. 966,  5, 1-25-94)
Chapters 27-29 RESERVED
Chapter 30
CIVIL EMERGENCIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 30-1. Emergency action authorized.
Every officer, agent or employee of the city, while responding to emergency situations, is hereby authorized to act in such a manner as to deal most
effectively with the emergency. This provision shall prevail over every other ordinance of the city and, to the extent to which the city has the authority to
so authorize, over any other law establishing a standard of care in conflict with this section. Neither the city nor the employee shall be liable for any failure
to use ordinary care in such emergency.
(Ord. No. 751,  1, 11-18-86)
State law referenceLiability of a municipality, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code  101.0215.
Secs. 30-230-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 30-26. Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in the enforcement of
any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this
article. Convictions for violations of the provisions of this article shall be punishable by fine as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 558,  11, 3-8-82)
Sec. 30-27. Office of director.
(a) There exists the office of emergency management director of the city, which shall be held by the mayor in accordance with state law.
(b) An emergency management coordinator may be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the director.
(c) The director shall be responsible for conducting a program of comprehensive emergency management within the city and for carrying out the duties
and responsibilities set forth in section 30-30. He may delegate authority for execution of these duties to the coordinator, but ultimate responsibility for
such execution shall remain with the director.
(Ord. No. 558,  1, 3-8-82)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 114/444
Cross referenceAdministration, ch. 2.
State law referenceMunicipal emergency management programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.103.
Sec. 30-28. Powers, duties of director generally.
The powers and duties of the director shall include an ongoing survey of actual or potential major hazards which threaten life and property within the city;
and an ongoing program of identifying and requiring or recommending the implementation of measures which would tend to prevent the occurrence or
reduce the impact of such hazards if a disaster did occur. As part of his responsibility in hazard mitigation, the director shall supervise the development of
an emergency management plan for the city, and shall recommend that plan for adoption by the city council along with any and all mutual aid plans and
agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such emergency management plan. The powers of the director shall include the authority
to declare a state of disaster, but such action may be subject to confirmation by the city council at its next meeting. The duties of the director shall also
include the causing of a survey of the availability of existing personnel, equipment, supplies and services which could be used during a disaster, as
provided for herein, as well as a continuing study of the need for amendments and improvements in the emergency management plan.
(Ord. No. 558,  2, 3-8-82)
State law referenceLocal emergency management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.106; declaration of local disaster, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.108; mutual aid,
V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.109.
Sec. 30-29. Participation in countywide program.
The mayor is hereby authorized to join with the county judge of the county of Aransas and the mayors of the other cities in the county in the formation of
an emergency management council for the county and shall have the authority to cooperate in the preparation of a joint emergency management plan and
in the appointment of a joint emergency management coordinator, as well as all powers necessary to participate in a countywide program of emergency
management insofar as the program may affect the city.
(Ord. No. 558,  3, 3-8-82)
State law referenceCounty programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.102; interjurisdictional programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.104; interjurisdictional emergency
management plans, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.106.
Sec. 30-30. Duties, responsibilities of director.
The duties and responsibilities of the emergency management director shall include the following:
(1) The direction and control of the actual disaster operations of the city emergency management organization as well as the training of
emergency management personnel.
(2) The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the emergency management organization of the city.
(3) The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, county, district, state, regional, federal or other emergency management
organizations.
(4) The marshaling, after declaration of a disaster as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department
of the city to aid in the carrying out of the provisions of the emergency management plan.
(5) The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of a disaster and the immediate operational effectiveness of the city
emergency management plan.
(6) The issuance of reasonable rules, regulations or directives which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city. Such rules
and regulations shall be filed in the office of the city secretary and shall receive widespread publicity unless publicity would be of aid and comfort
to the enemy.
(7) The supervision of the drafting and execution of mutual aid agreements, in cooperation with the representatives of the state and of other local
political subdivisions of the state, and the drafting and execution, if deemed desirable, of an agreement with the county in which such city is located
and with other municipalities within the county, for the countywide coordination of emergency management efforts.
(8) The supervision of, and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private
contributions which may be offered for the purpose of improving emergency management within the city.
(9) The authorizing of agreements, after approval by the city attorney, for use of private property for public shelter and other purposes.
(Ord. No. 558,  4, 3-8-82)
State law referenceInterjurisdictional programs, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.104; local finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.107; mutual aid, V.T.C.A., Government
Code  418.109.
Sec. 30-31. Organization.
The operational emergency management organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city so designated by the director in the
emergency management plan, as well as all organized volunteer groups. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such
officers and employees in accordance with the terms of the emergency management plan. Such plan shall set forth the form of the organization, establish
and designate divisions and functions, assign tasks, duties and powers, and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this article.
Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the division of emergency management of
the state and of the federal government.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 115/444
(Ord. No. 558,  5, 3-8-82)
State law referenceDivision of emergency management, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.041 et seq.
Sec. 30-32. Unauthorized operation of siren.
Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate the termination of a warning, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of
this article and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by this article.
(Ord. No. 558,  6, 3-8-82)
Sec. 30-33. Conflicting provisions.
At all times when the orders, rules, and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this article shall be in effect, they shall supersede and override all
existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith.
(Ord. No. 558,  7, 3-8-82)
Sec. 30-34. Provisions subordinate to state and federal law.
This article shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation.
(Ord. No. 558,  8, 3-8-82)
Sec. 30-35. Liability, indemnity.
This article is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents
and representatives of the city, nor any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, nor any of the agents thereof, in good
faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this article shall
be liable for any damage sustained to persons as the result of the activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily
and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege, or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part of such
real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack shall, together with his successors in
interest, if any, not be civilly liable for the death of, or injury to, any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other
permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person.
(Ord. No. 558,  9, 3-8-82)
State law referenceLiability of a municipality, V.T.C.A., Civil Practice and Remedies Code  101.0215.
Sec. 30-36. Approval of expenditures, contracts.
No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any emergency management activity authorized by this article without
prior approval by the city council, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific
approval of the city council.
(Ord. No. 558,  10, 3-8-82)
State law referenceLocal finance, V.T.C.A., Government Code  418.107.
Sec. 30-37. Oath, affirmation of personnel.
Each employee or any individual that is assigned a function or responsibility under this article shall solemnly swear or affirm to support and defend the
Constitution of the United States, laws of the state and ordinances of the city.
(Ord. No. 558,  12, 3-8-82)
Chapters 31-33 RESERVED
Chapter 34
ELECTIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 34-134-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. DISTRICTS (WARDS)
Sec. 34-26. Electoral wards.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 116/444
(a) The city shall be divided into four electoral wards for all election purposes. Such wards are generally described in Home Rule Charter, section 3.01.
(b) The existing single-member council ward boundary lines for the City of Rockport are hereby amended, and the new districting plan prepared from
the 2010 U.S. Census Bureau files and attached hereto as Exhibit A, defining new wards, as such new wards are further described in the tables attached
hereto as Exhibit B reporting populations and demographic statistics for each such new ward, is hereby designated to define the city's four single-member
council ward boundaries from and after the effective date; that Exhibits A and B are incorporated by reference in and made a part of this section, and shall
be kept on file in the city secretary's office. Said map shall also be recorded in the office of the Aransas County Clerk, Aransas County, Texas.
(Ord. No. 908,  1, 2, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 993,  1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 1209,  1, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 1500,  1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 1523,  1, 11-9-10; Ord.
No. 1549,  1, 9-27-11)
Sec. 34-27. Corporate city limit map.
The boundary map of the corporate city limits of the City of Rockport dated September, 2010 as drawn by Marsha Brundrett, Griffith & Brundrett,
Engineering & Surveying, and attached hereto as Exhibit B and included as part of this article.
(Ord. No. 1500,  1, 5-11-10; Ord. No. 1523,  2, 11-9-10)
Chapters 35-37 RESERVED
Chapter 38
EMERGENCY SERVICES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 38-138-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. BURGLARY, ROBBERY AND FIRE ALARMS
Sec. 38-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alarm business means the business by an individual, partnership, corporation, or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering,
replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced, moved or installed any
alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.
Alarm dialing device means an alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines a prerecorded voice message.
Alarm systems means any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical, arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity requiring
urgent attention to which police or firefighting personnel are expected to respond.
Alarm user means the person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind in control of any building, structure or
facility wherein an alarm system is maintained.
Burglary alarm system means an alarm system signaling an entry or attempted entry into the area protected by the system.
Coordinator means the individual designated by the chief of police to issue permits and enforce the provisions of this article.
False alarm means an alarm signal, received and answered by police or firefighting personnel when a situation requiring a response by police or
firefighting personnel does not in fact exist, but does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary
circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm business operator or alarm user.
False fire alarm means a fire alarm notification to the police or fire department when the responding personnel reasonably find there is no evidence of a
fire having occurred.
Robbery alarm system means an alarm system signaling a robbery or attempted robbery.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.2, 4-24-90)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 38-27. Purpose and scope.
(a) The purpose of this article is to:
(1) Protect the emergency services of the city from misuses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 117/444
(2) Defray the cost of administering this article through license fee charges.
(b) The provisions of this article shall apply only to alarm systems which:
(1) Send an alarm signal to a location where the signals are continuously monitored and an alarm message is relayed to the police department. No
alarm system may be directly connected to the police department nor may a prerecorded message of an alarm signal be sent to any city office; or
(2) Produce an audible or visual alarm which can be heard or seen outside of the premises, and are not equipped with an automatic shutoff device
which will shut off all external alarms within 20 minutes of being activated.
(c) The provisions of this article shall not apply to alarm systems which produce an audible or visual alarm which can be heard or seen outside the
premises, provided that:
(1) The alarm system is equipped with an automatic shutoff device which will shut off all external audible and visual alarms within 20 minutes of
being activated; and
(2) The alarm system is not continuously monitored at an off-premises location.
(Ord. No. 855,  1, 4-24-90)
Sec. 38-28. Penalty.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this article, and each offense is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 855,  1, 4-24-90)
Sec. 38-29. Alarm user's permit required.
(a) Every alarm user shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each system from the coordinator's office prior to use of an alarm system. An alarm user's
permit shall entitle the holder to operate all burglary, robbery or fire alarm systems at the location specified on the permit. A user that maintains alarm
systems at more than one location shall be required to purchase an alarm user's permit for each street address where alarm systems are maintained.
Application for an alarm user's permit and a fee of $25.00 for each alarm location shall be filed with the coordinator's office. Each permit shall bear the
signature of the chief of police and shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the chief of police
or his representative. The user shall acknowledge in the application for a permit that service is desired and that all information in the original application is
current, or if not current, the applicant shall update all incorrect entries to the original application. The police department shall protect all information on
such application as confidential information; provided, however, nothing in this article shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate law
enforcement purposes and for enforcement of this article.
(b) A revoked user's permit shall be obtained from the coordinator's office by filing an application and paying a fee as follows:
(1) First revoked user's permit, $50.00.
(2) Each additional revoked user's permit, $55.00.
(3) Each permit shall bear the signature of the chief of police and permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall
be available for inspection by the chief of police or his representative.
(c) An alarm user required by federal or state statute, regulation or rule to install, maintain and operate an alarm system shall be subject to this article;
provided:
(1) A permit shall be designated as special alarm user's permit and the permit fee of $25.00 shall not be required.
(2) A special alarm user's permit for a system which has six or more false alarms in a calendar year shall not be subject to revocation under this
article but the holder of the permit shall pay a fee of $50.00 with the submission of the report required by this article.
(3) Upon written demand by the coordinator the holder of a special user's permit shall pay a fee of $55.00 for each set of five false alarms in a
year.
(4) The payment of any fee provided for in this section shall not be deemed to extend the term of the permit.
(Ord. No. 855,  1, 4-24-90; Ord. No. 1538,  1, 6-28-11)
Sec. 38-30. User instructions.
(a) Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm system which is installed on premises located in the area subject to this
article shall furnish the user with instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the alarm system properly and to obtain service for the
alarm system.
(b) Standard form instructions shall be submitted by every alarm business to the coordinator. If the coordinator reasonably finds such instructions to be
incomplete, unclear or inadequate, he may require the alarm business to revise the instructions to comply with this section and then to distribute the revised
instructions to its alarm users.
(c) The alarm user shall keep the police department provided with a current list of not less than two persons who should be called to reset the alarm. If a
mechanism sounds an audible alarm signal for longer than 20 minutes after being activated, the chief of the police department or his designated
representative is authorized to disable the alarm. All cost of the city in disabling such an alarm shall be assessed to the operator of the alarm system and
shall be paid to the city within 30 days after the operator has received notice that the costs have been assessed. The city shall not be liable for any damage
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 118/444
incurred to the property or alarm system in disabling the alarm system. Application for a permit under the provisions of this article constitutes a grant of
approval by the operator of the alarm system for the city to deactivate the alarm system under the provisions of this subsection.
(d) In case of a power failure, all alarm circuits shall automatically convert to standby battery supply, capable of supplying at least 12 hours of
emergency power.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.4, 4-24-90; Ord. No. 1538,  2, 6-28-11)
Sec. 38-31. Automatic dialing devices.
It shall be unlawful to own, operate or maintain an automatic dialing device which is designed to dial a telephone number which is assigned to the city
police department. No alarm system may be directly connected to the police department.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.5, 4-24-90)
Sec. 38-32. Operation of central station or answering service.
Any alarm system business which operates a central station and any telephone answering service shall:
(1) Responding to alarm. Have sufficient personnel trained in the procedures to be followed in receiving and relaying notice of the activation of
any alarm system on duty at all times to ensure that emergency messages or alarm signals received by such business can be relayed immediately to
the police department.
(2) Notification of alarm user. Notify the alarm user or his designated employee of the activation of the alarm system within 24 hours of the time
the alarm was activated by telephone or by placing such notice in the mail, addressed to the person in control of the property.
(3) Records. Keep a written record of the date and time each notification of the activation of an alarm system is received, and the date, time and
method by which the person in control of the property or his designated employee was notified. Such records shall be retained for at least two years
and shall be made available for inspection by any member of the police department designated by the chief of police to inspect such records when
such a member of the police department makes demand at the office of the alarm system business or telephone answering service during regular
business hours.
(4) Periodic testing; correction of defects. Test or cause to be tested all equipment used by the central station or telephone answering service
relating to the receipt of notifications of the activation of any alarm system and the equipment in relaying those notifications to the police
department at least one time in every 12-month period and, where a test result is unsatisfactory, correct or cause to be corrected within a reasonable
period of time not to exceed seven days the cause of the unsatisfactory test result.
(5) Evidence of test results. Produce evidence of the results of tests conducted pursuant to subsection (4) above, upon request of a member of the
police department designated by the chief of police to inspect such evidence. The requirements of this subsection shall be satisfied if such results
are made available at the central station or telephone answering service on the next regular business day after demand is made.
(6) Providing service to licensed businesses only. Not provide answering services for any alarm system business which is not licensed by the
state.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.6, 4-24-90)
Sec. 38-33. False alarms; permit revocation.
(a) Any alarm system which has six or more false alarms within a calendar year shall be subject to permit revocation as provided in this section.
(b) If the police department records five or more false alarms within a calendar year for any alarm system:
(1) The coordinator shall notify the alarm user and the alarm business providing service or inspection to the user by certified mail of such fact
and direct that the user submit a report to the coordinator within ten days of receipt of the notice describing actions taken or to be taken to discover
and eliminate the cause of the false alarms.
(2) If the alarm user submits a report as directed, the coordinator shall determine if the actions taken or to be taken will prevent the occurrence of
false alarms; if he determines that the action will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, he shall notify the alarm user and the related alarm
business in writing that the permit will not be revoked at that time and that if one more false alarm occurs within the permit year, the permit will be
summarily revoked.
(3) If no report is submitted, or if the coordinator determines that the actions taken or to be taken will not prevent the occurrence of false alarms,
the coordinator shall give notice by certified mail to the user that the permit will be revoked without further notice on the tenth day after the date of
the notice if the user does not file within that period a written request for a hearing.
(4) If a hearing is requested, written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served on the user by the coordinator by certified mail at
the address provided by the user at least ten days prior to the date set for the hearing, which date shall not be more than 21 nor less than ten days
after the filing of the request for hearing.
(5) The hearing shall be before the chief of police. The alarm user shall have the right to present written and oral evidence, subject to the right of
cross-examination. If the chief of police determines that six or more false alarms have occurred in a calendar year, and that the user has not taken
actions which will prevent the occurrence of false alarms, the chief of police shall issue written findings to that effect and an order revoking the
user's permit.
(6) An alarm user shall immediately discontinue use of the alarm system upon being notified by certified mail at the address provided by the user
of the revocation of a permit pursuant to this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 119/444
(7) An alarm user whose permit has been revoked may apply for a revoked user's permit as provided in this section. The coordinator shall not be
required to issue a revoked user's permit unless he is satisfied that the user's system has been properly serviced and its deficiencies corrected. The
coordinator may impose reasonable restrictions and conditions upon the user, before issuing a revoked user's permit, which restrictions and
conditions shall be written on the permit and shall provide for summary revocation on the occurrence for six additional false alarms in the permit
year. Additional revoked user permits may be issued upon the same conditions as the first revoked user permit.
(8) In situations permitting summary revocation under this section, revocations shall be effective on the third day following the mailing by
certified mail by the coordinator of a notice of revocation. There shall be no appeal of a summary revocation for failure to submit a report.
(9) All administrative actions may be appealed, except for summary revocation for failure to submit a report.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.7, 4-24-90; Ord. No. 1538,  3, 6-28-11)
Sec. 38-34. Violations; corporations, partnerships and associations.
(a) A person, corporation, partnership or other association commits an offense under this article by commission or omission of any provision of this
article that imposes upon such person or entity a duty or responsibility.
(b) In addition to prohibiting or requiring certain conduct on individuals, it is the intent of this article to hold a corporation, partnership or other
association criminally responsible for acts or omissions performed by an agent acting in behalf of the corporation, partnership or other association and
within the scope of his employment.
(Ord. No. 855,  1.8, 4-24-90)
Sec. 38-35. Disclaimer.
The city shall not be under any duty or obligation to any person by reason of this article and specifically disclaims liability for any damages which may be
caused by the failure of any department of the city to monitor and/or respond to an alarm notification transmitted by any means or for any damage as a
result of any unreasonable delay in response to such alarm notification.
(Ord. No. 855, 4-24-90)
Chapter 39 RESERVED
Chapter 40
EMPLOYEES
ARTICLE 1. PERSONNEL POLICY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 40-1. Purpose.
(a) Efficiency in the operation of the city depends upon the effective utilization of its employees. This responsibility belongs to all supervisors of the
city. Each supervisor is in a true sense a "personnel" manager.
(b) The purpose of these policies is to bring into the service of the city a high degree of understanding, cooperation, efficiency and unity which comes
through systematic application of good procedures in personnel administration and to provide a uniform policy for all employees with all the benefits such
a program ensures. The basic objectives of these policies are:
(1) To promote and increase efficiency, effectiveness and economy in the service of the city.
(2) To provide fair and equal opportunity to all qualified applicants to enter city employment on the basis of demonstrated qualifications, merit
and fitness as determined through fair and practical methods of recruitment and selection.
(3) To provide a program of recruitment, advancement and retention which will make employment with the city attractive as a career and
encourage each employee to render his or her best services to the city.
(4) To promote high morale among city employees by providing a good working environment, uniform personnel policies, opportunity for
advancement and consideration for employee needs and desires.
(5) To provide a uniform plan of evaluation and consistent, up-to-date position classification and compensation plan based on relative duties and
responsibilities
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-2. Equal employment opportunity policy.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 120/444
(a) Equal opportunity. It is the policy of the city to ensure equal employment opportunities. Discrimination against any person in recruitment,
examination, appointment, training, evaluation, promotion, discipline, pay or any other aspect of personnel administration, because of the political or
religious opinions or affiliations, membership or non-membership in employee organizations, or because of race, color, national origin, marital status, sex,
age, handicap or other non-merit factors, is prohibited.
(b) Civil rights of all employees.
(1) The city recognizes the right of every employee to work in an environment that is free of racial, ethnic, age and/or sexual harassment and
intimidation. The city will not tolerate any form of racial, ethnic, age or sexual harassment either physically or verbally. Any and all steps necessary
to prevent such conduct are to be taken by employees and supervisors. It is the duty of every supervisor and department head, as well as the city
secretary, city manager and the council to ensure that harassment and/or intimidation is not permitted or tolerated in the work place.
(2) If any employee is the victim of harassment or intimidation, or observes such conduct, he or she is to report it promptly and directly to a
department head or the city manager. The city manager is to be informed immediately if a department manager receives a complaint or a report of
discrimination, harassment or intimidation. An investigation into any complaint or report that may be deemed as reasonable shall be initiated
immediately.
(3) Complaint procedure. If an employee feels he or she has been the victim of discrimination, harassment or intimidation or has observed
conduct that could be construed as harassment, discrimination or intimidation, the employee should report it verbally to the department head or the
city manager. The report should state specific details of the incident(s) and a description of what happened.
(4) Corrective action will be taken against any employee taking part in any form of racial, ethnic, age or sexual harassment or intimidation. This
includes, but is not limited to, unwelcome sexual advances to any employee or the making of remarks or jokes known to be offensive to any
employee because of his or her sex, race, age, and/or physical handicap. Harassment also includes slurs, inappropriate requests and other verbal,
graphic or physical conduct.
(5) Confidentiality. In no event will information concerning a complaint or a report of harassment be released by the city to a third party or to
anyone who is not directly involved in the investigation. Specifically, information will not be released to an affected employee's family, the news
media, or a prospective employer seeking a reference. The purpose of this provision is to protect the confidentiality of an employee who files a
complaint or reports a potential violation, and to protect the reputation of any employee wrongfully charged with a violation. The city may need to
share information concerning a complaint with potential witnesses as part of its investigation of the complaint and may also be legally compelled
by a court or government agency to disclose information concerning a complaint.
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-3. Applicability.
This Personnel Policies Manual applies to all city employees. An "employee" is any person hired by the city. A person on retainer or under contract is not
considered to be a city employee in the absence of a specific agreement to that effect. City council members; board, committee and commission members;
professionals that include, but are not limited to, municipal court judges, attorneys, engineers, architects, auditors, etc. are not considered to be city
employees. The City Charter supersedes all provisions in this manual if there is a conflict between this manual and the City Charter.
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-4. Dissemination.
All employees shall be informed of the existence of these policies and each department head shall keep a copy available for reference by his or her
employees. Personnel Policies Manuals outlining the general personnel policies of the city will be furnished to all employees for their personal use and
reference. The city shall require that all employees sign a statement that they have been furnished a copy of a Personnel Policies Manual outlining these
policies. It shall be the employee"s responsibility to become thoroughly familiar with such policies.
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-5. Amendment to policies.
These policies may be amended, supplemented or superseded at any time by the city council. Upon any change, each employee will be given a copy of the
revised policy changes in writing for their Personnel Policies Manual. All employees will sign a statement that they have been furnished a copy of the
amendment, supplement or notice of supercession.
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-6. Administrative authority.
Chapter 4.07 of the City of Rockport Home Rule Charter states:
(a) Personnel rules shall be prepared by the city manager and presented to the city council, which may adopt them by ordinance, with or without
amendment. The adopted rules shall establish the city as an equal opportunity employer and shall govern the equitable administration of the personnel
system of the city.
(b) The adopted rules shall provide for the following requirements:
(1) A pay and benefits plan for all city employment positions.
(2) A plan for working hours, attendance policy and regulation, and provision for sick and vacation leave.
(3) Procedures for the hearing and adjudication of grievances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 121/444
(4) Additional practices and procedures necessary to the beneficial and equitable administration of the city's personnel system.
(5) A plan for oral and written evaluation annually for all city employees by their immediate supervisor, including evaluation of the city manager
and the city secretary by the city council.
(c) The adopted personnel policies and rules shall be reviewed not less than biennially by the city manager; a report of said review, to include proposed
changes, shall be submitted to council for consideration.
(Ord. No. 1212,  1, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-740-20. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. HIRING POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
Sec. 40-21. Vacancies.
Department heads shall notify the administrative assistant when job vacancies occur or are projected in their department. The supervisor and department
head will review the existing job description to determine if it needs updating prior to posting the vacancy.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-22. Posting of vacancies.
The administrative assistant will post the job vacancy within the city for three working days to allow current employees the opportunity to advance in the
city service. Only after all internal applicants have been reviewed without a hire, will the position be advertised outside the city. The job posting will be
placed on a board in the front window of city hall and at the administrative assistant's office. Copies of the applicable job description and associated forms
will be available along with city employment applications.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-23. Applications.
When a job vacancy has been posted, copies of the applicable job description, associated forms and city employment applications will be available from
the administrative assistant's office. When no job vacancies exist, no city employment applications will be available. Completed applications are retained
only to meet the requirement of the records management plan; no completed applications are maintained for future employment consideration once the
position is filled.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-24. Selection.
Employees are selected solely on the basis of their qualifications for the specific position for which they apply. Selections are made without regard to the
applicant's political or religious opinions or affiliations or race, color, national origin, marital status or other non-merit factors. Age, sex and physical
conditions shall not be considered in selection except where specific age, sex or physical requirements constitute a bona fide occupational qualification
necessary for proper and efficient operation.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-25. Categories of employment.
All employees are categorized as one of the following:
(1) Full-time employee: One who is employed for a full-time workweek of 40 hours and who is eligible for all city benefits.
(2) Part-time employee: One who is employed for a workweek of less than 40 hours and who is not eligible for all city benefits.
(3) Temporary employee: one who is employed for a full-time workweek of up to 40 hours, but less than 52 weeks out of a calendar year and
who is not eligible for all city benefits.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-26. Continued employment.
The city is an "at-will" employer. Neither length of employment nor categorization as any type of employee shall be construed as to create an expectation
of continued employment.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-27. Nepotism.
No person related within the second degree of affinity (marriage) or within the third degree of consanguinity (blood) to the mayor, any city council
member or the city manager shall be appointed to any office, position or other services of the city, but this prohibition shall not apply to officers or
employees who have been employed by the city continuously for more than six months prior to the election of such member of the council or of the mayor
or the appointment of the city manager. In addition, the city manager shall not approve the appointment to any supervisor's work group, any person who is
related within the second degree by affinity or consanguinity to that supervisor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 122/444
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-28. Residency requirement.
In order to respond to civil emergencies within a reasonable time period, all employees who reside outside the corporate limits of the city shall reside so as
to be able to respond to duty within one hour of notification of the requirement to do so. All employees must comply with this residency requirement
within the first six months of employment.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-29. Medical examination.
As a condition of employment, each applicant offered employment must undergo a medical examination by a licensed facility designated by the city, the
cost to be borne by the city. No one shall be employed unless the medical examiner certifies the applicant meets the minimum standards of physical fitness
required for the position offered.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-30. Transfers.
A transfer is the reassignment of an employee from one position to another. A transfer not involving promotion or demotion may be affected at any time
for administrative convenience or necessity, or upon request of the employee to the department head, or if interdepartmental, to the city manager; provided
that the employee is qualified to perform the duties of the position to which the transfer is contemplated. Transfers may be made administratively or in
conjunction with an announced selection process. Transfers between classifications or between departments shall become effective following approval of
the city manager.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-31. Demotions.
A demotion is the assignment of an employee from one position to another position having less responsibility or requiring less experience, education,
technical or professional expertise, and which is usually at a lower salary. A demotion may be effected for either a disciplinary or non-disciplinary action.
With the approval of the city manager and if qualified to perform the duties of the lower position, an employee may be administratively demoted at his or
her request. Such demotions shall not be considered as disciplinary actions to disqualify the employee involved from consideration for later advancement.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-32. Termination.
Employment with the city is of an "at-will" nature, meaning the employee may resign at any time and the city may discharge the employee at any time, for
any reason or for no reason.
(1) An employee terminating under his or her own will shall provide two weeks' written notice to his or her supervisor in order to terminate in
good standing. The city manager may waive any portion of the notice period.
a. Employees terminating in good standing shall receive payment for any unused vacation time accrued. The personnel records the city
maintains on any employee who resigns by giving proper notice shall show that the employee resigned of his or her own accord.
b. Any employee whose employment is terminated by the city shall not be considered to have terminated in good standing. Any employee
whose employment is terminated by the city will be paid not later than the sixth business day after termination and employees who terminate
in good standing will be paid no later than the next scheduled payday.
(2) An employee failing to report for duty or remain at work as scheduled without proper notification, authorization or excuse shall be considered
as absent without leave which constitutes abandonment of duties, except when the failure to notify is due to circumstances beyond the control of the
employee. Absence without leave may be considered as an employee's resignation without notice. In such cases, the employee's termination shall
not be considered in "good standing."
(3) Layoff.
a. An employee may be laid off because of changes in duties, organizational changes, lack of work or budget cutbacks. Whenever possible,
an employee laid off from one city department shall be transferred to a suitable position elsewhere provided said employee has the appropriate
job qualifications and job skills and an opening exists in the receiving department. Whenever possible, at least two weeks' notice shall be given
an employee prior to layoff. Layoffs shall be carried out on the basis of demonstrated job performance and efficiency, with the most proficient
employees being retained the longest. Seniority within city service shall be used to determine the order of layoff among employees with
substantially equivalent records of job performance and efficiency, with the most senior employees being retained the longest. Temporary
employees shall be laid off before regular employees performing similar duties. A layoff shall not be considered a disciplinary action.
b. Employees laid off may be recalled to their job or another similar job in which they meet the minimum job requirements and
qualifications in the reverse order of layoff. Employees being recalled shall have precedence over other job applicants. Employees recalled to
employment shall report to work as instructed.
c. An employee failing to report back to work shall be considered as having forfeited his or her right to reemployment.
(4) Incapacity. An employee may be terminated for medical reasons when the employee as an individual no longer meets the standards of fitness
required for the position. A competent physician prescribed by the city manager shall base a finding of incapacity on an individual medical
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 123/444
determination. Terminations for incapacity shall not be considered disciplinary action and shall not operate to deny any employee the use of any
accrued illness, injury, disability leave or other benefits.
(5) Unsatisfactory service. An employee may be terminated for unsatisfactory service when his or her ability to handle the duties of the position
fall below the desirable standards for continued employment, as supported by performance evaluation records and supporting documentation.
(Ord. No. 1212,  2, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-3340-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE AND RETENTION
Sec. 40-41. New employee orientation.
(a) The personnel and risk manager will ensure that all new employees complete a new employee orientation. The orientation shall address, as a
minimum, the following topics: Employee benefits, minimum standards of job performance and personal conduct, schedule of paydays, procedures for
recording work time; introduction to other city employees in the employee's work area; supervisory relationships; minimum required standards of physical
fitness; procedures for evaluation of job performance.
(b) All new employees shall be given a thorough orientation about the nature of the job, the benefits, obligations and responsibilities of the position, and
the general policies and procedures of both the city and the department within which he or she is to be employed. In addition, the city will obtain
information needed for insurance programs, determining citizenship status, etc. such as date of birth that was not provided in the application for
employment. The employee shall also be furnished a copy of the city Personnel Policies Manual for their personal use and reference at this time and the
employee, by signature, shall acknowledge receipt of the manual.
(c) New employees shall be given up to six months to acclimate to the standards required to complete the assigned job. Supervisors are to inform the
new employee of any shortcomings in job performance or personal conduct as they occur. Regular meetings should be held between the new employee and
the supervisor (and/or department head) so as to assess the employee's progress in learning the required job skills as well as the employee's adaptation to
the work place and to the existing staff. All employees are "at-will" both during and after the initial six-months period.
(d) Any adverse action (final warning, suspension or termination due to non-performance) must be documented and recorded in the personnel record the
city maintains on each employee.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-42. Standards of conduct.
(a) The following guidelines pertaining to political activity shall apply to all employees:
(1) Under no circumstances may any employee wear a campaign button or other form of political endorsement on their clothing during work
hours. Employees not having defined work hours are expected to exercise professional discretion in this matter.
(2) Under no circumstances may bumper stickers, placards or other forms of endorsement be placed on any city owned vehicle or piece of
equipment. Employees may not place placards or other forms of political endorsement on publicly owned lands.
(3) No employees shall use working hours to participate in any partisan political activity. Employees not having defined work hours are expected
to exercise professional discretion in this matter.
(4) Under no circumstances shall employees use or attempt to use their position as a city employee to influence the outcome of any election.
(5) Employees are encouraged to participate in the electoral process by voting.
(6) No employees may hold an appointed or elective office, partisan office or any other office with or without remuneration, where such service
may constitute a direct conflict of interest with city employment. Prior to seeking or accepting an offer, all employees should first notify their
department head and request permission to proceed if they seek to retain their position with the city.
(b) The following guidelines pertaining to outside employment shall apply to all employees:
(1) In general, employees of the city are not prohibited from retaining outside employment. In many cases, such employment may be desirable
and beneficial to the city. However, there may be cases where outside employment may be detrimental to the city. Employees wishing to seek
outside employment are to review the matter with their department head and obtain permission before beginning the employment if they wish to
seek to retain their position with the city. Department heads may refer the matter to the city manager for consideration.
(2) Discretion and good judgment must be the underlying guidelines when reviewing the matter of outside employment; however, the following
rules shall be applied:
a. The performance of the city employee cannot be adversely affected by the outside employment, i.e., exhaustion, injury, etc. When there is
an adverse impact on the performance of the employee, the department head should take the appropriate steps to remedy the situation.
b. A city employee cannot hold an outside job, which creates a conflict of interest with the city.
c. Any outside business activity, such as selling a product, must not be conducted during normal business hours.
d. Approval of ongoing outside employment by either a department head or the city manager shall be noted in writing and placed in the
personnel file the city maintains on the employee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 124/444
(c) The following guidelines pertaining to the receipt and solicitation of gifts shall apply to all employees of the city:
(1) Under no circumstances shall any employee solicit or accept a gift in exchange for the performance of his or her job or the delivery of a city
service.
(2) Employees are to notify their supervisor of any citizen or vendor, who offers a gift to an employee in exchange for recommending a specific
product or service, or performing, failing to perform, or modifying the tasks and duties assigned to the employee.
(3) If an employee is in a situation where refusal of a gift would lead to a discourteous confrontation or some other adverse event, the employee
may receive it and then promptly turn it over to their supervisor.
(4) Employees who solicit gifts for civic projects in which they are involved shall make it clear to the prospective donor that their actions are
unrelated to their employment with the city and that the acceptance or refusal of the solicitation shall have no bearing on the job performance of
that employee or other employees.
(5) Relations with contractors. No officer or employee of the city shall accept, directly or indirectly, any gift, favor, privilege or employment
having a monetary value in excess of $25.00 from any person, firm or corporation doing business with, or seeking to do business with the city
during the term of office of such officer or during the employment of such employee of the city and in connection with such office or employment,
except as may be authorized by ordinance or on behalf of the city and for its benefit. Under no circumstance shall cash or any instrument of cash
having monetary value be accepted. No officer or employee of the city who is employed, directly or indirectly, by any person, firm or corporation
doing business with, or seeking to do business with the city shall in any manner participate in any discussion or decision of any agency, board,
commission or instrumentality of the city having to do with the business done or sought to be done with the city by such person, firm or corporation
without first declaring publicly such employment.
(d) Standards of conduct.
(1) All employees are expected to perform their job with a maximum degree of courtesy, cooperation, effectiveness and efficiency. Mediocrity,
indifference and other attitudes or behaviors that cause irreconcilable friction among employees or are counter-productive to completing specific
tasks and delivering services to the public shall not be tolerated.
(2) Conduct on or off the job, which adversely affects the ability of the employee to properly complete his job or adversely affects the ability of
the city to provide services shall be cause for disciplinary action.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of each employee to maintain the standards of physical fitness required to successfully perform the assigned job.
The minimum required fitness standard shall be clearly defined at the time of employment or upon adoption of these policies, whichever comes
first.
(4) Under no circumstances shall the possession or use of illegal drugs be tolerated. In addition, the possession or consumption of alcohol will
not be tolerated in the work place or during work hours. In cases where it is believed alcohol has been consumed in the work place or during work
hours, the supervisor shall ensure that the employee arrives at his home safely. In cases where illegal drugs are found, the police department will be
notified immediately. If an employee reports to work in a condition that makes it unsafe for the employee or for others, the employee is to be sent
or taken home unless medical attention is deemed appropriate. In all cases, the supervisor shall immediately notify the department head. An
informal investigation shall be started to determine the actual sequence of events, magnitude of the infraction(s) and the appropriate disciplinary
action.
(5) An employee taking prescribed medication or over-the-counter medication having a warning of drowsiness or other adverse condition on the
label must notify their supervisor prior to the beginning of the work period. The supervisor has the option of requiring the employee to provide a
letter from a physician or a copy of the prescription.
(6) Any employee who voluntarily seeks medical or professional assistance to overcome a substance abuse problem shall be given every form of
assistance possible. Every attempt will be made to hold the employee's position until the employee has had an opportunity to discuss his retention
with the department head and the city manager. Where possible, reasonable adjustments to schedules and workloads will be made to ensure that the
employee is given the opportunity to develop the routine(s) necessary to actively participate in any out-patient after care program that may be
required. Confidentiality shall be maintained in the interest of the employee.
(7) All employees are expected to keep their financial affairs in good order. Failure to pay just debts, including taxes and court approved child
support, may constitute cause for disciplinary action, particularly if the employee's job performance is impeded or there is interference in the
workplace by individuals or firms attempting to collect debts.
(8) City equipment and facilities shall be used for official city purposes only. Personal use of city equipment is prohibited. Employees assigned a
city vehicle for use during the workday will be allowed to stop for lunch so long as the vehicle remains within the city or the immediate vicinity.
Employees assigned a take-home vehicle for the purposes of "on call" duty shall not use the vehicle for personal purposes. Department heads and
other senior employees assigned a "take home" vehicle shall resolve the parameters of the use of the vehicle with the city manager.
(9) The city respects the privacy of its employees. However, an employee may not expect such privacy rights to extend to the use of city-owned
systems, property, equipment or supplies or to work-related conduct. This policy is intended to notify all employees that no reasonable expectation
of privacy exists in connection with use of city systems, property, equipment or supplies. City employees are prohibited from withholding
information maintained within company-supplied containers, including but not limited to, computer files, computer databases, desks, lockers and
cabinets. The following rules also apply to use of city property:
a. City right to access information. While city employees have individual passwords to e-mail, voice mail and computer network systems,
these systems are at all times accessible to and by the city and may be subject to unannounced, periodic inspections by the city for business
purposes. This policy applies to all telephone, electronic and computer network systems which are accessed on or from the city's premises,
used in a manner which identifies the employee with the city, accessed using city computer equipment and/or via city paid access methods.
Employees may not use secret passwords and all system passwords must be available to the city at all times. The city maintains backup copies
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 125/444
of computer records and these records, as well at the usage records of the city computer network systems may be reviewed by the city for
legal, business or other reasons.
b. Use is restricted to city business. City employees are expected to use city e-mail, voice mail and computer network systems for city
business (during working hours), not for personal reasons. Personal reasons include, but are not limited to, non-job-related communications,
research or solicitations, or soliciting for political or religious causes, outside organizations for other commercial ventures.
c. Prohibited content. Employees are prohibited from using city telephone, electronic or computer network systems in any manner that may
be offensive or disruptive to others. This includes, but is not limited to, the transmission of racial or ethnic slurs, gender-specific comments,
sexually explicit images or messages, any remarks that would offend others on the basis of age, political or religious beliefs, disability, national
origin or sexual orientation, or any messages that may be interpreted to disparage or harass others. No telephone, electronic or computer
network communications may be sent which represent the sender is from another agency or as someone else, or which try to hide the sender's
identity. Inappropriate or excessive personal use of city property or telephone, electronic or computer network systems will result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
(10) The city reserves the right to conduct inspections of employees' lockers, purses, personal vehicles, parcels, desks, work areas, clothing and
other personal property:
a. While in the possession of employees during the course and scope of their employment;
b. While located on city property; or
c. While located in city or personal vehicles parked on city property, or being used for city business.
d. Entering onto city property, as defined in this policy, or conducting city business, will constitute consent by the employee to such
inspections. The inspection of an employee or his or her clothing will be conducted by a person of the same gender as the employee being
inspected, in the presence of a witness of the same gender.
e. City property means all property and facilities of the city, including lockers, desks, parking lots, buildings, grounds, city vehicle, personal
vehicles used while conducting city business, and all other locations where employees are acting in the course and scope of their employment,
acting on behalf of the city, or are otherwise conducting city business.
f. Any employee who refuses to cooperate in an inspection or submit to a reasonable search, or is found in unauthorized possession of
property of the city, coworkers, customers, or in possession of alcoholic beverages, drugs, or drug-related paraphernalia will be terminated.
(e) Smoking policy.
(1) Smoking is prohibited in all city owned facilities. A sign, visible at each public entrance to the premises, shall be posted notifying persons
entering the premises that smoking is prohibited.
(2) Any smoking employee may object to the city manager about smoking in any portion of any city property normally frequented by that
employee. Using already available means of ventilation, separation, or partition, the city manager shall attempt to reach a reasonable
accommodation, insofar as possible, between the preferences of nonsmoking and smoking employees. The city is not required by this policy to
incur any expense or make structural or other physical modifications to accommodate the preferences of nonsmoking or smoking employees.
(3) If an accommodation, which is satisfactory to all affected nonsmoking employees, cannot be reached as to any portion of the place of
employment about which a complaint has been voiced, the preferences of nonsmoking employees shall prevail, to the end that nonsmoking
employees may work in a smoke free environment. No such portion of the place of employment shall be designated as a smoking area. However,
the requirements of this policy shall not apply to nonsmoking employees whose job duties include the serving of or the routine interaction with
members of the general public within designated smoking areas.
(f) All deficiencies in employee performance are to be corrected as they occur. Supervisors, department heads and the city manager shall ensure that
deficiencies are dealt with in a fair and consistent manner.
(g) Supervisors are to utilize the guidelines outlined in this manual when addressing deficiencies on the part of an employee.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-43. Attendance.
All employees are expected to report to work as scheduled and to work their scheduled hours and overtime, if necessary. Employees shall be at their place
of work in accordance with city and departmental policies and regulations. Department heads shall establish work schedules and maintain daily employee
attendance records. The personnel office will maintain annual employee attendance records.
Definitions. All employee time will be defined using the following categories:
Absence, excused. Those hours or days when an employee has been excused from being present during work time. Examples include vacation, sick leave,
emergency leave, etc. An excused absence may be with or without pay, depending upon the circumstances that led to the absence.
Absence, unexcused. Those hours or days when an employee is not performing work on behalf of the city that is not regular time off, approved lost time or
an excused absence. Unexcused absences are defined as follows:
a. Tardiness;
b. Unverified sick time;
c. Unauthorized absence from the work place during work time;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 126/444
d. Absence resulting from detention in a county, state or federal prison.
e. Failure to inform the supervisor or department head within 30 minutes after the beginning of the employee's regularly scheduled work
time.
Abuse of leave. Abuse of any leave provisions such as misuse of sick leave, emergency leave, funeral leave or injury leave shall be cause for disciplinary
action.
Compensatory time. Time which is credited toward normal work hours during which an employee is excused from work in lieu of having to pay overtime
(nonexempt employees) or in lieu of excess hours worked (exempt employees).
Emergency/non-emergency personnel. Because of the nature of public service employment, there will be occasions when it is necessary to define
"emergency" and "non-emergency" personnel. This determination will be made by the department head in conjunction with the city manager. It is expected
that all emergency personnel will continue to work notwithstanding foul weather conditions or other situations dictating the designation of emergency and
non-emergency personnel.
Job abandonment. An employee who has two consecutive days of unexcused absences may be considered to have abandoned or voluntarily quit his or her
employment. The city manager is to be notified when it appears that an employee has abandoned his job.
Lost time. Those hours or days when an employee cannot be at the work place during work time that is not covered by sick leave, vacation or some other
form of paid excused absence. Injury leave during which there is no compensation provided by the city shall be considered to be lost time.
Medical statements. All employees may be required to provide a doctor or hospital statement to the supervisor in order for an absence for medical reasons
to be excused if:
(1) The absence is two or more days;
(2) The absence occurred on a:
a. Regularly scheduled work day preceding or following a holiday;
b. Regularly scheduled work day preceding or following a regular day off;
c. Regularly scheduled workday preceding or following a day of vacation or some other form of excused absence.
(3) The department head feels that the employee's return to work may pose a health hazard or safety hazard to others or the employee.
(4) If an employee has exhausted all sick leave, a doctors report will be required.
It is important that common sense and fairness be exercised when enforcing these requirements.
Pattern of unexcused absences. When a pattern of unexcused absences or excessive lost time occurs that the department head considers to be detrimental
to the cooperation, effectiveness and efficiency of the staff, the department head shall take the necessary remedial action. It is important that remedial
action taken to resolve problems resulting from unexcused absences be applied equally and consistently and that remedial actions be documented in the
personnel file kept by the city on the employee.
Regular time off. Those hours when an employee is not expected or required to be working.
Reporting to work. Employees shall be required to report to and be at their place(s) of work during all scheduled work time. Reporting to work promptly
means that an employee arrives at the work site early enough so that he or she will be prepared to begin work at the beginning of the work time.
Employees are not to leave their assigned work area(s), except as approved by a supervisor or department head, until the scheduled work time is
completed.
Severe weather or natural disasters. The following guidelines shall apply to absences resulting from severe weather or natural disasters:
(1) Adverse working conditions due to weather or hazardous travel conditions. City departments will remain open if at all possible. If the adverse
weather or travel conditions significantly impair the productivity of a department, the department head may offer non-emergency personnel the
option of going home. The employees who exercise this option must select to be charged compensative time, vacation or excused leave without pay
for the remainder of the workday.
(2) Employee determination of hazardous travel conditions. If an individual employee believes it is too hazardous to make it to work due to
weather or hazardous travel conditions, the department head has the option of charging the day(s) as compensative time, vacation or an excused
absence without pay.
(3) Closing due to an evacuation order. When an evacuation has been ordered, all non-emergency personnel will be released and encouraged to
evacuate. Only those employees who are assigned functions necessary for the benefit of the general public during an emergency situation will be
required to work. Employees designated by their department head as emergency services personnel will not be authorized to evacuate should an
evacuation order be issued in accordance with chapter 22 of the Texas Labor Code. Shifts may be established according to departmental needs at
the discretion of the department head. Employees who are assigned "on call" status must notify supervisors of locations where they can be
contacted.
(4) Return-to-duty phase. By reporting to work as directed, each employee meets their responsibility to work with other city employees as a team
in restoring the community to normal service levels following a disaster. Nonessential service employees who evacuated will report to work at the
start of the next normal shift, or sooner as directed, following the announcement of the return-to-duty phase by city officials. If an employee has
received no instruction on when to return to work, he or she shall return to work at the start of his or her next normal shift upon announcement by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 127/444
city officials of the return-to-duty phase. A telephone number will be established or announced prior to evacuation for all employees to call for
return-to-duty information.
(5) Violation of this policy. An employee violates this policy by:
a. Refusing to perform assigned duties required by this policy or to obey any order or directive made or given by a supervisor; or
b. Failing to report for duty as directed during any applicable phase of this policy; or
c. Failure to abide by city policy, departmental rules or regulations; or
d. Any conduct that interferes with, or might reasonably be expected to interfere with the proper and orderly conduct of the city's business or
brings, or might reasonably be expected to bring, discredit on the public service.
e. Consequences for violation of this policy. A violation of this policy shall be considered a violation of city policy, departmental rules or
regulations for which disciplinary action up to and including termination may be taken by the applicable department head, with the
concurrence of the city manager.
Work period, work day. The standard work period for all employees, except those police officers covered under section 207(k) of the Fair Labor Standards
Act, shall be 40 hours within a seven-day period. The definition of the work period has no meaning or impact on the determination of exempt or
nonexempt status as defined by the Fair Labor Standards Act.
(1) The standard work period for those police officers covered under section 207(k) of the Fair Labor Standards Act shall be 86 hours within a
14-day period.
(2) The standard workday for all employees except police dispatchers and police patrol officers shall consist of eight hours exclusive of any
lunch hour or personal time. Up to one hour may be scheduled for a meal break or personal use by the employee.
(3) The standard workday for police patrol officers and dispatchers shall consist of eight consecutive hours. These employees may "check out" on
a meal break; however, they shall remain on duty and be responsible to respond to any call or job requirement at any time.
(4) The department head shall determine the beginning and end of the standard workday, subject to approval by the city manager. The manager's
review shall address any inconsistencies or problems that could arise if employees of different departments were scheduled to work different hours.
Work time. Those hours when an employee is performing work on behalf of the city or is attending training at the direction of his or her supervisor.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-44. Work standards.
It shall be the duty of each employee to maintain high standards of cooperation, proficiency and economy in his or her work for the city. Department heads
shall organize and direct the work of their departments to achieve these objectives. If work habits, attitude, production and/or conduct of an employee
become a problem, supervisors should point out the deficiencies at the time they are observed and take appropriate action. Counseling and warning the
employee in sufficient time for improvement should ordinarily precede formal disciplinary action, but nothing herein shall prevent immediate formal
action as provided elsewhere in these policies whenever the interest of the city requires it.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-45. Solicitation.
Solicitation of contributions or anything of value for any purpose whatsoever shall be permitted of or by city employees on the job only with the express
approval of the city manager. No employee may be required to make any contribution or may be penalized or rewarded in any way in connection with his
or her employment according to his or her response to the solicitation.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-46. Physical fitness.
It shall be the responsibility of each employee to maintain the standards of physical fitness required for performing his or her job.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-47. Personal appearance.
All employees, regardless of work location and degree of public contact, are expected to maintain a good personal appearance and an acceptable standard
of cleanliness and personal hygiene at all times.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-48. Financial obligations.
All employees are expected to keep their personal financial affairs in good order. Failure to pay just debts, including taxes, may constitute grounds for
disciplinary action if job performance is impeded.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-49. General deportment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 128/444
The attitude and deportment of a city employee, whether in public or private, should at all times be such as to promote the good will and favorable attitude
of the public toward the city administration and its programs and policies.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-50. Sexual harassment.
(a) No employee, male or female, shall harass another employee by making unwelcome sexual advances or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual
nature a condition of any employee's employment, using an employee's submission to or rejection of such conduct as the basis for or as a factor in any
employment decision affecting the individual; or otherwise creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment by such conduct. The city
does not condone any sexual harassment of its employees. All employees, including supervisors and department heads, will be subject to severe discipline,
up to and including discharge, for any act of sexual harassment they commit.
(b) The creation of an intimidating, hostile or offensive working environment may include such actions as persistent comments on an employee's sexual
preferences or the display of obscene or sexually oriented photographs or drawings. However, conduct or actions that arise out of a personal or social
relationship and that are not intended to have a discriminatory employment effect may not be viewed as sexual harassment. Any employee who feels
victimized by sexual harassment should report the harassment to their immediate supervisor immediately. If the immediate supervisor is a part of the
harassment, the employee should report the harassment to the next level of supervisor immediately above the level where the harassment is occurring. No
employee will be subject to any form of retaliation or discipline for pursuing a sexual harassment complaint.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-51. Indictments against employees.
An employee may be suspended, with or without pay, if accused of or indicted for a crime or official misconduct pending a decision on the indictment such
as dismissal, acquittal or conviction. If the indictment is dismissed or if the employee is acquitted, the suspended employee shall be reinstated to his or her
former position, or a similar one if the former position is not available, without loss of any benefits and such suspension shall not be considered as a
disciplinary action.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-52. All weapons banned.
The city specifically prohibits the carrying or possession of weapons by any employee while on city owned property or in a city vehicle. This ban also
includes keeping or transporting a weapon in a private vehicle on city business. Employees are also prohibited from carrying or possessing a weapon while
performing city services or while engaged in city business whether on private property or not. Weapons include guns, knives, explosives and other items
with the potential to inflict harm. Appropriate disciplinary action, up to and including termination, will be taken against any employee who violates this
policy. However, nothing in this policy shall prohibit any state or federal certified peace officer or law enforcement officer from carrying or possessing any
weapon he or she is lawfully authorized to carry or possess. Employees who are required to possess weapons to perform the duties of their job descriptions
are exempt from the applicable provisions of this section.
(Ord. No. 1212,  3, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-5340-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
Sec. 40-61. General policy statements.
(a) It is the policy of the city to fairly compensate its employees and to adhere to all fair labor standards regulations. Employees who believe the city is
not adhering to these standards may pursue resolution of the matter through a formal conference or a grievance. Supervisors who knowingly violate any of
the fair labor standards shall be subject to disciplinary action.
(b) The actual rate of compensation for an employee shall be determined by the employee grade/step pay scale, developed and adopted by the city. The
compensation of the city manager and the city secretary shall be fixed by the city council, and may be amended from time to time in accordance with the
individual experience and qualifications of the city manager and of the city secretary. The compensation to be paid to the city manager, city secretary, and
department heads shall be exempt from the grade and step wage/salary schedule.
(c) A pay scale adopted by the city council shall be predicated solely on the base pay of the employees. Additional forms of pay such as stability pay,
vacation pay and certification pay shall be considered separately from base pay.
(d) All employees will be paid biweekly. Pay dates falling on a city holiday will be scheduled for the preceding workday.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02; Ord. N. 1551,  1, 9-27-11)
Sec. 40-62. Types of pay.
(a) Base pay. The amount paid for completing the normally assigned tasks and duties associated with the position held by the employee.
(b) Certification pay. An additional amount paid to a regular full-time employee for completing a major task that is not normally part of an employee's
duties and responsibilities. Certification pay for full-time regular employees must be recommended by the department head and approved by the city
manager.
(c) Stability pay. In any year in which the city council sets aside funds for stability pay, the city may pay to each employee an amount based on a
percentage of the employee's base rate of pay calculated from October 1 to September 30. Only full-time permanent employees are eligible for stability
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 129/444
pay. To be eligible to receive stability pay, an employee must have been with the city for 12 months as of the first day of the fiscal year. Such sums may
not, however, be credited toward overtime compensation due under the act.
(d) Severance pay. A minimum of one month base pay and all accrued vacation and sick leave paid to an employee in good standing upon the
elimination of his or her position. Since staffing levels are reviewed and approved by council as part of the budget process, council must vote to reduce or
eliminate the position(s) in question, thereby necessitating the payment of severance pay. If it becomes necessary to eliminate a position within a
department, the department head shall eliminate the position(s) based on employee(s) evaluations.
(e) Vacation pay. Employees below the department head level, with the approval of the department head and city manager, may be allowed to sell one
week of vacation back to the city in the fiscal year. However, it shall be the policy of the city to ensure that every employee has ample opportunity to
utilize the vacation he or she has earned each year.
(f) Holiday pay. Every regular full-time employee of the city shall automatically be credited with eight hours of work on all scheduled holidays. Any
"nonexempt" employee who works on a holiday shall be compensated at one and one-half times the normal rate in addition to being given eight hours'
credit for the holiday.
(g) Overtime compensation. All "nonexempt" employees shall be compensated for overtime. Until such time that sufficient funds may be budgeted,
most overtime will be compensated in the form of "comp time" i.e., compensatory time off. For every hour of approved overtime worked by a nonexempt
employee, one and one-half hours of comp time shall be accrued.
(h) Wage continuation pay. An employee who sustains an on-the-job injury that results in lost time shall automatically receive up to one week of wage
continuation pay. Wage continuation pay may be extended indefinitely by the city manager based upon the finding and recommendations of the safety
review board. Wage continuation pay shall be the difference between the weekly workers compensation insurance payment and the employees base pay for
one week
(i) Emergency and disaster pay.
(1) Use of leave with and without pay by exempt and nonexempt employees. Employees designated by their department head as emergency
service personnel will be allowed to secure their families and property as scheduled by the department head, or designee, and to use vacation or
personal leave, if any, or leave without pay if paid leave is exhausted, for that purpose. Other employees shall also be allowed to use accrued
vacation, available personal leave, or leave without pay if paid leave is exhausted, to cover work time missed due to the disaster. Employees may
request that accrued compensatory time be used for these purposes.
(2) Nonexempt employees.
a. All actual hours worked by nonexempt employees over 40 in a seven-day work period shall be compensated at the overtime rate of one
and one-half of the employee's hourly rate as provided in the city's overtime policy. Whether the overtime will be paid or granted as
compensatory time will be determined and communicated to employees by their department head and/or supervisor prior to the overtime being
worked.
b. Unless notified in advance, city employees holding essential services position will be required to report to work in emergency conditions
including hurricanes, tornadoes, floods, ice storms, earthquakes, fires, chemical accidents including hazardous materials spills or any other
disaster which threatens the safety of the city's citizens. Nonexempt employees who report under these circumstances, who are subsequently
released from duty due to emergency conditions, shall be paid a minimum of three hours at the regular rate of pay, or for the number of actual
hours worked, whichever is greater, and allowed to use accrued vacation, available personal leave, if any or leave without pay if paid leave is
exhausted, to cover work hours missed during that work period.
c. Nonexempt employees may request that accrued compensatory time used for this purpose.
(3) Exempt employees.
a. Upon activation of emergency situation through written or verbal notification by the city manager, exempt employees who exceed 40
actual hours of work in a seven-day work period, as defined in the policy, shall be eligible for overtime at the rate of one and one-half time of
the employee's hourly rate or by compensatory time at the rate of one and one-half hours for each hour actually worked over 40 hours in a
seven-day work period. Compensatory time earned is to be scheduled as soon as practical in each department. This provision for exempt
employees will be enacted upon written notification to department heads by the city manager.
b. Exempt employees on a salaried basis shall be charged leave, as applicable, for partial day absences. The use of leave by municipal
employees is allowed under FLSA regulations without affecting the exempt employee's salaried status.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-63. Excused absences and types of leave.
Listed below are all of the types of excused absences and types of leave for which an employee will be compensated:
(1) Vacation. All employees are encouraged to use the vacation that they have earned. In order for vacation to be credited against an employee's
record of time, the department head must approve the vacation in advance. Each department head may establish internal departmental policies
pertaining to submission and review of vacation requests so as to insure completion of the department's tasks and reasonable scheduling of other
employees. The following rules or guidelines shall apply to all employees.
a. The administrative assistant shall keep the official record of vacation earned and vacation used.
b. Employees shall earn vacation at the following rates:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 130/444
Length of Service Days Earned Per Month
Less than 10 years One
10-14 years One and one-quarter
15 or more years One and one-half
c. Department heads shall earn vacation at the following rates:
Length of Service Days Earned Per Month
Less than 10 years One and one-quarter
10 or more years One and one-half
d. The rate at which the city manager and city secretary earn vacation shall be determined by council as part of their salary negotiations.
e. On the first day of the fiscal year, the maximum allowable vacation leave balance will be 30 days except as noted below. Any days in
excess of 30 shall be lost unless it has been necessary to deny an employee the opportunity to take his or her vacation. In these cases, the
manager shall recommend to council that the employee be paid for the excess leave.
The total vacation accrued by employees who already have more than 30 days of vacation "on the books" as of July 10, 1990, shall be the
limit they may carry forward into a new fiscal year. For example, if an employee has 45 days of accrued vacation "on the books" as of
July 10, 1990, then 45 will be the maximum that this employee can carry forward on the first day of the future fiscal years. If at any time
their accrued vacation total falls below 30 days at the beginning of a fiscal year, the "30-day rule" shall apply to them permanently.
f. Holidays and regular days off taken in conjunction with a vacation shall not be counted as vacation days.
g. Employees who retire, are terminated, or who resign, shall be paid all unused vacation.
(2) Sick leave. Employees who are ill or who must temporarily care for their father, mother, spouse, son, daughter or other relative living under
the same roof may utilize sick leave. In order for an absence to be excused as sick leave, the following rules shall apply to all employees.
a. In order for an absence to be counted as sick leave, an employee must call his or her supervisor within 30 minutes after the start of the
workday. If the supervisor cannot be contacted, then the employee is to contact the department head.
b. Sick leave may be used for scheduled appointments with health care professionals. Sick leave may also be used for the purpose of
attending inpatient or after care, outpatient treatment of alcohol or drug abuse. It may also be used to attend physical therapy if that therapy has
been prescribed by a physician.
c. Sick leave may not be used in lieu of injury leave.
d. An employee has the option of utilizing earned comp time in lieu of sick leave, however, the department head retains the option of
requiring a medical or hospital statement.
e. All employees shall earn sick leave at a rate of one day per month of service.
f. Employees who resign or are terminated shall not be paid for unused sick leave.
g. Employees who retire with 15 or more years of service with the city on July 10, 1990, shall be paid for 50 percent of their accrued sick
leave or 45 days, whichever is less.
h. Employees who retire and who have had less than 15 years of service with the city on July 10, 1990, shall be paid for 50 percent of their
accrued sick leave or 30 days, whichever is less.
i. The finance department shall maintain the official record of sick leave earned and sick leave taken.
j. Misuse or abuse of the sick leave provisions shall be cause for disciplinary action.
(3) Injury leave.
a. Employees who are injured and cannot perform the essential elements of their job description shall be placed in an injury leave status so
long as the employee reports the injury immediately to his/her supervisor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 131/444
b. If the employee has not been released by his or her physician to return to a full-duty work status by the end of a reasonable injury leave
period and cannot perform the essential elements of the job description, the employee may be terminated.
c. The department head may recommend a leave of absence without pay in lieu of termination if:
1. The employee will be able to return to his/her job within a 30-day period of time if certified by the attending physician; and
2. The department head can forego a regular replacement or the position can be filled on a temporary basis until the injured employee
can return to work.
(4) Court/jury leave. An employee who is called for jury duty, or who is subpoenaed to testify before a grand jury or at a criminal trial or in a
civil case in which the city is a party shall be given court/jury leave. If the subpoena requires that the employee remain away from the work place
for one or more workdays, the employee will be credited with eight hours court/jury leave per workday.
(5) Military leave. In accordance with state and federal regulations, an employee who is actively involved in the Reserve of the Armed Forces of
the United States or the Texas National Guard shall be entitled to take up to 15 days military leave. Military leave must be spent on active duty or in
an active reserve status. A department head will require the employee to provide a copy of the military orders for the military leave period.
(6) Off-site training. An employee may from time to time be required to attend training that occurs outside the normal workplace. As such, the
employee will be absent from the normal workplace. Attendance at the training will be considered the employee's work assignment for that period
of time. When the training is out of town or lasts for more than one day, the employee will be credited with eight hours training (work) time per
day.
(7) Death in family leave. All full-time employees may be granted leave with pay for a period not to exceed three workdays to attend a funeral
and handle the necessary family details in case of death in their immediate family or other relative living in the same household. This leave will not
be charged against sick leave or vacation. Part-time, seasonal and temporary employees may be granted up to three days' leave of absence without
pay in such cases. (Immediate family, for this purpose, shall be defined as husband, wife, son, daughter, mother, father, mother-in-law, father-inlaw,
grandparents, brother and sister.
(8) Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA). An employee must be awarded up to 12 weeks total of paid and unpaid leave for the reasons of birth
of a child, adoption or foster care of a child, care for seriously ill spouse, child or parent, and during the employee's own serious illness. The
employee must exhaust accrued vacation, comprehensive and sick leave time first before unpaid leave is taken.
a. To be eligible for FMLA leave, an employee must have been employed with the city for at least 12 months and worked at least 1,250
hours during the previous 12 months.
b. Eligible employees will be granted leaves of absence for up to 12 weeks within a "rolling" 12-month period (measured backwards from
the date the leave begins) for any of the following reasons:
1. Birth or placement (adoption or foster care) of a child, or in order to take care of a newborn child or a child newly placed with the
employee for adoption or foster care and the leave must be taken before the end of the first 12 months following the date of birth or
placement ("birth leave"); or
2. When certified by a health care provider, to care for a "family member" (the employee's spouse, child or parent, but not a parent-inlaw)
with a serious health condition; or
3. For a serious health condition that makes the employee unable to perform the functions of his or her position.
c. Eligible employees may take FMLA leave for any combination of these reasons. However, all combined leaves cannot exceed 12 weeks
within the "rolling" 12-month period.
d. A birth leave (unless it involves a serious health condition) must be taken in a continuous time period and may not be taken in intermittent
periods (e.g., one week working and the next week on leave) or through a reduced work schedule (e.g., changing from 40 hours per week to 20
hours per week). A childcare leave must be completed within 12 months of the birth, adoption or placement of the child. Leave for a serious
health condition may be taken in a continuous time period, or an intermittent basis or through a reduced work schedule.
e. Serious health condition. For the purpose of this policy the meaning of the term "serious health condition" may be summarized as an
illness, injury, impairment or physical/mental condition that involves in-patient care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical care facility,
or "continuing treatment" by a health care provider as defined in the FMLA. For a complete definition of the term "serious health condition,"
contact the administrative assistant. Ordinarily, unless complications arise, the common cold, flu, earaches, upset stomach, ulcers, headaches
(other than migraines) and routine dental or orthodontia problems are examples of conditions that do not constitute a serious health condition
and do not qualify for FMLA leave.
f. Notice to city of leave.
1. Where the need for an FMLA leave (including intermittent or reduced work schedule leaves) is foreseeable, employees must provide
the city with 30 days' prior notice. If 30 days' prior notice is not practicable because the absence results from unforeseen circumstances,
notice must be given as soon as practicable (usually within two business days after the leave begins). If an employee fails to give timely
advance notice when the need for leave is foreseeable, the city may deny FMLA leave until the employee provides 30 days' notice.
2. The city must notify the employee if the absence qualifies as FMLA leave. If the city does not have the information from the
employee needed to designate the leave as FMLA when the time leave commences, it may retroactively designate the leave as FMLA
upon obtaining that information.
3. If leave is taken on an intermittent basis or reduced work schedule for foreseeable, planned medical treatment, the city may transfer
the employee during the leave to an alternative position with equal pay and benefits which better accommodates an intermittent or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 132/444
recurring leave. If the leave is foreseeable for planned medical treatment, the employee must make a reasonable effort to schedule medical
treatments to avoid disrupting city operations.
g. Required medical certifications.
1. Initial certification. Employees who request leave because of a serious health condition must provide the administrative assistant
with a medical certification from their health care provider on the form provided by the city. When 30 days' notice of leave is provided to
the city, if possible, the employee must return the completed medical certification before beginning the leave. However, when the need for
leave is not foreseeable, the completed certification must be returned to the city within 15 days. If an employee fails to return a completed
medical certification in a timely manner, the city may deny foreseeable leave until the certification is submitted. If an employee never
returns the health care provider certification, the absence will not be considered FLMA leave.
2. Recertification during leave. Employees may also be required to submit medical recertification from their health care provider during
the course of the leave. Employees on leave may also be required to periodically report to the city regarding their intent to return to work
upon completion of leave. If an employee gives unequivocal notice that he or she does not intend to return to work, the employee's FMLA
leave, entitlement to reinstatement and medical/dental benefits, and employment with the city will be terminated.
3. Return to work certification. Before being reinstated from leave, employees must submit a medical certification that they are fit for
duty and able to perform the essential functions of their job position (with or without reasonable accommodation). Employees will not be
reinstated until the city receives this certification.
h. Reinstatement from leave. The city will reinstate employees from FMLA leave to their former positions. Employees must seek
reinstatement on or before the expiration of 12 cumulative weeks of leave and be able to perform their job duties (with or without reasonable
accommodation). Employee must request reinstatement within three working days after being released by their health care provider. If the
employee's former position is not available, the employee will be reinstated to an equivalent job position. Refusing an offer of reinstatement to
an equivalent position will be treated as a voluntary resignation of employment. Employees who do not return to work after 12 cumulative
weeks of FMLA leave or do not seek extended leave (if eligible) will be dismissed from employment. However, such employees are eligible to
reapply for future employment by submitting an application to the city.
(9) Additional leave of absence. Employees who exhaust their FMLA leave and need additional time off from work for their own medical
treatment may apply for up to a maximum of 14 weeks of extended leave anytime during the "rolling" 12-month period.
(10) Medical leave of absence.
a. Employees who do not qualify for FMLA leave may apply for or be placed on a medical leave of absence for the treatment of their onthe-
job serious health condition. Employees will be eligible for medical leave after completing the entry period, except for on-the-job injuries,
when a medical leave can begin immediately.
b. Medical leave is limited to a maximum of 12 cumulated weeks within the "rolling" 12-month period. A medical leave must be taken on a
continuous basis and may not be taken on an intermittent basis or a reduced work schedule.
c. Medical leaves will be unpaid. However, an employee's accrued sick leave, vacation or other paid benefits must be used during the leave,
under the policies of the city, until exhausted. The use of paid benefits will not extend the duration of a medical leave. An employee may not
receive more than 100 percent of regular wages during a medical leave from any combination of employment benefits.
(11) Extended leave.
a. Employees may qualify for additional time off from work during the "rolling" 12-month period for treatment of their on-the-job or offthe-
job serious health condition. To qualify for extended leave, employees must first exhaust their FMLA or medical leave. Employees must
apply for extended illness leave through the city manager.
b. Full time employees (for the purpose of this policy, individuals authorized to work 40 hours per week) who qualify for extended leave
may continue their absence for up to a maximum of 14 weeks during the "rolling" 12-month period.
c. Extended illness leave must be taken in a continuous time period and may not be taken on an intermittent basis or through a reduced work
schedule.
d. Benefits during leave.
1. Extended leaves will be unpaid. However, if an employee has accrued sick leave or vacation, such benefits must be used during an
extended leave, under the policies of the city, until exhausted. The remainder of the leave would be unpaid. The use of paid benefits will
not extend the duration of the leave. An employee may not receive more than 100 percent of regular wages during the extended leave
from any combination of employment benefits (e.g., vacation, sick leave, etc.).
2. Employees will not accrue service credit or employment benefits during the unpaid portion of an extended leave. Coverage under the
plan will remain in effect if the employee timely pays the employee's portion of the premium during an extended leave. Premiums will be
paid either through payroll deduction (if paid benefits are used during all or any or part of an extended illness leave) or through other
arrangements approved by the city manager. Employees who fail to pay plan premiums during their extended leave will be dropped from
the plan and may be required to requalify for health coverage if they are reinstated to employment.
3. Eligible employees may take reasonable leaves of absence for maternity purposes; the birth, adoption or placement of a foster child;
or for the care of a spouse, son, daughter or parent who has a serious health condition. For these purposes, "serious health condition" shall
mean an illness, injury, impairment or physical or mental condition involving inpatient care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical
care facility or continuing treatment by a health care provider. "Spouse" shall mean the husband or wife of the employee, but shall not
include unmarried domestic partners. If the city employs both an employee and his or her spouse, their combined time off may not exceed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 133/444
12 workweeks during any 12-month period. An employee will be required to first use any of his or her accrued and unused vacation and
sick leave benefits before being allowed to use family leave.
4. Taking family leave will not result in the loss of any benefit accrued prior to the date on which the leave began. However, vacation
and sick leave benefits shall not accrue during the period of the leave of absence. An employee on family leave will remain covered under
all employee benefit plans (medical, retirement, etc.) throughout the duration of the leave as if actively employed. If the employee fails to
return to work at the conclusion of the leave, the city will require the employee to reimburse it for the full cost of health care coverage
during the period of leave. However, if an employee fails to return to work because of legitimate medical reasons or circumstances
beyond the employee's control, he or she may not be required to reimburse the city for such benefits.
(12) Leave without pay. In rare occasions where an employee has no accrued vacation, sick leave or comp time and has legitimate reason to be
absent from the work place, a department head may recommend leave without pay. Reasonable causes for leave without pay may include, but not
limited to:
a. Maternity leave when the employee has no accrued vacation, sick leave or comprehensive time; or is ineligible for FMLA.
b. Additional emergency leave beyond five days when the employee has no accrued vacation, sick leave or comp time.
c. Additional military leave when the employee has no accrued vacation, sick leave or comp time.
d. Any leave required by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
(13) Compensatory time. Compensatory time is excused time away from the work site for nonexempt employees in lieu of cash payment for
overtime or excused time for exempt employees in lieu of excess hours above the standard workweek. Nonexempt employees shall accrue one and
one-half hour of comp time for every hour of overtime worked for which they are not paid. The department head must approve the use of comp
time before an employee can take it. The city strives to pay overtime when it is earned.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02; Ord. No. 1313,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 40-64. Overtime policy and procedures.
(a) The city shall comply with all fair labor, job safety and health regulations applicable to the work place. Willful violations of any of these standards
are cause for disciplinary action. Employees are entitled to request a formal conference if they believe there has been an accidental or intentional violation
of these policies, rules and regulations.
(b) Whenever possible, the "flex time" provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act shall be utilized in determining the overtime compensation due to an
employee. In those cases where the flextime rules are applicable, the multiplier used to determine the rate of overtime shall be 1.0. Department heads are to
determine the applicability of the flextime regulations for the nonexempt positions within their department.
(c) The city recognizes the Fair Labor Standards Act definition of "exempt" and "nonexempt" employees for the purpose of determining mandatory
payment of overtime compensation. The city also recognizes while "exempt" employees may have to work beyond the standard number of hours on
occasion, every effort should be made to limit the frequency with which this occurs. Exempt employees may be given comp time by a department head in
recognition of those occasions when they do work beyond the normal number of hours in a work period.
(d) All employees of the city should keep a record of their time worked, regardless of their status as exempt or nonexempt employees. Department heads
shall retain the time records of exempt employees. Time sheets for all nonexempt employees shall be forwarded to the finance department.
(e) A department head may review the exempt or nonexempt status of the positions within his department and recommend a change to the city manager.
(f) All employees, except department heads, are eligible to receive overtime pay. Overtime when ordered for the maintenance of essential city functions,
shall be allocated as evenly as possible among all employees qualified to perform the work. For all scheduled and approved time worked in excess of a
regular workweek, compensation will be at the rate of one and one-half times the employee's regular base pay. Overtime pay will be paid for all time
worked over 40 hours per week unless such employees are exempt from overtime pay. No sick time, vacation time or seminars shall be considered when
determining overtime pay. All overtime work must be clearly reflected on the employee's time records before it is allowed.
(g) In lieu of overtime pay, the city may provide time-off instead, normally referred to as compensatory time. Such compensatory time shall be provided
at not less than one and one-half hours for each hour of overtime worked. When the city chooses the compensatory option in lieu of overtime pay, the
finance department will maintain employee compensatory time records. Any employee accruing 240 hours of compensatory time shall be paid for any
additional overtime worked over this amount, except for police officers. Police officers will be paid for any compensatory time accrued over 480 hours.
When an employee has accrued the maximum amount of compensatory time, the department head will create a work schedule to eliminate the recorded
compensatory time during the forthcoming 12 months.
(h) Department heads are not eligible for overtime pay. However, department heads may be allowed to take time off from time to time at the discretion
of the city manager.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-65. Benefits.
(a) Group insurance.
(1) Insurance provided: All full-time employees and all retired employees are provided with medical insurance for which an employee
contribution may be required. Coverage shall begin upon acceptance of the employee by the insurance underwriter. This insurance provided for
payment of hospitalization and major medical expenses up to the limits of the policy for illness and accidental injuries off the job. Coverage for
other family members is at the option of and payable by the employee through payroll deductions at the prevailing rates. Any employee whose
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 134/444
employment ends except by retirement may continue the insurance coverage up to a maximum of 18 months. Employees who elect to continue
coverage will be required to pay the entire cost of the premium.
(2) Opt-out provision: Employees also covered by another medical insurance plan may voluntarily "opt-out" of the City of Rockport group
medical insurance. Those employees who choose this option of allowing another medical insurance provider to become their primary medical
insurance shall not be eligible for payment of any future benefits under the City of Rockport's group medical insurance, nor for reimbursement of
any past contributions paid by the city for that individual's employee medical insurance.
a. Employees wishing to "opt-out" must submit a written request on a form acceptable to the city, advising of the employees choice of
insurance provider, and waiving all benefits or claims to receive coverage, reimbursement, or any other benefit of whatever nature under the
city's group medical plan. Said written request shall be submitted to the city secretary not later than the last day of the open enrollment period,
generally in September of each year. Any requests to "opt-out" of the City of Rockport group medical insurance timely received shall take
effect only for the plans upcoming effective period, generally beginning October 1 of each year.
b. Employees wishing to make any other permitted changes to their insurance coverage must still comply with the city's group medical
insurance carrier's rules and regulations.
(b) Workers' compensation insurance. All employees are covered by city paid workers' compensation insurance.
(c) Retirement system. All regular employees contribute seven percent of their gross income into the Texas Municipal Retirement System (TMRS). The
city matches the employee contribution on a two-for-one basis according to the experience rating given by TMRS. Employee contributions are tax deferred
until the employee receives the funds either as a refund upon termination of employment or as monthly retirement benefits.
(d) Social Security coverage. The Social Security Act provides a plan for benefits to workers and their survivors. Under this plan, the city contributes an
amount equal to that paid by each employee. The contributions are made to a federal fund from which benefits are paid in the event of the employee's
retirement, disability or death.
(e) Educational incentive. Employees who voluntarily pursue additional education or training during their off duty hours may petition to have a portion
of the tuition and book costs associated with that education or training reimbursed. In order to be eligible for reimbursement, the employee must notify the
city manager in writing that they intend to enroll in a specific training session or classes. Upon submission of transcripts or course completion certificate
and a copy of the tuition and book receipts, employees will be reimbursed based upon the following schedule:
(1) Course or training session directly related to the employee's field of employment, 80 percent.
(2) Course or training session intended to improve the overall ability, skill and performance of an employee, 20 percent.
(3) Under no circumstances may any of the time utilized for voluntary, off-duty education be construed as training time as defined by the Fair
Labor Standards Act and therefore make it necessary for the city to compensate the employee.
(4) Tuition and fee amounts eligible for reimbursement are the maximum dollar amounts charged by state university systems.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02; Ord. No. 1397,  1, 8-28-07; Ord. No. 1551,  2, 9-27-11)
Sec. 40-66. Allowances and reimbursements.
(a) The city council may authorize the payment of an allowance to an employee. Examples of allowances may include, but not be limited to:
(1) Car allowance.
(2) Uniform or clothing allowance.
(b) All employees are eligible for payment/reimbursement of out-of-town travel before it occurs.
(1) Department heads must approve out-of-town travel before it occurs.
(2) The city must directly benefit from the expenditure.
(c) Eligible reimbursements include, but shall not be limited to:
(1) Out-of-town meals: actual costs. Employees are expected to refrain from any excessive expenses related to meals.
(2) When traveling in a city vehicle or on a commercial carrier, the actual cost of travel to and from the out-of-town training, meeting or
conference.
(3) The per mile rate paid to employees of the state when a privately owned vehicle is used to travel to and from an out of town meeting,
conference or training session.
(4) Housing and registration costs for training sessions and conference.
(5) Out of town parking expenses.
(6) Certain approved expenses of the city secretary, city manager and department heads.
(7) Long distance telephone calls charged to personal accounts only when the calls are for the purpose of conducting official city business.
(8) Reasonable laundry expenses when out of town trips last more than five days.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 135/444
(9) A maximum of one personal telephone call per day to the immediate family.
(d) All requests for reimbursements must be approved by a department head, the city manager, or the mayor (or mayor pro tem) as appropriate before the
reimbursement may be issued.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-67. Payroll procedures.
(a) All employees of the city shall be paid biweekly. The finance department shall publish a yearly schedule of paydays. Department heads shall post
this scheduled in a place visible by employees. Normally, employees will be paid on every other Tuesday for the two-week period ending the preceding
Friday.
(b) Department heads are responsible for submitting accurate, totaled time sheets on all nonexempt employees to the finance department no later than
9:00 a.m. on the Monday proceeding a pay day. The payroll staff may change this as required due to holidays, vacations, etc.
(c) Any employee who has a question about the amount paid, any of the deductions from the paycheck or who wishes to change the amount of income
tax withholding should consult with his or her department head before contacting the staff of the finance department.
(d) The finance department shall be responsible for distributing required federal income tax information forms to all employees during the month of
January each year.
(Ord. No. 1212,  4, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-6840-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. JOB SAFETY AND WORKING CONDITIONS
Sec. 40-71. Employee duty.
It is the duty of all employees of the city to conduct themselves in a safe manner while executing the duties and tasks assigned to them. When an individual
accepts a position as an employee of the city, he is accepting the normal risk of physical harm or injury associated with that position.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-72. Supervisory duty.
It shall be the responsibility of all supervisors to ensure that the employees of the city are not exposed to unsafe equipment, unsafe procedures or
hazardous working conditions.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-73. Safety equipment.
It shall be the duty of all employees and the responsibility of all supervisors to insure that all employees wear the appropriate safety equipment. Employees
who refuse to wear such safety equipment will be subject to disciplinary action. Supervisors who fail to ensure the use of safe procedures and the use of
safety equipment shall be subject to disciplinary action.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-74. Safety and accident prevention training program.
Department heads shall ensure that a safety and accident prevention training program is developed and implemented within their department. A record of
attendance and a record of the subject material will be kept on all safety and accident prevention training sessions.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-75. Safety inspections.
It is the responsibility of all supervisors and department heads to insure that safety inspections and timely preventive maintenance is completed on all city
vehicles, other city equipment and on city owned facilities. The fleet operations and maintenance division shall keep a record of all preventive
maintenance on vehicles and equipment. Department heads shall insure that accurate records are kept of all safety inspections on equipment, vehicles and
workspaces.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-76. Accident investigation.
When a serious accident or injury occurs involving a city employee while on duty, or while driving city equipment, a supervisor from the same department
of the employee involved shall be called to the scene immediately, regardless of the time of day. In the case of all vehicle accidents within Rockport, or the
immediate vicinity (i.e. Aransas County), the Rockport Police Department shall be notified. If the supervisor of the affected employee was present at the
time of the incident, another supervisor from the same department shall be called to the scene. In the case where a department head, city secretary or city
manager is involved in a traffic accident, another agency such as the DPS will be called and asked to investigate the matter.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 136/444
Sec. 40-77. Accident report.
The supervisor called to the scene shall be responsible for preparing a preliminary accident investigation report, which shall contain answers to the
following questions:
(1) Who was involved?
(2) Where did the incident occur?
(3) What vehicle or equipment was involved?
(4) Was a separate police incident or accident investigation report prepared?
(5) What were the physical conditions in the area of the accident?
(6) Who witnessed the accident? (Supervisors may direct other employees to prepare a written statement; supervisors may ask non-employees if
they would be willing to prepare a written statement).
(7) How did the accident/injury occur? (Be as objective as possible; develop a specific sequence of events if possible.)
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-78. Full investigation.
The department head shall determine, in conjunction with the city manager, whether the preliminary accident/injury report is sufficient or whether a formal
safety investigation should be conducted. If the latter is recommended, the city manager shall appoint an individual to conduct a full investigation. Under
normal circumstances, the appointee shall be the risk manager. The city manager may ask the chief of police to appoint an investigator from the staff of the
criminal investigation division of the police department.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-79. Notification.
The personnel and risk manager shall be notified immediately during normal working hours, or as soon thereafter as possible of all accidents and injuries
for the purpose of initiating worker's compensation or other insurance coverage.
(Ord. No. 1212,  5, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-8040-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. EVALUATION
Sec. 40-91. General.
(a) Systematic evaluation procedures will be used for evaluating, as objectively as possible, the performance of all personnel. Informal evaluation of the
employee is a continuous process. The formal evaluation will take place at least once annually, usually on the anniversary of the employee's hire date. The
immediate supervisor will discuss the results of each evaluation with the employee and the department head will review it. The original evaluation form
will be forwarded to the administrative assistant for inclusion in the file the city maintains on the employee.
(b) Ordinarily, a performance evaluation is conducted at the end of the initial six-month period of employment. However, a formal performance may be
conducted at any time to recognize and document occasions of either unsatisfactory or outstanding performance.
(c) Evaluators shall individually discuss the evaluation results with the employees and shall counsel them regarding their careers and any improvements
in performance, which appear desirable or necessary. Employees dissatisfied with their performance evaluation may seek reconsideration by using the
established grievance procedures.
(d) Any time that an employee receives a marginal or poor written evaluation, he must be asked to sign a statement acknowledging that he understands
that the evaluation of his performance has been marginal or poor. The employee must also be given a professional development or "growth" plans that
outlines what must be done and the maximum time allowable to correct the deficiencies. Failure to provide a growth plan will negate the impact of a
marginal or poor evaluation when considering formal disciplinary action in the future.
(Ord. No. 1212,  6, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-92. Employee performance evaluations.
(a) An employee shall be evaluated at least annually. Special evaluations may be made if requested by the department head. All performance evaluation
reports shall be permanently placed in the personnel file the city maintains on the employee.
(b) Performance evaluations are designed to help the supervisors and employees measure how well work is being performed and to provide a tool for
management decisions regarding pay increases, promotions and retention of employee.
(c) Supervisors shall individually discuss the evaluation results with the employees and shall counsel them regarding their careers and any
improvements in performance, which appear desirable or necessary.
(Ord. No. 1212,  6, 4-23-02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 137/444
Sec. 40-93. Merit increases.
Pay increases may be granted by the department head in accordance with the compensation plan as a reward for those employees demonstrating
exceptional or above average job performance. These merit increases are intended to reward outstanding personnel and as an inducement to motivate
employees in their performance and productivity.
(Ord. No. 1212,  6, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-9440-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 7. DISCIPLINE AND APPEALS
Sec. 40-101. Work ethic and disciplinary policy.
(a) The city expects its employees to accept reasonable and appropriate work assignments willingly and to perform them in a satisfactory manner.
Employees are also expected to comply with all rules, regulations and policies pertaining to job performance standards and personal conduct on the job. If
an employee fails to perform satisfactorily or if his or her personal conduct is unacceptable, disciplinary action may be taken.
(b) All reasonable efforts will be made to ensure due process to the employee. The city will attempt to review and resolve all employee problems as
promptly and equitably as possible and at the lowest possible organizational/supervisory level. All employees will be provided with a fair, expedient,
objective and consistent means of resolving work-related problems.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-102. Grounds for disciplinary action.
The city manager or department head may take disciplinary action against an employee for the following (Note: This list is to illustrate the more common
causes and is not intended to be all-inclusive):
(1) Illegal, unethical, abusive or unsafe acts.
(2) Violation of city rules, regulations, policies or procedures.
(3) Insubordination.
(4) Leave under false pretenses.
(5) Neglect of duties.
(6) Theft.
(7) Participation in prohibited political activities.
(8) Unauthorized soliciting while on duty.
(9) Excessive or unauthorized absenteeism and tardiness.
(10) Failure to conduct himself or herself in a courteous and proper manner while on duty.
(11) Falsification of official documents or records.
(12) Unauthorized use or disclosure of official information.
(13) Unauthorized or improper use of official authority.
(14) Possession, use or being under the influence or drugs or alcoholic beverages not prescribed by a physician while on duty.
(15) Damaging city equipment, tools, machines and/or property.
(16) Wasting materials and supplies.
(17) Carelessness, recklessness and/or engaging in horseplay.
(18) Immoral conduct or indecency.
(19) Abuse of illness, injury, disability or other benefits.
(20) Any threat of or actual physical attack on any supervisor or coworker.
(21) Failure to properly document time and attendance records.
(22) Sexual harassment.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-103. Types of disciplinary action.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 138/444
(a) Formal disciplinary action taken shall be consistent with the nature of the deficiency or infraction involved and the record of the employee. Formal
disciplinary action shall include written reprimand, suspension, reduction in pay, demotion and dismissal. Any of the foregoing types of formal
disciplinary action may be invoked for a particular deficiency or the employee may be warned at any time that he or she may be dismissed or otherwise
disciplined for further unsatisfactory performance and/or conduct. Nothing here shall prohibit the administration of informal disciplinary action, such as
oral reprimands. Informal disciplinary action may be documented in the personnel file the city maintains on an employee at the discretion of the
department head or the city manager.
(b) Department heads are encouraged to consider the following as normal disciplinary transitional steps in situations requiring disciplinary action:
(1) Verbal warnings which may be noted in the personnel file the city maintains on each employee.
(2) Written reprimands which the department head must transmit through the city manager before placing in the personnel file the city maintains
on each employee.
(3) Suspension without pay or reduction in pay.
(4) Demotion and/or dismissal.
(c) Nothing herein is intended to negate the authority and responsibilities of a supervisor to take the disciplinary action they believe appropriate based
upon the relevant circumstances nor prohibit the supervisor from immediately discharging an employee for the first instance of gross misconduct.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-104. Written reprimand.
In the interest of good discipline, an employee may be formally reprimanded in writing. The reprimand shall describe the deficiency or infraction involved
and shall state the likely consequences of further unsatisfactory performance and/or conduct. The employee will be informed of the written reprimand and
given an opportunity to make written comments. The original of the reprimand shall be kept in the personnel file the city maintains on the employee.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-105. Suspension.
In the interest of good discipline, an employee may be suspended without pay for up to 30 calendar days in any one calendar year. A notice of suspension
must be given to the employee which describes the deficiency or infraction involved and which states the likely consequence of further unsatisfactory
performance and/or conduct. The suspension shall be permanently noted in the personnel file the city maintains on the employee. When an employee is
under investigation for a crime or official misconduct or is awaiting hearing or trial in a criminal matter, he or she may be suspended with or without pay
for the duration of the proceedings when such suspension would be in the best interests of the city and the public. If the investigation or proceedings clear
the employee, he or she shall be eligible for reinstatement with full pay and benefits restored.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-106. Reduction in pay.
In the interest of good discipline, an employee's pay may be reduced provided it is done within reason. A notice of reduction must be given to the
employee which describes the deficiency or infraction involved and which states the likely consequences of further unsatisfactory performance and/or
conduct. The reduction shall be permanently noted in the personnel file the city maintains on each employee, but the employee shall not be disqualified
from consideration for later pay increases.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-107. Disciplinary demotion and dismissal.
(a) In the interest of good discipline, an employee may be demoted. A notice of demotion must be given to the employee which describes the deficiency
or infraction involved and which states the likely consequences of further unsatisfactory performance and/or conduct. The demotion shall be permanently
noted in the personnel file the city maintains on each employee, but the employee shall not be disqualified from condition for later advancement.
(b) An employee may also be dismissed from the city employment in the interest of good discipline. A notice of dismissal must be given to the
employee, which describes the deficiency or infraction involved.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-108. Appeals of disciplinary action.
(a) An employee may appeal any disciplinary action taken against him or her if he or she feels that he or she has been disciplined unfairly, too harshly, or
inappropriately; provided, it is appealed in writing to the city manager within five working days following such action. Such action may be stayed pending
decision on the appeal or may take effect at any time after issuance of the notice as determined by the disciplinary authority. The city manager, after careful
investigation of the facts, shall have broad authority to approve, disapprove, modify or rescind any disciplinary actions taken or proposed. The city
manager shall attempt to resolve the issue within ten calendar days. The city manager's decision may be appealed in writing to the city council; provided,
notice of intention to appeal is made in writing within five days following the city manager's decision. There shall be no right of discrimination prohibited
by law or these rules.
(b) As promptly as practicable after the appeal has been filed, the employee should be given notice of the hearing date and time, which shall be not less
than three days after the date the notice is given to the employee. The hearing shall be conducted fairly and in private, to the extent practicable, unless the
employee requests it to be public. The hearing shall be confined to a consideration of the reasons for the proposed or actual disciplinary action. Should the
reasons for such disciplinary action not have previously been given, the employee may request that such reasons be given and reduced to writing, and that
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 139/444
the hearing be recessed for one day or longer in order to allow the employee to consider the reasons given. At the hearing, the supervisor or the department
head initiating such disciplinary action may respond to questions from the employee but should keep such responses brief and objective. At the hearing,
the employee may challenge any evidence presented against him or her and may call witnesses and present evidence in his or her own behalf. Formal rules
of evidence need not be followed during such hearings. After the hearing, the city council, after careful investigation of the facts, shall have broad
authority to approve, disapprove, modify or rescind any disciplinary actions taken or proposed. Should it be found that the employee has been unjustly
disciplined, discharged or suspended, he or she shall be reinstated and compensated for all time lost at his or her regular rate of pay. The decision of the
city council is final.
(Ord. No. 1212,  7, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-10940-120. Reserved.
DIVISION 8. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES
Sec. 40-121. Formal conference.
(a) The identification and resolution of problems ought to be accomplished at the lowest level possible within the organization. Informal discussion,
constructive critiques and effective supervisory techniques should be used to identify and resolve problems as much as possible. Nevertheless, it may be
necessary to formalize the discussion process from time to time so as to ensure resolution of a problem. It is important that an employee believes he has a
chance to be heard when he thinks he is not being treated fairly, or he believes something is wrong that should be brought to the attention of his superiors.
It is equally important that the employee is confident there will be no reprisal against him for bringing an issue up for discussion. An employee may
request a formal conference with his supervisor to talk about a problem or issue. If the employee is not satisfied with the outcome of that meeting, he may
request a conference with the department head, and ultimately, the city manager. When an employee requests a conference, he is to understand that he
cannot demand anything or instruct his superiors on what to do. The intent of the conference is to present an issue in a non-threatening, constructive
environment.
(b) An employee must initiate the process of scheduling a formal conference with his supervisor before talking to the department head or the city
manager, except in cases where the employee believes there has been a violation of civil rights, a violation of fair labor standards, or a violation of any
criminal statute. In these cases, the employee may initiate the process at any level. Any decisions or changes made by the city manager as a result of a
formal conference shall be final. In cases where the employee meets with the department head or city manager, a written record of the meeting will be
prepared.
(Ord. No. 1212,  8, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-122. Appeal hearing.
An employee may file a request for a hearing before the appeal board when he has been subjected to a loss of compensation for a period greater than five
consecutive workdays due to a suspension or termination. The following rules and procedures pertaining to an appeal hearing shall apply:
(1) The aggrieved employee must file a written request to the city secretary for an appeal hearing within five working days of termination or five
working days from the end of his suspension without pay.
(2) The written request must clearly state the following:
a. The specific appeal, i.e., loss of compensation;
b. The dates of the occurrence that led to the loss of compensation;
c. City personnel involved in the incident (if any);
d. The policy, rule or regulation alleged to have been violated or misapplied;
e. The remedy sought by the aggrieved employee.
(3) The city secretary shall have five working days to notify the members of the appeal board in writing of the request for an appeal hearing.
(4) The date of the appeal hearing shall be within ten working days after the board has been informed.
(5) The aggrieved employee shall have the right to determine whether the appeal hearing is open (public) or closed.
(6) Employees may be required to respond to a call for testimony during normal working hours from the chairman of the appeal board.
(7) The chairman of the board shall set the specific rules of conduct and procedures for the appeal hearing. Generally the city will present a
review of the actions taken against the employee and the causes for that action. The aggrieved employee will then have an opportunity to respond
or rebut the actions of the city. After completion of closed deliberations, in open session the appeal board will announce its decision to:
a. Uphold the action.
b. Reverse the action.
c. Reduce the action.
d. The appeal board may not, however, increase the severity of the disciplinary action to any degree or extent whatsoever.
(8) The decision of the appeal board shall be final. The board may take recommendations to the city manger or to the city council based upon
issues and procedures involved in the resolution of the grievance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 140/444
(Ord. No. 1212,  8, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-123. Appeal board appointment.
The council shall appoint annually seven citizens to serve on the appeal board. A minimum of five members of the board must be present to hear an
appeal.
(Ord. No. 1212,  8, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-12440-130. Reserved.
DIVISION 9. TRAVEL AND TRAINING
Sec. 40-131. General.
(a) It is the policy of the city to ensure that all employees are given ample opportunity, within the parameters established in the annual budget, to obtain
the training and education needed to be up-to-date in the skills and knowledge required to perform their assigned tasks effectively and efficiently.
(b) It is also the policy of the city to ensure that it is fully protected from any allegation of negligent retention through careful attention and adherence to
the training standards and requirements associated with the positions filled by the employees of the city.
(Ord. No. 1212,  9, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-132. Official training record.
Department heads shall maintain the official training record of all employees of their departments. Duplicate copies of transcripts, certificates and licenses
may be placed in the appropriate personnel record the city maintains on each employee. Under no circumstances will an employee be asked or directed to
perform any task or skill for which he does not hold the required license or state certification.
(Ord. No. 1212,  9, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-133. Annual training plan.
In order to ensure that all required licenses and certificates are properly maintained, department heads are encouraged to develop an annual training plan
for all employees of the department. When developing this plan, the following priorities should be utilized:
(1) Mandatory training to retain a state required license or certificate already held by an employee;
(2) Training required to qualify additional employees for a state required license or certificate;
(3) Training required to upgrade the level of a license or certificate held by an employee;
(4) Training recognized by the state or by a reputable professional association in which an employee may earn "Continuing Education Credits"
(CEUs) or some other commonly recognized level of achievement and knowledge;
(5) Training that will directly benefit the employee and the city in the completion of his or her current job assignment;
(6) Training that will benefit the professional development and growth of the employee.
(Ord. No. 1212,  9, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-134. Required training and requirements.
Paid appointees of the city council shall be responsible for completing any required training associated with their positions. Failure to do so shall result in
disqualification of the appointee to remain in the position or to be reappointed to the position. The city secretary shall inform the council of the required
training for all appointed positions and shall maintain a copy of all appointee's training certificates and license. The city secretary shall also notify the
council when an appointee has failed to complete any required training in a timely manner.
(Ord. No. 1212,  9, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-135. Training expenses.
(a) Normally, employees and appointees will not be expected to pay for the training needed to maintain a state required license or certificate. Update or
renewal training will be underwritten by the city as permitted within the parameters of the adopted (amended) budget. Under normal conditions, the city
shall pay for:
(1) Tuition or conference registration fees;
(2) Housing and meals for off-site training; and
(3) Travel expenses to/from the training site.
(b) If any employee wishes to attend a training session for which the city cannot, or will not, pay all or a portion of the costs, the employee may request
to take training leave or leave without pay. The employee's department head shall approve or deny these requests.
(Ord. No. 1212,  9, 4-23-02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 141/444
Secs. 40-13640-150. Reserved.
DIVISION 10. POST EMPLOYMENT
Sec. 40-151. Retirement.
(a) An individual who was employed by the city prior to April 24, 2001, shall continue to be covered by the city's group health insurance plan.
(b) For employees hired after April 24, 2001, the city shall pay a percentage of retiree health insurance based on the number of years of service to the
citizens of Rockport. For individuals retiring after April 24, 2001, they must enroll for this coverage within 30 days of their retirement.
(c) Eligibility for retirement shall be predicated upon the criteria established by the Texas Municipal Retirement System.
(d) The city elects to provide health benefits coverage to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool
under the pool's interlocal agreement.
(e) The city adopts the following benefit plans to be provided to its retirees through the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits
Pool:
(1) The same medical plan(s) offered to active employees until their 65th birthday.
(2) Retiree optional life-The maximum policy amount offered by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool up to
$5,000.00.
(f) The interlocal agreement in effect between the city and the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental Employee Benefits Pool (TML-IEBP) allows
the participating member entity to provide retiree medical coverage of the same contribution as charged to active employees or to select a contribution
level which is 150 percent of the active employee contribution. The city elects to have the TML-IEBP offer this 150 percent of the active employee
contribution rate structure for retiree medical coverage. Other coverage will be as established annually by the Texas Municipal League Intergovernmental
Employee Benefits Pool Board of Trustees.
(g) Final payments for vacation and sick leave are outlined in division 7 of this chapter.
(h) If at the time of retirement the stability payments for that fiscal year have not been made, the stability pay due to the retiree shall be included with his
last paycheck.
(Ord. No. 1212,  10, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-152. Recommendations.
All requests for references shall be referred to the appropriate department head. The department head may refer such requests to the city manager if
necessary. The only information that will be provided by the city to any outside source shall be:
(1) Beginning and ending dates of service.
(2) Last position held with the city.
(Ord. No. 1212,  10, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-153. Closing of records.
Upon retirement, resignation or termination of an employee, the personnel and risk manager shall combine and seal the training, vacation, sick leave and
personnel records of the individual.
(Ord. No. 1212,  10, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-15440-170. Reserved.
DIVISION 11. REPORTS AND RECORDS
Sec. 40-171. Reports.
(a) Required reports are identified throughout this manual. It is the intent of this policy manual to keep the number of reports to an absolute minimum.
However, it is important to the employee and to the city that accurate documentation to be kept on personnel related matters.
(b) Listed below are the reports cited throughout this manual:
(1) Organization chart.
(2) Staffing level.
(3) Training plan.
(4) Summary memo upon hiring a new employee.
(5) Report of safety/accident prevention training.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 142/444
(6) Accident/injury investigation report.
(7) Report of alleged/actual violation of civil rights.
(8) Report of alleged/actual violation of fair labor standards.
(9) Report of a formal conference with a department head or the city manager.
(10) Report of a grievance panel.
(11) Monthly report of vacation and sick leave taken.
(12) Memorandum for record-Pre-termination conference.
(c) In addition to the reports cited above, the personnel and risk manager and finance department staff shall be responsible for compiling, preparing and
submitting all personnel related reports required by the state, the city's insurance carriers or its affiliates and the federal government.
(Ord. No. 1212,  11, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-172. Records.
(a) Employee and personnel records are as important as the reports cited throughout this manual and (re)listed above. Different types of records are also
cited throughout this manual. The intent is to retain the essential information in the easiest and most accurate manner.
(b) The records mentioned in this manual include:
(1) Training records.
(2) Licenses.
(3) Certificates.
(4) Vacation records.
(5) Sick leave records.
(6) Time sheets.
(7) Records of formal disciplinary action.
(Ord. No. 1212,  11, 4-23-02)
Sec. 40-173. Retention of personnel records.
Unless otherwise specified by law, personnel records will be kept for a period of three years after the end of employment. At the end of the three-year
period, the personnel records will be removed and destroyed.
(Ord. No. 1212,  11, 4-23-02)
Secs. 40-17440-299. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ALCOHOL AND DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE POLICY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 40-300. Purpose.
It is the purpose of the City of Rockport (the city) to help provide a safe and alcohol- and drug-free work environment for our clients and our employees.
With this goal in mind and because of the serious drug abuse problem in today's workplace, the city has established a policy for existing and future
employees.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-301. Possession prohibited.
(a) The use, possession, solicitation for, or sale of narcotics or other illegal drugs, alcohol, or prescription medication without a prescription on city or
customer premises or while performing an assignment.
(b) Being impaired or under the influence of legal or illegal drugs or alcohol away from the city or customer premises, if such impairment or influence
adversely affects the employee's work performance, the safety of the employee or of others, or puts at risk the city's reputation.
(c) Possession, use, solicitation for, or sale of legal or illegal drugs or alcohol away from the city or customer premises, if such activity or involvement
adversely affects the employee's work performance, the safety of the employee or of others, or puts at risk the city's reputation.
(d) The presence of any detectable amount of prohibited substances or an alcohol concentration greater than 0.02 in the employee's system while at
work, while on the premises of the city or its customers, or while on city business. "Prohibited substances" include illegal drugs, alcohol, or prescription
drugs not taken in accordance with a prescription given to the employee.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 143/444
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-302. Reserved.
Sec. 40-303. Reservation of rights.
The city reserves the right to interpret, change, rescind or depart from this policy in whole or in part without notice. Nothing contained in this policy shall
be construed as creating or constituting a contract with any employee, whether expressed or implied.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-304. Definitions.
Alcohol means alcohol, or any beverage, containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which is capable of use for beverage
purposes, either alone or when diluted.
Alcohol abuse means use of alcohol in any quantity during working time or reporting for work under the influence of alcohol.
Alcohol testing means testing for alcohol contents by a breathalyzer instrument device, urinalysis, or a blood sample analysis.
City property means all city buildings and adjacent land, parking lots, all other city-owned land and city vehicles.
Department head shall also include any person designated by the department head to take any action necessary under this policy in the absence of the
department head.
Controlled substance or drugs includes, but is not limited to, marijuana, hashish, cocaine, heroin, morphine, codeine opiates, phencyclidine,
amphetamines, inhalants, barbiturates and hallucinates.
Drug testing means the collection of a urine sample by medical personnel and laboratory analysis of that sample or testing by other accepted methods.
Employee means an individual employed by the city in a full-time or part-time position.
Medical review office is the city's designated physician to review and interpret drug and/or alcohol tests.
Motorized equipment means equipment powered by a motor, including tools.
Proper medical authorization means a prescription, or their written approval from a physician, for the use of a drug in the course of medical treatment.
Reasonable suspicion means a conclusion based on personal observation of a specific objective instance, or instances, of employee conduct on or off duty,
which shall be confirmed in a sworn (notarized) statement. On duty observation must be corroborated and documented in writing, that an employee is
unable to satisfactorily perform his/her duties due to the use of controlled substances or alcohol. Such inability to perform may include, but is not limited
to, a drop in employee's performance level or an indication of impaired judgment, reasoning, level of attention or behavioral change or decreased ability of
the senses.
Safety sensitive position means jobs where employees' use of drugs or alcohol could render the employee unfit to perform assigned duties and could create
a safety hazard to the employee, other employees, citizens or damage to property.
Substance abuse is exemplified by, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Ingestion, inhalation or injection of a controlled substance during work hours, in a city vehicle or on city property.
(2) Ingestion of alcohol in a city vehicle or on city property.
(3) Ingestion, inhalation or injection of a controlled substance or alcohol during non-working hours which causes an employee to be unable to
work in a safety sensitive manner during working hours.
(4) Use of prescription or over-the-counter medication in a manner in which it was not intended.
Tampering with a urine specimen includes, but is not limited to, diluting the specimen with water, adding any other substance to the specimen, or
substituting urine. Possession of a urine sample when an employee or applicant reports to the laboratory shall constitute tampering.
Under the influence or impaired is defined as abnormal behavior during working hours which results from indulging, in any degree, in alcohol or in any
controlled substance or other drug including prescription or over-the-counter medication which, to any degree, may limit an employee's ability to safely
and efficiently perform his or her duties or poses a threat to the safety of the employee, other employees, citizens or property.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-305. Administrative authority.
The city is authorized to develop, administer and modify testing procedures for drug and alcohol testing.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-306. Alcohol/controlled substance use prohibited.
(a) The use, sale or personal possession (such as on the person or in a tool box, desk, etc.) of controlled substances or alcohol while on duty or on city
property at any time is a dischargeable offense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 144/444
(b) Employees taking prescription or non-prescription drugs must report this use to the department head when the use of such drugs is likely to affect the
workers' ability to perform assigned duties. It is the employee's responsibility to ascertain from his or her physician whether the prescription drug can or is
likely to have adverse impact on the employee's performance of his or her duties. This provision is intended to protect the safety of each employee, and his
or her co-workers, property and the public. Employees failing to follow this policy may be subject to disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
Any information received from an employee under this provision will be kept confidential except to the extent it may be shared with individuals who are in
a "need to know" position, such as the immediate supervisor, or as required by state or federal law.
(c) Any use of controlled substances and alcohol abuse that has an adverse affect on the employee's performance or that could jeopardize the safety of
others, city equipment of the city's relations with the public, will be a violation of this policy and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to,
and including, termination.
(d) No employee who is required to drive any city vehicle or motorized equipment shall consume alcohol during the four hours before driving such
vehicle or equipment. The employee may be subject to disciplinary action, and including, termination for violating this policy.
(e) No employee shall report to work with the odor of alcohol on his or her breath. The employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to, and
including, termination for violating this policy.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-307. Employee's responsibilities.
(a) While at work, each city employee has a responsibility to deliver service in a safe, efficient and conscientious manner. Therefore, the use, sale,
distribution, possession or being under the influence of alcohol or any controlled substances, including prescription medication (when use of such
prescribed medication is likely to affect the employee's ability to perform assigned duties) during working hours, as outlined in the provisions of this
policy, is strictly prohibited and may result in disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(b) Employees in need of assistance, in relation to controlled substances or alcohol abuse, are encouraged to explore the use of leave time and medical
benefits in obtaining assistance through public and private referral agencies specializing in chemical dependency before the problem affects their job.
(c) Employees scheduled to be on call are expected to be fit for duty upon reporting to work. An employee scheduled to be on call who is called out is
subject to the provisions of this policy.
(d) An employee not scheduled to be on call who is called out and is under the influence of legally prescribed drugs or who is impaired by alcohol must
so advise his or her supervisor and will not be required to report to work. An employee, who is called out and who report to work, but fails to notify his or
her supervisor that he or she is under the influence or impaired, may be subject to disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(e) An employee shall not consume any alcohol for at least eight hours following any accident or until he or she undergoes post-accident testing. An
employee who consumes any alcohol prior to eight hours following this accident or until a post-accident test has been administered may be subject to
disciplinary action up to, and including, termination if such person tests above the allowable alcohol limits.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-308. Special exemption.
Any police officer who is required to be in possession of alcohol and/or drugs in the course and scope of his or her employment will be exempt from the
provisions of this policy pertaining to possession of alcohol and/or drugs. Specific guidelines will be established by police department internal operating
procedures.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-309. City approved laboratory.
(a) The city will select a laboratory which follows a chain of custody procedure in conducting and preserving the tests required under this policy.
(b) The laboratory will report each test result to the medical review officer who will notify the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary
or his or her designee of the results.
(c) An employee who does not pass the drug or alcohol test may request that the original urine or blood sample be analyzed again. An employee
requesting a retest must submit a written request within two days of the employee's notification of the test result.
(d) An employee making a request for a retest will be required to pay the cost of the additional analysis and all costs associated with the transfer of the
specimen to another certified, qualified laboratory, including shipping and handling. If the request results in the employee passing the drug or alcohol test,
the city will reimburse the employee for laboratory expenses.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-310. Breath alcohol technician requirements.
Any individual qualified as a breath alcohol technician may be used to conduct alcohol tests. Law enforcement officers certified by the State of Texas to
conduct breath alcohol testing are deemed to be qualified as a breath alcohol technician.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-311. Confidentiality of information.
The following procedures will be used to assure that records relating to the drug and alcohol testing process are kept confidential.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 145/444
(1) Test results and other written material concerning a particular drug test will not be kept in the personnel file the city maintains on each
employee.
(2) No test results may be released except to the employee's department head and supervisor, any other individuals involved in a disciplinary
action, in an appeal process and to state or federal agencies, as necessary or required.
(3) Staff who are authorized to have access to drug test results will maintain complete confidentiality. Breach of confidentiality relating to drug
test results, or any other personnel related matter, will subject that employee to disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-312. Employee drug convictions.
Any employee convicted of a violation of a criminal drug statute for conduct occurring while on duty or on city property must notify the city of such
conviction within five days of the conviction occurring. If an employee fails to report such conviction, the employee will be subject to disciplinary action
up to, and including, termination.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-313. Employee search policy.
The city reserves the right to search for illegal drugs and alcohol on any employee, city vehicles and equipment, the employee's personal effects, and the
employee's other property located on city premise is or worksites, include, but not limited to private vehicles located on city premise is or worksites, city or
personal lockers, desks, file cabinets, lunch boxes, purses, or other containers brought on city premises or worksites.
(Ord. No. 1370,  1, 2-27-07)
Secs. 40-31440-340. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TESTING
Sec. 40-341. Drug testing.
The city will conduct drug testing under any of the following circumstances:
(1) For cause testing. The city may ask an employee to submit to a drug test at any time it feels that the employee may be under the influence of
drugs or alcohol, including, but not limited to, the following circumstances: evidence of drugs or alcohol on or about the employee's person or in
the employee's vicinity, unusual conduct on the employee's part that suggests impairment or influence of drugs or alcohol, negative performance
patterns, or excessive and unexplained absenteeism or tardiness.
(2) Post-accident testing. Any employee involved in an on-the-job accident or injury under circumstances that suggest possible use or influence
of drugs or alcohol in the accident or injury event may be asked to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test. "Involved in an on-the-job accident or
injury" means not only the one who was injured, but also any employee who potentially contributed to the accident or injury event in any way.
(3) If an employee is tested for drugs or alcohol outside of the employment context and the results indicate a violation of this policy, the
employee may be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, up to and possibly including discharge from employment. In such a case, the employee
will be given an opportunity to explain the circumstances prior to any final employment action becoming effective.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-342. Conditions applicable to all testing.
(a) The department head or, for pre-employment testing, the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary, will arrange for drug screenings
with a certified laboratory.
(b) A urine sample will normally be given to test for the presence of controlled substances or alcohol. However, breath testing for alcohol may also be
used. Also, other acceptable testing methods (e.g., blood samples) may be ordered.
(c) Any person who tampers with, or attempts to tamper with, a urine/blood specimen or breath test in any manner shall be disqualified from
employment with the city and shall be barred for any future consideration for employment with the city or, if currently employed by the city, shall be
subject to disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(d) Prescription or over-the-counter drugs taken by the person to be tested will not be considered if the drug affects the testing, unless the use of such
drugs, in the judgment of the medical review officer, would be potentially harmful to the safety of the person being tested, or others.
(e) All positive urine samples will be confirmed by the use of the gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) method. The additional testing
(GS/MS) will be at the city's expense.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-343. Pre-employment testing.
(a) All person offered positions with the city shall be required to submit to a drug and/or alcohol test.
(b) Prior to the test, all applicants shall be require to sign a written consent form authorizing a urine or breath test for the presence of controlled
substances and alcohol. A job applicant refusing to sign a requested consent form will not be considered for employment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 146/444
(c) Test results shall be sent marked "Personal and Confidential" from the medical review officer to the administrative assistant in the office of the city
secretary or his or her designatee, and shall be treated in a highly confidential manner. An applicant shall not be placed on the city payroll or otherwise
allowed to report to work until negative test results have been received.
(d) If test results are positive, the department head shall be contacted by the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary and told nothing
more than that the applicant did not successfully pass the test. If negative test results are returned, and the applicant otherwise passes the test, the
administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary shall notify the hiring supervisor and process the appointment of the applicant.
(e) In the case of positive test results, disclosure of the results shall be made to the applicant by the administrative assistant in the office of the city
secretary. The applicant shall be told by the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary that he or she is disqualified for employment with the
city for a one-year period, and to be reconsidered, must submit evidence of successful completion of a rehabilitation program.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-344. Post accident testing.
(a) Employees who drive city vehicles or equipment on or off duty will be subjected to testing for motor vehicle accidents as described herein.
(b) Drug/alcohol testing will be required of employees following motor vehicle or motorized equipment accidents in any of the following circumstances:
(1) When a fatality or bodily injury occurs;
(2) When a third party (non-employee) is involved;
(3) When any significant damage to a city vehicle or equipment occurs;
(4) When a city driver receives a citation under state or local law for a moving traffic violation arising from an accident;
(5) When an employee who, in the judgment of the department head, is involved in a traffic accident without justifiable cause or cannot be
discounted as a contributing factor to an accident; or
(6) When an employee who, in the judgment of the department head, could have prevented the accident by being more alert.
(c) Procedures for post vehicle or motorized equipment accident testing.
(1) The employee(s) involved in the accident and the employee(s) from the department whose employee and vehicle are involved in the accident,
first arriving at the accident site are required to inform the department head of the accident immediately, but not longer than two hours following
the accident. If the department head or his or her designee is not available in that period of time, the employee(s) shall notify the city manager of
the accident.
(2) The employee(s) involved in the accident shall be prohibited from working or continuing to work until reporting to the office of the medical
review officer or, if the accident occurs when the medical review officer's office is closed, to the city-approved testing facility.
(3) Alcohol testing must be administered within two hours of the accident and in no event more than eight hours after the accident. Drug tests
must be administered within eight hours after the accident and in no event more than 32 hours after the accident. If this deadline for alcohol or drug
tests cannot be administered, such tests shall not then be conducted.
(4) The supervisor or a designated person not involved in the accident shall take the employee from the accident site and drive him or her to the
medical review officer or, if the accident occurs after working hours, a city-approved laboratory for the drug test. Under no circumstances will the
employee be allowed to drive to the medical review officer's office or testing facility. (If an employee is seriously injured or unconscious, he or she
will be taken to a hospital by emergency medical personnel for treatment. The first consideration will be the health and welfare of the employee. In
such case, a urine test will be given at the hospital laboratory, if possible).
(5) If the employee, in the judgment of the medical review officer, exhibits physical and/or emotional impairments such that his or her safety or
the safety of others could be in jeopardy if the employee returns to work, the employee shall not be allowed to return to work. In that situation, after
being tested, the employee will be driven home by the supervisor or other designated person. The employee shall not be allowed to drive home.
(6) Refusal to submit to a post-accident drug or alcohol test will be grounds for disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(7) An investigation surrounding the circumstances of the accident leading to a drug or alcohol test will automatically be conducted by the
department head and/or the city manager.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-345. Reasonable suspicion testing.
All employees suspected of controlled substance use or alcohol abuse will be required to provide a urine/blood sample for testing or to submit to a breath
test.
(1) A written record of specific, observable facts will be required before a drug or alcohol test can be ordered based on reasonable suspicion.
(2) Only department heads and supervisors who have received supervisory drug awareness training may refer for testing an employee who has
been observed in conduct or behavior which would create reasonable suspicion of controlled substances use or alcohol abuse. The department head
and/or supervisors will document the exact reasons why he or she suspects that a certain employee has violated the controlled substances and
alcohol abuse policy, including the symptoms exhibited by the employee, the actions of the employee, statements from other employees or third
parties, and other evidence which tends to establish a reasonable suspicion of controlled substances or alcohol abuse.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 147/444
(3) When it has been determined that reasonable suspicion exists and the employee should be tested, that decision must be approved by the city
manager. In the event that these individuals are inaccessible within a reasonable period of time, the department head is authorized to require the
employee to submit to a drug or alcohol test. Prior to such testing, the employee will be required to sign a form consenting to testing. Failure or
refusal to sign the consent form or to submit to testing may result in disciplinary action, up to and including, termination.
(4) The supervisor or a designated person will drive the employee to the testing facility (i.e., either the office of the medical review officer or
when the medical review officer's office is closed, a city-approved laboratory. Under no circumstances will the employee be allowed to drive.
(5) The department head or a designed person shall stay with the employee being tested and shall drive him or her back to work. If the medical
review officer, after observation and examination of the employee, determines the department head's suspicion is well founded, the department head
or a designated person shall arrange for the employee to be drive home.
(6) An employee tested for controlled substances or alcohol under the reasonable suspicion standard will be placed on leave of absence with pay
until the results of the test are received.
(7) All department heads and supervisors will prepare statements to be filed with the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary
describing the circumstances and conditions used as a basis for the required testing.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-346. Testing before employee returns to duty.
(a) The city will ensure that before an employee returns to duty after engaging in prohibited conduct concerning alcohol, the employee must take a
return to duty alcohol test with a result indicating an alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent.
(b) The city will ensure that before an employee returns to duty after engaging in prohibited conduct concerning drugs, the employee must take a return
to duty drug test with a result indicating a verified negative result for drugs. Prior to such testing, employees will be required to sign a form consenting to
testing.
(Ord. No. 1370,  2, 2-27-07)
Secs. 40-34740-355. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. REHABILITATION AND EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM
Sec. 40-356. Rehabilitation program as condition of employment.
Employees who test positive for drugs or alcohol may be permitted an opportunity to enter a rehabilitation program, at the sole discretion of the city. If the
city decides to continue the employment of the employee, the city may require the employee to participate in a rehabilitation program as a condition of
continued employment.
(1) The employee health benefit plan in effect on the date of adoption of this policy provides benefits for the treatment of chemical dependency
conditions, both in-patient and out-patient. Employees may contact the administrative assistant in the office of the city secretary for details.
(2) Any employee who has completed a rehabilitation program must remain alcohol- and drug-free. Any relapse by an employee will be a
violation of this policy and the employee may be subject to disciplinary action up to, and including, termination.
(3) An employee's decision to seek assistance by entering a rehabilitation program before work performance or behavior difficulties occur will be
kept confidential. Once work performance or behavior difficulties affecting the job or the city do occur, the subsequent voluntary entrance into a
rehabilitation will not necessarily prevent disciplinary action up to, and including, indefinite suspension or termination. Any employee who tests
positive and who refuses to enter a rehabilitation program, who fails to complete the rehabilitation program, or who refuses to cease using or
abusing controlled substances or alcohol, will be indefinitely suspended or terminated.
(Ord. No. 1370,  3, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-357. Leave available.
Employees who seek controlled substance or alcohol abuse assistance and rehabilitation and cannot report for work while undergoing such rehabilitation
may request sick leave, vacation leave in the amount accrued or leave without pay. All sick and vacation leave shall be exhausted prior to granting the use
of approved leave without pay, including leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act. Requests for, and approval of, leave without pay are governed by
the city's personnel policy.
(Ord. No. 1370,  3, 2-27-07)
Sec. 40-358. Working while enrolled in rehabilitation program.
Employees who are involved in rehabilitation and are able to report for work may do so under the following conditions:
(1) An employee may resume regular duties only after the employee tests negative for a drug test administered by the medical review officer or a
city-approved laboratory and can provide a release to return to work from an appropriate substance abuse treatment facility or confirmation of
continued and on-going participation in a recognized substance abuse assistance program.
(2) Prior to being allowed to return to work, the employee shall be required to meet with his or her department head or designatee to receive an
explanation of the terms of continued employment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 148/444
(3) An employee may, at the city's request, be required at any time to submit to interviews and physical examinations by the medical review
officer and/or evaluation by the professional staff at an appropriate chemical dependency treatment facility.
(4) Any employee will be require to submit to unannounced drug and alcohol testing up to 60 months after resuming duties.
(Ord. No. 1370,  3, 2-27-07)
Chapter 41 RESERVED
Chapter 42
ENVIRONMENT*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 42-142-10. Reserved.
Editor's noteFormerly, Art. I contained  42-1, noise, derived from the 1972 Code,  12-3. Such section was repealed by Ord. No. 1154,  1, adopted May
23, 2000. See Art. III,  42-81, etc. for current provisions concerning such subject matter.
ARTICLE II. SANITATION AND NUISANCE ABATEMENT
DIVISION 1. KEEP ROCKPORT BEAUTIFUL ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 42-11. Appointments.
(a) Members of the Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board shall be qualified voters residing in the city.
(b) The Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board shall consist of 11 members and include as officers a chairman, vice chairman and secretary. The
mayor, or his designate, shall be an ex-officio member. The appointment of members will be by the mayor and approved by the city council for three-year
overlapping terms with the exception of the initial members who shall be appointed as follows:
(1) Four members to be appointed for three years.
(2) Four members to be appointed for two years.
(3) Three members to be appointed for one year.
(c) All members so appointed shall serve until their successors are appointed and qualified. Members shall serve without compensation, but may be
reimbursed for personal expenses incurred in the performance of their duties, when authorized in advance by the city manager. The board will elect
officers of the board.
(d) The city council should strive to balance board membership to represent best each ward.
(Ord. No. 1244,  2, 4-22-03)
Sec. 42-12. Organization.
(a) The Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board shall:
(1) Hold one regular monthly meeting and other special meetings as deemed necessary.
(2) Elect a chairman, vice-chairman and secretary-treasurer to serve out a term of one calendar year, who shall serve the board as follows:
a. Chairman. The chairman of the board shall be responsible for the calling and the conduct of all meetings and shall be responsible for the
preparation and posting of meeting agendas as required by law.
b. Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman shall act in the absence of the chairman and perform other such duties as directed by the chairman.
c. Secretary-treasurer. The secretary-treasurer of said board shall keep a permanent record of the proceedings of meetings and submit a copy
of said proceedings to the city council each month, and shall also keep a permanent record of donated funds. Such funds received shall be
delivered to the city's finance director to be maintained in a separate trust account, with the funds expended only for the purpose for which they
were donated. Such account shall be audited annually as part of the regular city audit.
(b) The city manager shall ensure that the Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board receives the staff support necessary to prepare minutes,
correspondence and other written material.
(c) All meetings of the advisory board will be open to the public and in conformance with the rules and regulations of the Texas Open Meetings Law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 149/444
(1) The board shall hold all meetings at the Rockport City Hall.
(2) A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
(3) Any member who is absent from three consecutive meetings of the board without valid excuse, as determined the board, shall be
automatically dismissed form the membership and the city council advised that such vacancy exists.
(4) Vacancies occurring on the board, for whatever reason, will be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term within 30 days, by appointment
of the mayor with the consent of the city council.
(Ord. No. 1244,  2, 4-22-03)
Sec. 42-13. Purpose.
The Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board shall have the purpose of working towards continued city improvement and beautification of its
environment and shall:
(1) Actively encourage citizen support for improving and beautifying the city.
(2) Regularly report to the city council any resolutions, recommendations and reports adopted by the board.
(Ord. No. 1244,  2, 4-22-03)
Sec. 42-14. Duties.
The Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board shall:
(1) Determine the goals of the city beautification and develop long range plans and programs for improvement and beautification within the city.
(2) Prepare, with recommendations, an annual Keep Rockport Beautiful budget, to be submitted for approval by the city council. The funds
included in the budget shall be for normal administrative costs of the committee. In addition, the committee may recommend different projects for
beautification, which, if implemented by the city, will be budgeted as part of its regular budgeting procedure.
(3) Recommend the selection and employment of such personnel, agents or consultants as the board deems necessary, within the limits of their
approved city budget.
(4) Act as the city's representative in all matters relating to state, federal and county beautification programs.
(5) Arrange and conduct, subject to prior council approval, publicity campaigns relative to its activities, for better public understanding. Any
such plan shall have prior city council approval before implementation.
(6) Accept, with approval of city council, gifts, donations and grants on behalf of the city for the development of beautification and improvement
of the city.
(7) Recommend to city council schedules of fees and charges for the use of any such facilities under the jurisdiction of said board.
(Ord. No. 1244,  2, 4-22-03)
Sec. 42-15. Liaisons.
(a) With the approval of the council, the mayor shall designate one council member to serve as the council liaison to the Keep Rockport Beautiful
Advisory Board. The appointed individual shall receive notice of all Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board meetings, minutes of all meetings, and all
other materials submitted to or from the park and leisure services advisory board.
(b) The park and leisure service director will serve as a staff advisor to the Keep Rockport Beautiful Advisory Board.
(Ord. No. 1244,  2, 4-22-03)
DIVISION 2. PROPERTY, ENVIRONMENT AND SAFETY
Subdivision I. General
Sec. 42-16. Title.
The following provisions shall be and constitute the Rockport Property, Environmental and Safety Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(1.1), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-17. Statutory references.
[The following statutory references shall apply to this division:]
Sec. 342.001 to 342.007 V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code.
Sec. 365.011 to 365.015 V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 150/444
Sec. 54.001 V.T.C.A., Local Government Code.
Sec. 54.011 to 54.019 V.T.C.A., Local Government Code.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(1.2), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-18. Purpose.
It is deemed by the city council of the City of Rockport, Texas, that it is dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare for property in the city to have
accumulations of stagnant water, litter, junk and trash or other unwholesome, impure or unsanitary matter that may produce disease or attract disease
carrying pests, and it is dangerous and constitutes a fire hazard to have weeds, tall grass, brush and litter on property in the city. It is recognized that native
plants and wildlife are an essential part of the appeal of this city, and this division favors the promotion and preservation of such habitat.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(1.3), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-19. Definitions.
As used in this division, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Affidavit means a statement in writing, made under oath or on affirmation before an authorized magistrate or public notary, by a person(s) who has/have
witnessed an incident, which contains enough evidence in the form of documented pictures, witness statements and other undisputed evidence acceptable
to the code official.
Approved solid waste site means a solid waste site permitted by the Texas Natural Resources Conservation Commission (TNRCC) or the Texas
Department of Health; a solid waste site licensed by a county under Chapter 361, Health and Safety Code; or a designated collection area for ultimate
disposal at a permitted or licensed municipal solid waste site.
Brush see shrub.
City means the City of Rockport, Texas.
Cleared means to cut or remove to ground level herbaceous plants, woody vegetation, brush or shrubs on property to the greater extent possible.
Code enforcement official means the designated authority charged with the enforcement of this division, or his duly authorized representative.
Cultivated includes but is not limited to tending, maintaining and removal of litter and brush.
Dispose means to discharge, deposit, inject, spill, leak or place litter on or into land or water.
Improved property means the opposite of unimproved property.
Junk and trash pertains to the following but not limited to:
(1) Decayable waste from a public or private establishment, residence or restaurant, including yard trimmings, leaves or similar materials, animal
and vegetable waste material from a market or storage facility handling or storing produce or other food products, or the handling, preparation,
cooking or consumption of food, but not including sewage, body wastes or industrial by-products; or
(2) Nondecayable solid waste, except ashes, that consist of:
a. Combustible waste material, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, furniture, rubber and plastics;
b. Noncombustible waste material, including glass, crockery, tin or aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures of 1800 degrees Fahrenheit or less; and
c. Discarded or worn-out manufactured materials and machinery, including motor vehicles and parts of motor vehicles, tires, aircraft, farm
implements, building or construction materials, appliances, and scrap metal.
Maintain means to provide for upkeep or support; to keep unimpaired or in proper condition.
Mowed means to cut or clip grass and weeds on property to the minimum height possible.
Natural state means property, which has no official city record of having been cleared and contains vegetation, which has grown naturally.
Official city record means documentation generated by the city or as an affidavit submitted by a person(s) that shows definitive evidence that a property
has been maintained (mowed or cleared) within the past three (3) years prior to date of affidavit submittal, that may be used as official record to address
the maintenance of property as required herein.
Person means an individual, corporation, organization, government, business trust, partnership, association or other legal entity.
Property means any piece or parcel of land, lot or tract, or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal
instrument of record.
Sanitary means a condition of good order and cleanliness that precludes the probability of disease transmission.
Shrub means a singular or multiple-stemmed woody plant, usually, but not necessarily, less than four feet in height. This term shall have the same meaning
as hedge, bush or brush.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 151/444
Uncultivated vegetation means grass, flowers, shrubs, brush, weeds and other plant matter that is not maintained and is unattended by human hands, that
grows naturally and attains heights in excess of minimum standards as prescribed herein.
Unimproved property means land that contains no habitable structures or no manmade improvements, except for improvements that are utility in nature
(surface and subsurface features).
Vacant property shall have the same meaning as unimproved property.
Weeds means undesirable grassy matter that tends to overgrow or choke out more desirable plants (see uncultivated vegetation).
Xeriscape means a manmade area on real property in which vegetation other than grass is planted, grown and cultivated for the purpose of creating a low
maintenance natural landscape.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(2), 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1184,  1, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 1449,  1, 11-5-08; Ord. No. 1621,  1, 1-14-14)
Sec. 42-20. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this division. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this division shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(8.1), 6-9-98)
Secs. 42-2142-25. Reserved.
Subdivision II. Public Nuisances
Sec. 42-26. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow a public nuisance as herein defined to exist or remain on any premises in the city.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.1), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-27. Stagnant water.
Accumulations of stagnant water which may attract or harbor mosquitoes or produce disease are hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.2), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-28. Unsanitary conditions.
Unwholesome, impure or unsanitary conditions that may produce disease or are likely to attract or harbor insects, rodents, vermin, snakes or disease
carrying pests are hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.3), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-29. Uncultivated vegetation.
(a) General. Uncultivated vegetation exceeding the standards addressed in this chapter are hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be maintained as
required. Areas identified as Xeriscapes in Chapter 106, Rockport Code of Ordinances shall be exempt from this section.
(b) Weeds and grass shall not exceed the following heights:
(1) Twelve inches for improved property that is less than one (1) acre, including that portion of the street right-of-way area extending from the
property line of real property to the edge of the street pavement adjacent to it or to the center line of the adjacent unpaved street or alley.
(2) Eighteen inches for unimproved property that is less than one-half (1/2) acre, including that portion of the street right-of-way area extending
from the property line of real property to the edge of the street pavement adjacent to it or to the center line of the adjacent unpaved street or alley.
(c) Vacant property exempt. Vacant property in its natural state shall be exempt from this section.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.4), 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1184,  2, 7-24-2001; Ord. No. 1361,  2, 10-10-06; Ord. No. 1449,  2, 11-5-08; Ord. No. 1621,  2, 1-14-14)
Sec. 42-30. Junk and trash.
Accumulations of junk and trash are hereby declared a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.5), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-31. Compost piles.
Personal compost piles which are maintained and kept for residential use are encouraged and are exempt.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(3.6), 6-9-98)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 152/444
Sec. 42-32. Prohibited discharges within the city limits.
Except as authorized by rule, permit, or order issued by the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), or into any approved system, no person
may:
(1) Discharge sewage, municipal waste, recreational waste, agricultural waste, industrial waste, refuse within the city limits.
(2) Discharge other waste within the city limits which in itself or in conjunction with any other discharge or activity causes, or will cause
pollution with the city limits.
(Ord. No. 1596,  1, 1-8-13)
Secs. 42-3342-35. Reserved.
Subdivision III. Compliance Process
Sec. 42-36. Notice to abate public nuisance.
(a) Notice required. The code enforcement official shall give written notice to the owner of property to abate a violation found on the premises. The
notice shall require the abatement of the violation within ten days of the date of the notice.
(b) Method of notice. The notice must be given:
(1) Personally to the owner; or
(2) By certified mail addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address; or
(3) If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's mailing address is unknown, then notice must be given:
a. By posting the notice for ten days on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or
b. By posting the notice for ten days on a placard attached to a stake driven into the ground on the property to which the violation relates, if
the property contains no buildings.
(c) Notice by certified mail. If notice is given by certified mail to a property owner to abate a violation, three days shall be added to the prescribed
period.
(d) Subsequent notice. Subsequent notices are not required to a property owner for reoccurring violations on the same property within one calendar year
from the date notice is first provided pursuant to this section. (Reference section 42-17 of this article.)
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(4.1), 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1156,  1, 6-27-00; Ord. No. 1184,  3, 7-24-01; Ord. No. 1274,  1, 12-9-03)
Sec. 42-37. Abatement by city.
If the owner of the property does not comply with the requirements of a notice to abate a violation, the city may perform or cause to be performed the work
or improvements required. The city may pay for the work done or improvements made and charge the expenses to the owner of the property as outlined in
sections 42-38 through 42-41.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(4.2), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-38. Assessment of expenses.
Required work or improvements performed or caused to be performed by the city shall be charged to the owner of the property.
(1) Minimum fee. In addition to any administrative costs, the fee charged by the city shall be the actual invoice cost submitted by the
mowing/clean-up contractor. In cases where city labor performs mowing/clean-up services, the minimum fee shall be $50.00 per hour for labor and
equipment used in mowing/cleanup, plus all related expenses and the minimum charge shall be for one hour.
(2) Administrative fee. The city shall charge an administrative fee of $50.00 added to the total, to cover the city's cost of administering the work.
(3) Expenses. Related expenses shall include but are not limited to the costs of inspection or testing by third parties, photography, publication
costs, title search fees, attorney's fees, costs incurred in identifying, locating, or contacting the owner, landfill fees, etc.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(5.1), 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1413,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 42-39. Invoice.
The code enforcement official shall certify the expenses incurred in enforcing the provisions of this division for invoicing to the owner of the property. The
invoice becomes an account receivable upon completion and shall be due within 30 days of invoicing. The invoice shall be delivered personally or mailed
to the owner's known address.
Lien after certification. If personal service cannot be obtained or the owner's address is unknown, the lien may be filed after certification of the expenses.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(5.2), 6-9-98)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 153/444
Sec. 42-40. Lien.
If payment in full has not been received after 30 days from invoicing, the city shall assess the expenses against the property in the form of a lien.
(1) Execution of lien. The mayor city manager, or other city official designated by the mayor city manager, shall execute the lien on behalf of the
city. The lien shall be filed with the county clerk. The lien arises and attaches to the property at the time the lien is recorded and indexed in the
office of the county clerk. The lien should contain the name of the owner, a legal description of the real property, the amount of expenses incurred
by the city, the interest rate to be charged and the balance due.
(2) Lien privileged. The city's lien is a privileged lien subordinate only to tax liens and liens for street improvements.
(3) Interest. Interest shall accrue at the rate of ten percent per annum on the balance due.
(4) Release of lien. The lien shall be extinguished and released if the city is reimbursed for the total amount due.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(5.3), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-41. Foreclosure.
(a) The city may authorize its attorney to bring a suit for foreclosure of a lien in the name of the city to recover the expenditures and interest due. Such
suit may be filed in any court having jurisdiction over such matter, against any property for which:
(1) Such bill has remained unpaid 60 days after it has been rendered; and
(2) Exceeds ten percent (10%) of the appraised value of subject property.
(b) Records of property liens shall be reviewed annually to determine if foreclosure is feasible.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(5.4), 6-9-98; Ord. No. 1621,  3, 1-14-14)
Secs. 42-4242-45. Reserved.
Subdivision IV. Prohibited Acts
Sec. 42-46. Obstruction.
It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or interfere with the implementation of any action required by the order of the code enforcement official.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(6.1), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-47. Junk and trash.
(a) Disposal. It shall be unlawful to dispose or allow or permit the disposal of junk and trash at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, including
a place on or within 300 feet of a public highway, on a right-of-way, or other public or private property, or into inland or coastal water of the state. (Refer
to Sec. 365.012 H&SC.)
(b) Receiving. It shall be unlawful to receive junk and trash for disposal at a place that is not an approved solid waste site, regardless of whether the junk
and trash or the land on which the junk and trash is disposed is owned or controlled by the person. (Refer to Sec. 365.012 H&SC.)
(c) Transport. It shall be unlawful for a person to transport junk and trash to a place that is not an approved solid waste site for disposal at the site.
(Refer to Sec. 365.012 H&SC.)
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(6.2), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-48. Public nuisance.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit or allow a public nuisance as herein defined to exist or remain n any premises in the city.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(6.3), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-49. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1449,  3, adopted Nov. 5, 2008, deleted  42-49, which pertained to weeds and derived from Ord. No. 1267, adopted Oct. 28,
2003.
Sec. 42-50. Reserved.
Subdivision V. Enforcement and Remedies
Sec. 42-51. Civil action.
The city may direct its attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this division.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 154/444
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(7.2), 6-9-98)
Sec. 42-52. Criminal penalties.
Certain violations specified in section 42-47 of this division may be classified as Class C, B or A misdemeanors, or 3rd degree felonies. Consult Chapter
365, Subchapter B, of the Health and Safety Code.
Any person who violates any provision of this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor (Class C), and upon conviction shall be fined any sum up to
$1,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1083,  1(7.3), 6-9-98)
Secs. 42-5342-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES
Sec. 42-56. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Junked motor vehicle means a motor vehicle as defined in Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d-11:
(1) That is inoperative; and
(2) That does not have lawfully affixed to it either an unexpired license plate or a valid motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, that is
wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, or discarded, or that remains inoperable for a continuous period of more than 45 days.
Owner or occupant of premises means any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
(Code 1972,  12-32; Ord. No. 747,  1, 10-14-86)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
State law referenceDefinitions pertaining to abandoned motor vehicles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.01.
Sec. 42-57. Enforcement.
The chief of police and the code enforcement officer are authorized to administer the provisions of this article and may enter upon private property during
reasonable hours to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of vehicles or parts thereof, and to remove or cause the removal
of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. The municipal court shall have authority to issue all orders necessary to
enforce this article.
(Code 1972,  12-33)
Sec. 42-58. Declaration of nuisance.
(a) Junked vehicles which are located in any place where they are visible from a public place or a public right-of-way are detrimental to the safety and
welfare of the general public, tending to reduce the value of private property, to invite vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance
creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, and are detrimental to the economic welfare of the city, by producing urban blight which is adverse to
the maintenance and continuing development of the community, and such vehicles are, therefore, declared to be a public nuisance.
(b) The provisions of this section shall not apply to a vehicle or vehicle part that is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is
not visible from the street or other public or private property, a vehicle or vehicle part that is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed vehicle dealer or junkyard, or an unlicensed, operable or inoperable antique or special interest vehicle stored by
a collector on the collector's property, if the vehicle and the outdoor storage area are maintained in a manner so that they do not constitute a health hazard
and are screened from ordinary public view by means of a fence, rapidly growing trees, shrubbery or other appropriate means.
(Code 1972,  12-34)
State law referenceJunked vehicles as public nuisance, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 4477-9a,  5.08.
Sec. 42-59. Notice to abate or remove.
(a) Whenever any public nuisance defined by this division exists within the city, the chief of police or the code enforcement officer shall give notice of
such public nuisance, which notice shall require abatement or removal of the nuisance.
(b) For a nuisance on private property, the notification shall provide ten days' notice stating the nature of the public nuisance on private property, that it
must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the ten-day period. The notice must be
mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor vehicle, any lienholder of record, and to
the owner or occupant of the private premises on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the
motor vehicle is unknown, notice to the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is
physically located, the notice may be hand-delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the
nuisance shall be continued to a date not less than ten days after the date of the return.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 155/444
(c) For a nuisance on public property, the notification shall provide ten days' notice, stating the nature of the public nuisance on public property or on a
public right-of-way, that the nuisance must be removed and abated within ten days, and that a request for a hearing must be made before expiration of the
ten-day period. The notice must be mailed, by certified mail with a five-day return requested, to the last known registered owner of the junked motor
vehicle, any lienholder of record, and to the owner or occupant of the public premises or to the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public
right-of-way on which the public nuisance exists. If the post office address of the last known registered owner of the motor vehicle is unknown, notice to
the last known registered owner may be placed on the motor vehicle, or, if the last known registered owner is physically located, the notice may be hand
delivered. If any notice is returned undelivered by the United States post office, official action to abate the nuisance shall be continued to a date not less
than ten days after the date of the return.
(d) The notification shall be in writing and include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if
available, at the site.
(Code 1972,  12-35)
Sec. 42-60. Public hearing.
A public hearing shall be held before the removal of the vehicle or vehicle part as a public nuisance. The hearing shall be held before the city council, if a
hearing is requested by the owner or occupant of the public or private premises or by the owner or occupant of the premises adjacent to the public right-ofway
on which the vehicle is located, within ten days after service of notice to abate the nuisance. At the hearing it is presumed, unless demonstrated
otherwise by the owner, that the vehicle is inoperable. If the decision of the council is that the vehicle or vehicle part is deemed a public nuisance and a
disposition agreement with the owner or occupant can not be reached, the council will cause the municipal court to issue an order for removal of the
vehicle or vehicle part. An order requiring the removal of a vehicle or vehicle part must include a description of the vehicle and the correct identification
number and license number of the vehicle if the information is available at the site.
(Code 1972,  12-36)
Sec. 42-61. Removal by owner or occupant of premises.
Junked vehicles or parts thereto declared a public nuisance by this article, may be removed from the premises by the owner or occupant of the premises at
his own expense, provided the vehicle or parts thereof are disposed of at a licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. The city sanitary fill is not an authorized
disposal area for junked vehicles.
(Code 1972,  12-37)
Sec. 42-62. Removal on court order.
If the owner or the occupant of the premises fails to comply with the notification given him by the chief of police or the code enforcement officer pursuant
to this division, the municipal court shall have the authority to issue all orders necessary to have the junked vehicle removed from the premises by an
authorized demolisher.
(Code 1972,  12-38)
Sec. 42-63. Effect of granting permission for removal by chief of police or code enforcement officer.
If, within ten days after receipt of notice from the chief of police or the code enforcement officer to remove or abate a nuisance under this division, the
owner or occupant gives his written permission to the chief of police or the code enforcement officer for removal of the junked vehicle from the premises,
the giving of such permission shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this division.
(Code 1972,  12-39)
Sec. 42-64. Transfer of removed vehicle to demolisher; notice given to state highway department.
(a) A junked vehicle which is removed from public or private property by authority of this division and which is disposed of to a demolisher shall be
transferred to such demolisher on state department of transportation form #MVD 71-5. The transfer receipt shall stipulate the disposition of the vehicle for
demolition only, and must contain a complete description of the vehicle, including the license number, if ascertainable, and must make reference to this
article as authority under which transfer is made. The transfer receipt shall specifically stipulate that the vehicle being transferred shall not be reconstructed
or made operable.
(b) In addition, state department of transportation form #MVD 71-4 shall be used to notify the state department of transportation, within five days of the
date or removal of the junked vehicle. Such notification shall contain the complete identification of the vehicle or part thereof, and the license number of
the vehicle, if available. A copy of this division must be attached to the notification of abatement and removal of a junked vehicle, or a copy of this
division must be on file with the state department of transportation. The department shall immediately cancel the certificate of title to the vehicle pursuant
to the Certificate of Title Act (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6687-1).
(Code 1972,  12-40)
Sec. 42-65. Reconstruction, repair of vehicle not allowed after official removal.
A vehicle may not be reconstructed or made operable after it has been removed pursuant to this division.
Secs. 42-6642-80. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. NOISE ABATEMENT*
Sec. 42-81. Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 156/444
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of their
usage clearly indicates another meaning:
Daytime hours shall mean the hours between 7:00 a.m. on one day and 10:00 p.m. in the same day.
dB(A) shall mean the intensity of a sound expressed in decibels read from a calibrated sound level meter utilizing the A-level weighting scale and the slow
meter response, as specified by the applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute or its successor body.
Emergency shall mean any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma or property damage or less which demands
immediate action.
Emergency work shall mean any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused
by an emergency, or which is otherwise necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a fire, accident or natural disaster, or which is required
to protect persons or property from exposure to danger, or which is required to restore public utilities.
Nighttime hours shall mean the hours between 10:00 p.m. on one day and 7:00 a.m. the following day.
Nonresidential property shall mean any real property within the limits of the city, which is not included in the definition of residential property as defined
in this section.
Person shall mean any individual, association, partnership or corporation.
Property line shall mean the line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned, leased or occupied by one
person from that owned, leased, or occupied by any other person and the imaginary line which represents the legal limits of property of any person who
owns, leases or otherwise occupies an apartment, condominium, hotel or motel room, office or any other type of occupancy.
Public right-of-way shall mean any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, road, thoroughfare, sidewalk, alley or any other property, which is owned or
controlled by a governmental entity.
Residential property shall mean any real property developed and used for human habitation and which contains living facilities, including provisions for
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation, unless such premises are actually occupied and used primarily for purposes other than human habitation.
Sound nuisance shall mean any sound which either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 42-82 or otherwise unreasonably
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of persons with ordinary sensibilities within the limits of the city.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
Sec. 42-82. Maximum permissible sound levels.
(a) No person shall conduct, permit or allow any activity or sound source to produce a sound that is discernible beyond the property lines of the property
on which the sound is being received that when measured as provided in section 14-88 [42-81, defining dB(A)] of this Code exceeds the applicable dB(A)
level listed below for the property on which the sound is received:
(1) Residential [property:]
a. 85 dB(A) during daytime hours.
b. 80 dB(A) during nighttime hours.
(2) Nonresidential property: (85) dB(A) during either daytime or nighttime hours.
(b) The dB(A) levels set forth in this section apply to the property where the sound is being received. Any sound that when measured at the property
where the sound is being received exceeds the dB(A) levels set forth in this section is a violation of this chapter. Evidence that an activity or sound source
produces a sound that exceeds the dB(A) levels specified in this section, when measured at the site where the sound is being produced, if available, shall be
prima facie evidence of a sound nuisance which unreasonably disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within
the limits of the city in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
Sec. 42-83. General prohibition.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to make, assist in making, permit, continue, cause to be made or continued or permit the continuance of any sound
which either exceeds the maximum permitted sound levels specified in section 42-82 or otherwise unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the limits of the city.
(b) The acts enumerated in the following sections of this article, among others are declared to be sound nuisances, which are unreasonably loud,
irritating, disturbing, or excessive sounds in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
Sec. 42-84. Noisy vehicles generally.
The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner so as to create loud and unreasonable grating,
grinding, rattling or any other loud and unreasonable sound is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 157/444
Sec. 42-85. Amplified sound from motor vehicle.
The production or reproduction of sound from amplification equipment contained in or mounted on a motor vehicle that produces sound in excess of the
limits set forth in section 42-82, when measured at or near 30 feet from the nearest external point on the vehicle, or otherwise produces noises which are
unreasonably loud, irritating, or disturbing, are hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful as a sound nuisance in violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
Sec. 42-86. Noisy animals.
The keeping of any animal which barks, whines, howls, crows, cackles or makes any noise excessively and continuously, and such noise disturbs a person
of ordinary sensibilities, is hereby prohibited and declared to be unlawful as a sound nuisance in violation of this article, regardless of whether the sound so
created by said animal or bird is within the permissible levels specified in section 42-82 of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
Sec. 42-87. Affirmative defenses.
The following defenses shall apply to any offense established in this article:
(1) The emission of any sound was for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency, danger or attempted crime.
(2) The sound was produced by an authorized emergency vehicle.
(3) The sound was produced by emergency work necessary to restore public utilities, or to restore property to a safe condition, or to protect
persons or property from imminent danger, following a fire, accident or natural disaster.
(4) The sound was generated:
a. At a lawfully scheduled stadium event;
b. By a parade and spectators and participants on the parade route during a permitted parade;
c. By spectators and participants at a lawfully scheduled amphitheater event;
d. By spectators and participants of any outdoor event, fun run, race, festival, or concert which was sponsored, co-sponsored, or permitted
by the city; or
e. A governmental entity, as defined by Local Government Code  271.021 as it may be amended from time to time.
(5) The sound was produced by the erection, excavation, construction, demolition, alternation, or repair work, or the permitting or causing
thereof, of any building or other structure, or the operation or the permitting or causing the operation of any tools or equipment used in any such
activity conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. and which activity did not produce a sound exceeding 85 dB(A) when measured
from the nearest residential property where the sound is being received.
(6) The sound was produced by aircraft in flight or in operation at an airport, or railroad equipment in operation on railroad rights-of-way.
(7) The sound was produced by operating or permitting the operation of any mechanically powered saw, drill, sander, router, grinder, lawn or
garden tool, lawnmower, or any other similar device used between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. and which device did not produce a sound
exceeding 85 dB(A) when measured from the nearest residential property where the sound is being received and was used for the maintenance or
upkeep of the property on which it was used.
(8) The sound was generated as authorized under the terms of a permit issued under section 70.4(b)(2) of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1154,  2, 5-23-00)
ARTICLE IV. LIGHTING NUISANCE
Sec. 42-100. Purpose and intent.
It is the intent of this article to preserve, protect, and enhance the lawful nighttime use and enjoyment of any and all property through the use of
appropriate lighting practices and systems. Such individual fixtures and lighting systems are designed, constructed, and installed to: control glare and light
trespass, minimize obtrusive light, conserve energy and resources while maintaining safety, security and productivity, and curtail the degradation of the
nighttime visual environment.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-101. Definitions.
[As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:]
Cutoff angle (of a luminaries): The angle, measured up from the nadir, between the vertical axis and the first line of sight at which the bare sources is not
visible.
Footcandle: A unit of luminance amounting to one lumen per square foot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 158/444
Full cut-off type fixture: A luminaries or light fixture that, by design of the design of the housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to
shine above a 90-degree, horizontal plane from the base of the fixture. Full cut-off fixtures must be installed in a horizontal position as designed, or the
purpose of the design is defeated.
Fully shielded: A fully shielded luminaries is a luminary constructed or shielded in such a manner that all light emitted by the luminaries, either directly
from the lamp or indirectly from the luminaries, is projected below the horizontal plane through the luminaries' lowest light emitting part as determined by
photometry test or certified by the manufacturer. Fixtures will be installed in a horizontal position as designed, or disability glare will result.
Glare: The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to cause
annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility.
Light trespass: Light emitted by a lighting installation, which falls outside the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
Luminance: The quantity of light, or luminous flux, arriving at a surface divided by the area of the illuminated surface, measured in lux or footcandles.
Luminance: The physical quantity corresponding to the brightness of a surface (e.g. a lamp, luminaries, sky, or reflecting material) in a special direction. It
is the luminous intensity of an area of the surface divided by that area. The unit is candela per square meter.
Luminaries: A complete lighting unit consisting of a lamp or lamps together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and protect the lamps
and to connect the lamps to the power supply.
Lux (lx): The SI unit of illuminates. One lux is one lumen per square meter.
Obtrusive light: Spill light which, because of quantitative, directional or spectral context, gives rise to annoyance, discomfort, distraction or a reduction in
the ability to see essential information.
Spill light: Light emitted by lighting installation that falls outside the boundaries of the property on which the installation is sited.
Up lighting: Any light source that distributes illumination above a 90-degree horizontal plane.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-102. General provisions.
(a) Curfew: All nonessential lighting in any district will be required to be turned off after business hours in the commercial zones and after 10:30 p.m. in
residential areas, leaving only the necessary lighting for site security. The nonessential lighting shall remain off until dawn or one-half hour before a
business opens, whichever is earlier. ("Nonessential" can apply, but is not limited to: display, aesthetic, paring, sign lighting, playground, or yard lights.)
(b) Light trespass limits: No use or operation in any district shall be located or concentrated so as to produce intense glare or direct illumination across
the bounding property line for a visible source of illumination nor shall any such light be of such intensity as to create a nuisance or detract from the use
and enjoyment of adjacent property. The pre-curfew luminance level measured on the property line at eye height on a plane perpendicular to the line of
sight shall be no greater than three lux. The post-curfew luminance level measured on the property line at eye height on a plane perpendicular to the line of
sight shall be no greater than one lux.
(c) Street lights: All lights illuminating a parking area shall be designed and located so as to reflect away from any street and adjacent property.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-103. Special provisions.
(a) Lighting used for flagpoles or church steeples and other religious monuments or displays on church property are exempted from the requirements of
this article. Except all such lighting shall be shielded in manner so the filament/bulb is not directly visible from a public roadway.
(b) Street lights: All street or other public entity lighting shall be exempt from the requirements of this article.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1329,  1, 6-21-05)
Sec. 42-104. Nonresidential provisions.
The following provisions shall apply to all nonresidential land uses including, but not limited to, commercial, light industrial, and open space.
(1) All parking area lighting shall be full cut-off type fixtures. Pole mounted lights shall be a maximum height of 25 feet, measured from ground
level to the base of the light fixture.
(2) All building lighting for security or aesthetics will be full cutoff or a shielded type, not allowing any upward distribution of light.
Floodlighting is discouraged, and if used, must be shielded to prevent:
a. Disability glare for drivers or pedestrians.
b. Light trespass beyond the property line.
c. Light above a 90-degree, horizontal plane.
(3) Unshielded wall-pack type fixtures are unacceptable.
(4) Adjacent to residential property, no direct light source will be visible at the property line at ground level or above.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 159/444
(5) Externally lit signs, display, building and aesthetic lighting must be lit from the top and shine downward. The lighting must be shielded to
prevent direct glare and/or light trespass. The lighting must also be, as much as physically possible, contained to the target area. Internally lighted
signs are acceptable. (See sign ordinance for further restrictions on lighted signs.)
(6) The "maintained horizontal illuminates recommendations" set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) shall be
observed.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01; Ord. No. 1249,  1, 6-24-03)
Sec. 42-105. Site plan standards.
(a) All site plans shall include locations, size, height, orientation, wattage, design and plans of all outdoor lighting and lighted signs. For site plans
showing a high level of illumination, the building and development department may require an iso-lux plan indicating levels of illumination in footcandles,
at ground level. The plan shall adhere to the "maintained horizontal luminance recommendations" set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IES). (See Appendix A)
(b) Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source be changed after the site plan has been approved, a change request must be submitted in
writing to the building official for his approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this article, which must be received prior to
substitution.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-106. Temporary lighting exemptions.
(a) Any person may submit a written request, on a form prepared by the city, to the building official for a temporary lighting exemption request. A
temporary exemption shall contain the following information:
(1) Specific exemption or exemptions requested.
(2) Duration of time requested for exemption.
(3) Type of lamp(s), fixture(s) and shielding provided.
(4) Total wattage of lamp or lamps.
(5) Proposed location on premises of the outdoor light fixture(s), including height.
(6) Such other data and information as may be required by the building official.
(b) The building official shall have five business days from the date of submission of the request for temporary exemption to act, in writing, on the
request. If approved, the exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 days from the date of issuance of the approval. The approval shall be renewable at
the discretion of the building official upon a consideration of all the circumstances. Each such renewed exemption shall be valid for not more than 30 days.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-107. Nonconforming lighting.
(a) Existing lighting in conflict with this article shall be classified as nonconforming.
(b) Nonconforming lighting shall not be altered, rebuilt, enlarged, extended, or relocated, unless doing so brings it into conformance.
(c) Nonconforming lighting shall not be permitted to remain after cessation or change of the business or activity to which the lighting pertains.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-108. Administration.
The duties and responsibility of administering this article shall be vested in the police department and building and development department, building
official of the city, or such other person as may be designated from time to time by the city manager.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Sec. 42-109. Penalty.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be
punished by a penalty or fine not to exceed the sum of $500.00 for each offense, and each and every day such offense is continued shall constitute a new
and separate offense.
(Ord. No. 1176,  1, 4-24-01)
Secs. 42-11042-119. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. STORMWATER REGULATIONS*
Sec. 42-120. Responsibility.
Except as otherwise provided herein, the director of public works (DPW) and code enforcement administrator (CEA) shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon these people may be delegated to other city personnel.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 160/444
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-121. General provisions.
(a) Purposes. The purposes and objectives of this article are as follows:
(1) To maintain and improve the quality of surface water and groundwater within the city and the state.
(2) To prevent the discharge of contaminated stormwater runoff from industrial, commercial, residential, and construction sites into the municipal
separate storm sewer system (MS4) and natural waters within the city.
(3) To promote public awareness of the hazards involved in the improper discharge of hazardous substances, petroleum products, household
hazardous waste, industrial waste, sediment from construction sites, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, and other contaminants into the storm sewers
and natural waters of the city.
(4) To encourage recycling of used motor oil and safe disposal of other hazardous consumer products.
(5) To facilitate compliance with state and federal standards and permits by owners and operators of industrial and construction sites within the
city.
(6) To enable the city to comply with all federal and state laws and regulations applicable to stormwater discharges.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-122. Definitions and abbreviations.
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
Best management practices (BMP) means the schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to
prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the United States. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control
plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
City means the City of Rockport, Texas, or the city council of Rockport.
City inspector(s) means the DPW or CEA who go on site to determine if the provisions of this article are being met.
Code enforcement administrator (CEA) means the person appointed by the city manager to enforce city codes or his/her duly authorized representative.
Commencement of construction means the disturbance of soils associated with clearing, grading, or excavating activities or other construction activities.
Commercial means any business, trade, industry, or other activity engaged in for profit.
Director of public works (DPW) means the person appointed by the city manager to manage field operations and provide environmental education, or
his/her duly authorized representative.
Discharge means any addition or introduction of any pollutant, stormwater, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) or into waters of the United States.
Discharger means any person, who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for, a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a
construction site or industrial facility.
Domestic sewage means human excrement, gray water (from home clothes washing, bathing, showers, dishwashing, and food preparation), other
wastewater from household drains, and waterborne waste normally discharged from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses
and hotels), office buildings, factories, and institutions, that is free from industrial waste.
Environmental protection agency (EPA) means the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the regional office thereof, any federal department,
agency, or commission that may succeed to the authority of the EPA, and any duly authorized official of EPA or such successor agency.
Extremely hazardous substance means any substance listed in the appendices to 40 CFR part 355, emergency planning and notification.
Facility means any building, structure, installation, process, or activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant.
Fertilizer means a solid or nonsolid substance or compound that contains an essential plant nutrient element in a form available to plants and is used
primarily for its essential plant nutrient element content in promoting or stimulating growth of a plant or improving the quality of a crop, or a mixture of
two or more fertilizers. The term does not include the excreta of an animal, plant remains, or a mixture of those substances, for which no claim of essential
plant nutrients is made.
Final stabilization means the status when all soil disturbing activities at a site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover with a
density of seventy (70%) percent of the cover for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures has been established, or equivalent
permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of riprap, gabions, or geotextiles) have been employed.
Fire department means the fire department of the city, or any duly authorized representative thereof.
Fire protection water means any water, and any substances or materials contained therein, used by any person other than the fire department to control or
extinguish a fire.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 161/444
Garbage means putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking, or consumption of food, including waste
materials from markets, storage facilities, and the handling and sale of produce and other food products.
Harmful quantity means the amount of any substance that will cause pollution of water in the state.
Hazardous household waste (HHW) means any material generated in a household (including single and multiple residences, hotels and motels, bunk
houses, ranger stations, crew quarters, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreational areas) by a consumer which, except for the exclusion
provided in 40 CFR section 261.4(b)(1), would be classified as a hazardous waste under 40 CFR part 261.
Hazardous substance means any substance listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302.
Hazardous waste. Any substance identified or listed as a hazardous waste by the EPA pursuant to 40 CFR part 261.
Hazardous waste treatment, disposal, and recovery facility means all contiguous land, and structures, other appurtenances and improvements on the land,
used for the treatment, disposal, or recovery of hazardous waste.
Herbicide means a substance or mixture of substances used to destroy a plant or to inhibit plant growth.
Industrial waste means any waterborne liquid or solid substance that results from any process of industry, manufacturing, mining, production, trade, or
business.
Motor vehicle fuel means any vehicle crankcase oil, antifreeze, transmission fluid, brake fluid, differential lubricant, gasoline, diesel fuel, gasoline/alcohol
blend, and any other fluid used in a motor vehicle.
Municipal landfill (or landfill) means an area of land or an excavation in which municipal solid waste is placed for permanent disposal, and which is not a
land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an injection well, or a pile (as these terms are defined in regulations promulgated by the Texas Water
Commission).
Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) means the system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catchbasins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned and operated by the city and designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater,
and which is not used for collecting or conveying sewage.
Municipal solid waste means solid waste resulting from or incidental to municipal, community, commercial, institutional, or recreational activities, and
includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and other solid waste other than industrial waste.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity (or industrial general permit) means the industrial general permit
issued by EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41304 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent
modifications or amendments thereto.
NPDES general permit for stormwater discharges from construction sites (or construction general permit) means the construction general permit issued by
EPA on August 27, 1992, and published in volume 57 of the Federal Register at page 41217 on September 9, 1992, and any subsequent modifications or
amendments thereto.
NPDES permit means a permit issued by EPA (or by the state under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC  1342(b)), as amended, that authorizes the
discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general areawide basis.
Nonpoint source means any source of any discharge of a pollutant that is not a point source.
Notice of intent (NOI) means the notice of intent that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit.
Notice of termination (NOT) means the notice of termination that is required by either the industrial general permit or the construction general permit.
Oil means any kind of oil in any form, including, but not limited to, petroleum, fuel oil, crude oil or any fraction thereof which is liquid at standard
conditions of temperature and pressure, sludge, oil refuse, and oil mixed with waste.
Operator means the person or persons who meet either of the following two criteria:
(1) They have operational control over the facility specifications (including the ability to make modifications in specifications); and
(2) They have the day-to-day operational control over those activities at the facility necessary to ensure compliance with pollution prevention
requirements and any permit conditions.
Owner means the person who owns a facility or part of property.
Person means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity,
or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities.
Pesticide means a substance or mixture of substances intended to prevent, destroy, repel, or mitigate any pest, or any substance or mixture of substances
intended for use as a plant regulator, defoliant, or desiccant (as these terms are defined in section 76.001 of the Texas Agriculture Code, as amended).
Petroleum product means a petroleum product that is obtained from distilling and processing crude oil and that is capable of being used as a fuel for the
propulsion of a motor vehicle or aircraft, including motor gasoline, gasohol, other alcohol blended fuels, aviation gasoline, kerosene, distillate fuel oil, and
#1 and #2 diesel. The term does not include naphtha-type jet fuel, kerosene-type jet fuel, or a petroleum product destined for use in chemical
manufacturing or feedstock of that manufacturing.
Petroleum storage tank (PST) means any one or combination of aboveground or underground storage tanks that contain petroleum products and any
connecting underground pipes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 162/444
Point source means any discernable, confined, and discrete conveyance, including but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from
which pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
Pollutant means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water.
The term pollutant does not include tail water or runoff water from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pastureland,
and farmland.
Pollution means the alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the state that renders the
water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness
or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose.
Qualified personnel means persons who possess the appropriate competence, skills, and ability (as demonstrated by sufficient education, training,
experience, and/or, when applicable, any required certification or licensing) to perform a specific activity in a timely and complete manner consistent with
the applicable regulatory requirements and generally-accepted industry standards for such activity.
Registered landscape architect (RLA) means a person who has been duly licensed and registered to practice landscape architecture by the Texas Board of
Architectural Examiners.
Registered professional engineer (RPE) means a person who has been duly licensed and registered by the state board of registration for professional
engineers to engage in the practice of engineering in the state.
Release means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or the waters of the United States.
Reportable quantity (RQ) means for any hazardous substance, the quantity established and listed in table 302.4 of 40 CFR part 302, as amended; for any
extremely hazardous substance, the quantity established in 40 CFR part 355, as amended, and listed in appendix A thereto.
Rubbish means nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of:
(1) Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves, and similar
materials; and
(2) Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture, and similar materials that do not burn at
ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit).
Sanitary sewer (or sewer) means the system of pipes, conduits, and other conveyances which carry industrial waste and domestic sewage from residential
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, to the city sewage treatment plant
(and to which stormwater, surface water, and groundwater are not intentionally admitted).
Septic tank waste means any domestic sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks.
Service station means any retail establishment engaged in the business of selling fuel for motor vehicles that is dispensed from stationary storage tanks.
Sewage (or sanitary sewage) means the domestic sewage and/or industrial waste that is discharged into the city sanitary sewer system and passes through
the sanitary sewer system to the city sewage treatment plant for treatment.
Site means the land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the
facility or activity.
Solid waste means any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and
other discarded material, including, solid, liquid, semi-solid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining, and
agricultural operations, and from community and institutional activities.
State means the State of Texas.
Stormwater means stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage.
Stormwater discharge associated with industrial activity means the discharge from any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater
and which is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage areas at an industrial plant which is within one of the categories of
facilities listed in 40 CFR  122.26(b)(14), as amended, and which is not excluded from EPA's definition of the same term.
Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) means a plan required by either the construction general permit or the industrial general permit and which
describes and ensures the implementation of practices that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction or
other industrial activity at the facility.
Uncontaminated means not containing a harmful quantity of any substance.
Used oil (or used motor oil) means any oil that has been refined from crude oil or synthetic oil that, as a result of use, storage, or handling, has become
unsuitable for its original purpose because of impurities or the loss of original properties but that may be suitable for further use and is recyclable in
compliance with state and federal law.
Water in the State (or water) means any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks,
estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico, inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 163/444
inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or non-navigable, and including the beds and banks of all watercourses and bodies of surface water, that are
wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state.
Water quality standard means the designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria
deemed by the state to be necessary to protect those uses, as specified in chapter 307 of title 31 of the Texas Administrative Code, as amended.
Waters of the United States means all waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign
commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters the
use, degradation, or destruction of which would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as
waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this
definition; and any waters within the federal definition of waters of the United States at 40 CFR  122.2, as amended; but not including any waste
treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act.
Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes,
bogs, and similar areas.
Yard waste means leaves, grass clippings, yard and garden debris, and brush that results from landscaping maintenance and land-clearing operations.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-123. General prohibition.
(a) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) any discharge that is not composed
entirely of stormwater.
(b) It is an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for violation of subsection (a) of this section that the discharge was composed entirely of one
or more of the following categories of discharges:
(1) Water line flushing (excluding discharges of hyperchlorinated water, unless the water is first dechlorinated and discharges are not expected to
adversely affect aquatic life);
(2) Runoff or return flow from landscape irrigation, lawn irrigation, and other irrigation utilizing potable water, groundwater, or surface water
sources. Runoff from irrigation systems using potable water is prohibited by Ordinance 1619, drought contingency and emergency plan;
(3) Discharges from potable water sources;
(4) Diverted stream flows;
(5) Rising groundwaters and springs;
(6) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration;
(7) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
(8) Foundation and footing drains;
(9) Air-conditioning condensation;
(10) Water from crawl space pumps;
(11) Individual residential vehicle washing;
(12) Flows from wetlands and riparian habitats;
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;
(14) Street washwater;
(15) Discharges or flows from firefighting activities;
(16) Other allowable nonstormwater discharges listed in 40 CFR 122.26(d)(2)(iv)(B)(1), as amended;
(17) Nonstormwater discharges that are specifically listed in the TPDES multi-sector general permit (MSGP) or the TPDES construction general
permit (CGP);
(18) A discharge from a temporary carwash sponsored by a civic group school religious or nonprofit organization where only soap and water are
used and where efforts are made to minimize pollutants in the discharge; and
(19) Other similar occasional incidental nonstormwater discharges, unless the TCEQ develops permits or regulations addressing these
discharges.
(c) No affirmative defense shall be available under subsection (b) of this section if the discharge or flow in question has been determined by the DPW to
be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the waters of the United States or to the MS4, written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger, and the discharge has occurred more than fourteen (14) calendar days beyond such notice. The correctness of the DPW's determination that a
discharge is a source of a pollutant or pollutants may be reviewed in any administrative or judicial enforcement proceeding.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 164/444
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-124. Specific prohibitions and requirements.
(a) The specific prohibitions and requirements in this section are not necessarily inclusive of all the discharges prohibited by the general prohibition in
section 42-123.
(b) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water
quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
(c) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be
introduced any of the following substances into the MS4:
(1) Any industrial waste;
(2) Any used motor oil;
(3) Any hazardous waste, including hazardous household waste;
(4) Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste, or grit trap waste;
(5) Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of
pumped, confined, or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria:
(A) Compliance with all state and federal standards and requirements; and
(B) No discharge containing a harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(d) No person shall intentionally dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or introduce any of the following substances into
the MS4 and all persons shall to the maximum extent practicable under prevailing circumstances employ control measures to prevent the following
substances from entering into the MS4:
(1) Any motor oil, antifreeze, or any other motor vehicle fluid;
(2) Any garbage, rubbish, or yard waste;
(3) Any wastewater from a commercial carwash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning, or maintenance at any new or used automobile or
other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop, or maintenance facility; or from any washing, cleaning, or maintenance of any
business or commercial or public service vehicle, including a truck, bus, or heavy equipment, by a business or public entity;
(4) Any wastewater from a commercial mobile power washer or from the washing or other cleaning of a building exterior that contains any soap,
detergent, degreaser, solvent, or any other harmful cleaning substance;
(5) Any wastewater from floor, rug, or carpet cleaning;
(6) Any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, solvent, degreaser,
emulsifier, dispersant, or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the wash-down or other cleaning of any pavement where
any spill, leak, or other release of oil, motor fuel, or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such
released material have been previously removed;
(7) Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter, or the blow down from a boiler;
(8) Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, or asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or from the cleaning of commercial vehicles or
equipment containing, or used in transporting or applying, such material;
(9) Any runoff or wash-down water from any animal pen, kennel, or foul [fowl] or livestock containment area;
(10) Any filter backwash from a swimming pool, fountain, or spa;
(11) Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection
of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning;
(12) Any discharge from water line disinfection by super chlorination or other means if it contains any harmful quantity of chlorine or any other
chemical used in line disinfection;
(13) Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment;
(14) Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle wrecking yard;
(15) Any substance or material that will damage, block, or clog the MS4;
(e) No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil, or other material associated with
clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities, or associated with landfilling or other placement or disposal of soil, rock, or other earth
materials, in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable
under prevailing circumstances.
(f) No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 165/444
(g) No person shall cause or allow any pavement washwater from a service station to be discharged into the MS4 unless such washwater has passed
through a properly functioning and maintained, grease, oil, and sand interceptor before discharge into the MS4.
(h) No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose, or otherwise introduce or cause, allow, or permit to be
introduced harmful levels of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers into the MS4. All persons shall to the maximum extent practicable under prevailing
circumstances employ control measures to minimize pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers from entering the MS4. This includes the following:
(1) Applying products according to manufacture recommendations.
(2) Applying products according to all state and federal laws.
(3) Proper storage and disposal.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-125. Release and reporting and cleanup.
(a) The person in charge of any facility, vehicle, or other source of any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, escaping,
leaching, dumping, disposing, or any other release of any of the following quantities of any of the following substances that may flow, leach, enter, or
otherwise be introduced into the MS4 or waters of the United States, shall immediately telephone and notify the DPW concerning the incident:
(1) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR part 302, as amended;
(2) An amount equal to or in excess of a reportable quantity of any extremely hazardous substance, as established under 40 CFR part 355, as
amended;
(3) An amount of oil that either:
(A) Violates applicable water quality standards; or
(B) Causes a film or sheen upon or discoloration of the surface of the water or an adjoining shoreline or causes a sludge or emulsion to be
deposited beneath the surface of the water or upon an adjoining shoreline; or
(4) Any harmful quantity of any pollutant.
(b) The immediate notification required by subsection (a) shall include the following information:
(1) The identity or chemical name of the substance released, and whether the substance is an extremely hazardous substance;
(2) The exact location of the release, including any known name of the waters involved or threatened and any other environmental media
affected;
(3) The time and duration (thus far) of the release;
(4) An estimate of the quantity and concentration (if known) of the substance released;
(5) The source of the release;
(6) Any known or anticipated health risks associated with the release and, where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention that may be
necessary for exposed individuals;
(7) Any precautions that should be taken as a result of the release;
(8) Any steps that have been taken to contain and/or clean up the released material and minimize its impacts; and
(9) The names and telephone numbers of the person or persons to be contacted for further information.
(c) Within fourteen (14) calendar days following such release, the responsible person in charge of the facility, vehicle, or other source of the release
shall, unless waived by the DPW, submit a written report containing each of the items of information specified above in subsection (b), as well as the
following additional information:
(1) The ultimate duration, concentration, and quantity of the release;
(2) All actions taken to respond to, contain, and clean up the released substances, and all precautions taken to minimize the impacts;
(3) Any known or anticipated acute or chronic health risks associated with the release;
(4) Where appropriate, advice regarding medical attention necessary for exposed individuals;
(5) The identity of any governmental/private sector representatives responding to the release; and
(6) The measures taken or to be taken by the responsible person(s) to prevent similar future occurrences.
(d) The notifications required by subsections (b) and (c) above shall not relieve the responsible person of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability
which may be incurred as a result of the release, including any liability for damage to the city, to natural resources, or to any other person or property; nor
shall such notification relieve the responsible person of any fine, penalty, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article or to state or
federal law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 166/444
(e) Any person responsible for any release as described in subsection (a) above shall comply with all state, federal, and any other local law requiring
reporting, cleanup, containment, and any other appropriate remedial action in response to the release.
(f) Any person responsible for a release described in subsection (a) above shall reimburse the city for any cost incurred by the city in responding to the
release.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-126. Stormwater discharges from construction activities.
(a) General requirements.
(1) All operators of construction sites shall use best management practices to control and reduce the discharge, to the MS4 and to waters of the
United States, of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other material associated with the clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction activities to
the maximum extent practicable under the circumstances. Such best management practices may include, but not be limited to, the following
measures:
(A) Ensuring that existing vegetation is preserved where possible and that disturbed portions of the site are stabilized as soon as practicable
in portions of the site where construction activities have temporarily or permanently ceased. Stabilization measures may include: temporary
seeding, permanent seeding, mulching, geotextiles, sod stabilization, vegetative buffer strips, protection of trees, preservation of mature
vegetation, and other appropriate measures;
(B) Use of structural practices to divert flows from exposed soils, store flows, or otherwise limit runoff and the discharge of pollutants from
the site to the extent feasible;
(C) Minimization of the tracking of sediments off-site by vehicles, the generation of dust, and the escape of other windblown waste from the
site;
(D) Prevention of the discharge of building materials, including cement, lime, concrete, and mortar, to the MS4 or waters of the United
States;
(E) Providing general good housekeeping measures to prevent and contain spills of paints, solvents, fuels, septic waste, and other hazardous
chemicals and pollutants associated with construction, and to assure proper cleanup and disposal of any such spills in compliance with state,
federal, and local requirements;
(F) Implementation of proper waste disposal and waste management techniques, including covering waste materials and minimizing ground
contact with hazardous chemicals and trash;
(G) Timely maintenance of vegetation, erosion and sediment control measures, and other best management practices in good and effective
operating condition; and
(H) Installation of structural measures during the construction process to control pollutants in stormwater discharges that will occur after
construction operations have been completed. Structural measures should be placed on upland soils to the degree attainable. Such installed
structural measures may include, but not be limited to, the following: stormwater detention structures (including wet ponds); stormwater
retention structures; flow attenuation by use of open vegetative swales and natural depressions; other velocity dissipation devices; infiltration
of runoff on site; and sequential systems which combine several practices. Operators of construction sites are only responsible for the
installation and maintenance of stormwater management measures prior to final stabilization of the site, and are not responsible for
maintenance after stormwater discharges associated with construction activity have terminated.
(2) The DPW may require any plans and specifications that are prepared for the construction of site improvements to illustrate and describe the
best management practices required by subsection (a)(1) above that will be implemented at the construction site. The city may deny approval of any
building permit, grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the
grounds that the management practices described in the plans or observed upon a site inspection by the DPW are determined not to control and
reduce the discharge of sediment, silt, earth, soil, and other materials associated with clearing, grading, excavation, and other construction activities
to the maximum extent practicable under the circumstances.
(3) All contractors wishing to receive a building permit from the city shall sign a copy of the following certification statement before receiving
said permit:
I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this
certification, with the stormwater ordinance of the city and for the construction site for which I am responsible.
(4) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name, address, and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made.
(5) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of any construction site that have not been
finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where vehicles
enter or exit the site, at least once every seven calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of a storm that is 0.5 inches or greater.
All erosion and sediment control measures and other identified best management practices shall be observed in order to ensure that they are
operating correctly and are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters and the MS4. Based on the results of the inspection, best
management practices shall be revised as appropriate, and as soon as is practicable.
(6) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit written certification to
the DPW that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in this article.) The city may deny the approval required to
assume occupancy or an additional use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 167/444
and the DPW has determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent
structural controls have been completed.
(7) Any owner of a site of construction activity, whether or not he/she is an operator, is jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
requirements in subsection (a).
(8) Any contractor or subcontractor on a site of construction activity, who is not an owner or operator, but who is responsible under his/her
contract or subcontract for implementing a best management practices control measure, is jointly and severally responsible for any willful or
negligent failure on his/her part to adequately implement that control measure if such failure causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a
water quality standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from its MS4.
(b) One - up to five acre disturbances. All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, and excavation activities, that result in
the disturbance of one or more acres of total land area but less than five acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of development or sale
within which one or more but less than five acres of total land area are disturbed, or who are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater
discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the following requirements (in addition to those in subsection (a)):
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a construction site under the NPDES general permit for
stormwater discharges from construction sites (the construction general permit) shall submit a signed copy of its construction site notice (CSN) to
the DPW at least two (2) days prior to the commencement of construction activities. A signed copy of the CSN shall be posted at the construction
site as well. If the construction activity is already underway upon the effective date of this article, the CSN shall be submitted within thirty (30)
days.
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the construction
general permit or any individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article and any other city ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the CSN to the DPW and, for new construction, prior to the commencement of
construction activities. The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction general permit and this article.
(4) The DPW may require any operator who is required by subsection (b)(2) to prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications
thereto, to the DPW for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the DPW prior to commencement of or during
construction activities at the site.
(5) Upon the DPW's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he/she may conduct, the city may deny approval of any building permit,
grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the
SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater
discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. Also, if at any time the DPW determines that
the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site
development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at the site.
(6) All contractors and subcontractors identified in a SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following certification statement before conducting any
professional service identified in the SWPPP:
I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this
certification, with the stormwater ordinance of the City of Rockport, and with those provisions of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) for the construction site for which I am responsible.
(7) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name, address, and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made.
(8) The SWPPP, and the certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (b)(6), and with any modifications attached, shall
be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of construction through the date of final stabilization.
(9) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the DPW upon request (as well as to EPA and state inspectors).
(10) The DPW may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the construction general permit, any
applicable individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed
by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and
identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within seven (7) days of such notification from
the DPW (or as otherwise provided by the DPW), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the DPW a
written certification that the requested changes have been made.
(11) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant
effect on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general
objective of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be amended to
identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the SWPPP.
(12) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of the construction site that have not
been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where
vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the storm that is 0.5
inches or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the
potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be observed to ensure
that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion control
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 168/444
measures are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
As an alternative to the above-described inspection schedule of once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of a
storm event of 0.5 inches or greater, the SWPPP may be developed to require that these inspections will occur at least once every seven (7)
calendar days. If this alternative schedule is developed, then the inspection must occur on a specifically defined day, regardless of whether or
not there has been a rainfall event since the previous inspection. The inspections may occur on either schedule provided that the SWPPP
reflects the current schedule and that any changes to the schedule are conducted in accordance with the following provisions: the schedule may
be changed a maximum of one time each month, the schedule change must be implemented at the beginning of a calendar month, and the
reason for the schedule change must be documented in the SWPPP (e.g., end of dry season and beginning of wet season).
(13) Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (b)(12), the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures
identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as appropriate, but in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the inspection. Such
modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven (7) calendar days following the inspection.
(14) A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (b)(12) above, and the name(s) and qualifications of personnel
making the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in
accordance with subsection (b)(13) above shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three (3) years from the date that the site is
finally stabilized. Such report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the
report shall contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES permit, and this article. The report shall
be certified and signed by the person responsible for making it.
(15) The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by the NPDES permit for the site, and records of all
data, for a period of at least three (3) years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
(16) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit written certification to
the DPW that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in this article.) The city may deny the approval required to
assume occupancy or an additional use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed
and the DPW has determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent
structural controls have been completed.
(c) Five-acre disturbances. All operators of sites of construction activity, including clearing, grading, and excavation activities, that result in the
disturbance of five or more acres of total land area, or that are part of a common plan of development or sale within which five or more acres of total land
area are disturbed, or who are required to obtain an NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity, shall comply with the
following requirements (in addition to those in subsection (a) above):
(1) Any operator who intends to obtain coverage for stormwater discharges from a construction site under the NPDES general permit for
stormwater discharges from construction sites shall submit a notice of intent NOI with the Texas Commission of Environmental Quality in
accordance with the construction general permit.
(2) A stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) shall be prepared and implemented in accordance with the requirements of the construction
general permit or any individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, and with any additional
requirement imposed by or under this article and any other city ordinance.
(3) The SWPPP shall be completed prior to the submittal of the NOI to the DPW and, for new construction, prior to the commencement of
construction activities. The SWPPP shall be updated and modified as appropriate and as required by the construction general permit and this article.
(4) A copy of any NOI that is required by subsection (c)(1) shall be submitted to the city in conjunction with any application for a building
permit, grading permit, site development plan approval, and any other city approval prior to the commencement of construction at the site.
(5) The DPW may require any operator who is required by subsection (c)(2) to prepare a SWPPP to submit the SWPPP, and any modifications
thereto, to the DPW for review. Such submittal and review of the SWPPP may be required by the DPW prior to commencement of or during
construction activities at the site.
(6) Upon the DPW's review of the SWPPP and any site inspection that he/she may conduct, the city may deny approval of any building permit,
grading permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, on the grounds that the
SWPPP does not comply with the requirements of the construction general permit, any individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater
discharge from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed by or under this article. Also, if at any time the DPW determines that
the SWPPP is not being fully implemented, the city may similarly deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site
development plan or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction, or to assume occupancy, at the site.
(7) All contractors and subcontractors identified in an SWPPP shall sign a copy of the following certification statement before conducting any
professional service identified in the SWPPP:
I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms and conditions of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
permit that authorizes the stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity from the construction site identified as part of this
certification, with the Stormwater Ordinance of the City of Rockport, and with those provisions of the stormwater pollution prevention
plan (SWPPP) for the construction site for which I am responsible.
(8) The certification must include the name and title of the person providing the signature; the name, address, and telephone number of the
contracting firm; the address (or other identifying description) of the site; and the date the certification is made.
(9) The SWPPP, and the certifications of contractors and subcontractors required by subsection (c)(7), and with any modifications attached, shall
be retained at the construction site from the date of commencement of construction through the date of final stabilization.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 169/444
(10) The operator shall make the SWPPP and any modification thereto available to the DPW upon request (as well as to EPA and state
inspectors).
(11) The DPW may notify the operator at any time that the SWPPP does not meet the requirements of the construction general permit, any
applicable individual or group NPDES permit issued for stormwater discharges from the construction site, or any additional requirement imposed
by or under this article. Such notification shall identify those provisions of the permit or ordinance which are not being met by the SWPPP, and
identify which provisions of the SWPPP require modifications in order to meet such requirements. Within seven (7) days of such notification from
the DPW (or as otherwise provided by the DPW), the operator shall make the required changes to the SWPPP and shall submit to the DPW a
written certification that the requested changes have been made.
(12) The operator shall amend the SWPPP whenever there is a change in design, construction, operation, or maintenance, which has a significant
effect on the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or to the waters of the United States, and which has not otherwise been addressed
in the SWPPP, or if the SWPPP proves to be ineffective in eliminating or significantly minimizing pollutants, or in otherwise achieving the general
objective of controlling pollutants in stormwater discharges associated with construction activity. In addition, the SWPPP shall be amended to
identify any new contractor and/or subcontractor that will implement a measure in the SWPPP.
(13) Qualified personnel (provided by the operator of the construction site) shall inspect disturbed areas of the construction site that have not
been finally stabilized, areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation, structural control measures, and locations where
vehicles enter or exit the site, at least once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of the end of the storm that is 0.5
inches or greater. Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the
potential for, pollutants entering the drainage system. Erosion and sediment control measures identified in the SWPPP shall be observed to ensure
that they are operating correctly. Where discharge locations or points are accessible, they shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion control
measures are effective in preventing significant impacts to receiving waters or the MS4. Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be
inspected for evidence of off-site sediment tracking.
As an alternative to the above-described inspection schedule of once every fourteen (14) calendar days and within twenty-four (24) hours of a
storm event of 0.5 inches or greater, the SWPPP may be developed to require that these inspections will occur at least once every seven (7)
calendar days. If this alternative schedule is developed, then the inspection must occur on a specifically defined day, regardless of whether or
not there has been a rainfall event since the previous inspection. The inspections may occur on either schedule provided that the SWPPP
reflects the current schedule and that any changes to the schedule are conducted in accordance with the following provisions: the schedule may
be changed a maximum of one time each month, the schedule change must be implemented at the beginning of a calendar month, and the
reason for the schedule change must be documented in the SWPPP (e.g., end of dry season and beginning of wet season).
(14) Based on the results of the inspections required by subsection (c)(13), the site description and/or the pollution prevention measures
identified in the SWPPP shall be revised as appropriate, but in no case later than seven (7) calendar days following the inspection. Such
modifications shall provide for timely implementation of any changes to the SWPPP within seven (7) calendar days following the inspection.
(15) A report summarizing the scope of any inspection required by subsection (c)(13), and the name(s) and qualifications of personnel making
the inspection, the date(s) of the inspection, major observations relating to the implementation of the SWPPP, and actions taken in accordance with
subsection (c)(14) above shall be made and retained as part of the SWPPP for at least three (3) years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
Such report shall identify any incidence of noncompliance. Where a report does not identify any incidence of noncompliance, the report shall
contain a certification that the facility is in compliance with the SWPPP, the facility's NPDES permit, and this article. The report shall be certified
and signed by the person responsible for making it.
(16) The operator shall retain copies of any SWPPP and all reports required by this article or by the NPDES permit for the site, and records of all
data for a period of at least three (3) years from the date that the site is finally stabilized.
(17) Where a site has been finally stabilized and all stormwater discharges from construction activities that are authorized by this article and by
the NPDES permit for those construction activities are eliminated, or where the operator of all stormwater discharges at a facility changes, the
operator of the construction site shall submit to the DPW a notice of termination (NOT) in accordance with the construction general permit.
(18) Upon final stabilization of the construction site, the owner (or the duly authorized representative thereof) shall submit written certification to
the DPW that the site has been finally stabilized. (See definition of final stabilization in this article.) The city may deny the approval required to
assume occupancy or an additional use permit for any premises constructed on the site until such certification of final stabilization has been filed
and the DPW has determined, following any appropriate inspection, that final stabilization has, in fact, occurred and that any required permanent
structural controls have been completed.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-127. Compliance monitoring.
(a) Right of entry: inspection and sampling. City inspectors shall have the right to enter the premises of any person reasonably suspected by the city of
discharging pollutants into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or to waters of the United States to determine if the discharger is complying
with all requirements of this article, and with any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement. Dischargers shall allow the city inspectors
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and for the performance of any
additional duties. Dischargers shall make available to the city inspector, upon request, any SWPPPs, modifications thereto, self-inspection reports,
monitoring records, compliance evaluations, notices of intent, and any other records, reports, and other documents related to compliance with this article
and with any state or federal discharge permit.
(1) Where a discharger has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
discharger shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city inspector will be
permitted to enter without unreasonable delay for the purposes of performing his/her responsibilities.
(2) The city inspector shall have the right to set up on the discharger's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to
conduct sampling and/or metering of the discharger's operations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 170/444
(3) When pollutants have been discharged the DPW may require any discharger to the MS4 or waters of the United States to conduct specified
sampling, testing, analysis, and other monitoring of its stormwater discharges, and may specify the frequency and parameters of any such required
monitoring.
(4) The DPW may require that discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's expense. The facility's sampling and
monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices
used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy.
(5) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by
the discharger at the written or verbal request of the city inspector and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
discharger.
(6) Unreasonable delays in allowing the city inspector access to the discharger's premises shall be a violation of this article.
(b) Search warrants. If the city inspector has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article or any state or federal discharge permit, limitation, or requirement, or
that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the city inspector may seek issuance of a
search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-128. Publication of dischargers in significant noncompliance.
The DPW may periodically publish, in a daily newspaper generally distributed within the city, a list of owners and operators of discharges to the MS4 or
waters of the United States from sites of construction and industrial activity which, during the previous three (3) months, were in significant
noncompliance with the requirements of this article. The term significant noncompliance shall mean:
(1) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the waters of the United States any discharge that violates a water quality standard;
(2) Introducing or causing to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes or contributes to causing the city to violate a water quality
standard, the city's NPDES permit, or any state-issued discharge permit for discharges from the city's MS4;
(3) Any connection of a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allowing any such connection to continue;
(4) Any discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United States that has caused an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health
or welfare of persons or to the environment, or has resulted in the DPW's exercise of his/her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
(5) Any violation that has resulted in injunctive relief, civil penalties, or criminal fine being imposed as a judicial remedy under section 42-131 of
this article;
(6) Any other violation(s) which the DPW determines to be chronic or especially dangerous to the public or to the environment; or
(7) Any failure to comply with a compliance schedule, whether imposed by the city or by a court.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-129. Administrative enforcement remedies.
(a) Warning notice. When the DPW finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, the DPW may serve upon that person a written warning notice, specifying the particular violation believed to have occurred and requesting the
discharger to immediately investigate the matter and to seek a resolution whereby any offending discharge will cease. Investigation and/or resolution of the
matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the
warning notice. Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of the DPW to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement
action, without first issuing a warning notice.
(b) Notification of violation. When the DPW finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, the CEA may serve upon that person a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, the violator shall take
corrective action to bring the violation into compliance. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred and/or contends that no corrective action
is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to the CEA within ten (10) days of receipt of the notice.
Submission of an explanation and/or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice
of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the CEA to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action,
without first issuing a notice of violation.
(c) Consent orders. The CEA may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement
with any person responsible for noncompliance with any provision in this article or any order issued hereunder. Such documents may include specific
action to be taken by the person to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force
and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to subsections (e), (f) and (g) this article and shall be judicially enforceable.
(d) Show cause hearing. The CEA may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, to appear before the CEA and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged
violator specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the alleged violator
show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified
mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the alleged
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 171/444
violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in section 42-130(a)(7) of this article. A show cause hearing shall
not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the alleged violator.
(e) Compliance orders. When the CEA finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued
hereunder, the CEA may issue an order to the violator directing that the violator come into compliance within a specified time limit. Compliance orders
also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize
the amount of pollutants discharged to the MS4 and waters of the United States. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established by a state or federal standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the person of liability for any violation, including any
continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(f) Remediation, abatement, and restoration orders. When the CEA finds that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article,
or any order issued hereunder, and that such violation has adversely affected the MS4, the waters of the United States or any other aspect of the
environment, the CEA may issue an order to the violator directing him/her to undertake and implement any appropriate action to remediate and/or abate
any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment, and/or to restore any part of the
MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment that has been harmed. Such remedial, abatement, and restoration action may
include, but not be limited to: monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement,
and/or restoration action; confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; prevention,
minimization, and/or mitigation of any damage to the public health, welfare, or the environment that may result from the violation; restoration or
replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. The order may direct that the remediation, abatement, and/or restoration be
accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and/or be completed within a specified period of time. An order issued under this Subsection does not
relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of an order under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or
a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party.
(g) Emergency cease and desist orders.
(1) When the CEA finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that
the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the person's violation(s) have caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to
the MS4 or waters of the United States which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons or to the environment, the CEA may issue an order to the violator directing it immediately to cease and desist all such violations and
directing the violator to:
(A) Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; and
(B) Take such appropriate preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including
immediately halting operations and/or terminating the discharge.
(2) Any person notified of an emergency order directed to it under this subsection shall immediately comply and stop or eliminate its
endangering discharge. In the event of a discharger's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the emergency order, the CEA may take such
steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the United States, and/or endangerment to persons or to the
environment, including immediate termination of a facility's water supply, sewer connection, or other municipal utility services. The CEA may
allow the person to recommence its discharge when it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the CEA that the period of endangerment has passed,
unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the discharger under this article. A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any
discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the CEA within two days of receipt of the emergency order. Issuance of an emergency cease
and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(h) Red tags. Whenever the CEA finds that any operator of a construction site has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any
order issued thereunder, the CEA may order that a red tag be issued to the operator, posted at the construction site, and distributed to all city departments
and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. Unless express written exception is made by the CEA, the red tag shall prohibit any further
construction activity at the site and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city associated with a building permit, grading permit, subdivision
plat approval, site development plan approval, or any other city approval necessary to commence or continue construction or to assume occupancy at the
site. Issuance of a red tag order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-130. Right to reconsideration, hearing, and appeal.
(a) Reconsideration and hearing.
(1) Any person subject to a compliance order under section 42-129(e), a remediation, abatement, or restoration order under section 42-129(f), an
emergency cease and desist order under section 42-129(g), or a red tag order under section 42-129(h) of this article may petition the CEA to
reconsider the basis for his/her order within thirty (30) days of the affected person's notice of issuance of such an order.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written petition for reconsideration shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative
reconsideration or review of the order.
(3) In its petition, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are
contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and
whether the petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition.
(4) The effect of any compliance order under section 42-129(e), remediation, abatement, or restoration order under section 42-129(f), and any red
tag order under section 42-129(h) shall be stayed pending the CEA's reconsideration of the petition, and any hearing thereon, unless the CEA
expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. The effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order under section 42-129(g) shall
not be stayed pending the CEA's reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless the CEA expressly and in writing stays his/her emergency order.
(5) Within ten (10) days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the CEA shall either:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 172/444
(A) Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly;
(B) Deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact is raised; or
(C) If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, set a hearing on the petition.
(6) Written notice of any hearing set by the CEA pursuant to subsection (a)(5) above shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by
registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the petitioning party.
(7) The CEA may himself/herself conduct the hearing and take evidence, or he/she may designate any employee of the city or any specially
designated attorney or engineer to:
(A) Issue in the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence
relevant to any matter involved in the hearing;
(B) Take evidence;
(C) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the CEA for
action thereon. At any hearing held pursuant to this subsection, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to
present his/her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true
disclosure of the facts. A transcript will be made available to any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(8) After the CEA has reviewed the evidence, he/she shall either: (A) grant the petition; (B) deny the petition; or (C) grant the petition in part and
deny it in part. The CEA may modify his/her order as is appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and his/her
action on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued.
(b) Appeal.
(1) Any person whose petition for reconsideration by the CEA has not been granted in its entirety and who remains adversely affected by the
CEA's order, or who is subject to an order of the CEA issued following a show cause hearing under section 42-129(d), may appeal the action of the
CEA to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city council within ten (10) days of the person's notice of the CEA's adverse action on
the petition for reconsideration, or within ten (10) days of the person's notice of the issuance of the order following the show cause hearing, as the
case may be.
(2) Failure to submit a timely written appeal to the city council shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review.
(3) In its written appeal to the city council, the appealing party shall indicate the particular provisions of the order objected to, the particular
determinations of the CEA that are contested, the reasons that the CEA's order and/or determinations are contested, and any alternative order that
the appealing party would accept.
(4) The effect of the CEA's order, as issued or modified, shall not be stayed pending the appeal to the city council, unless the city council
expressly so states.
(5) Within thirty (30) days of the submittal of a written appeal to the city council, the city council shall hear and consider the appeal in open
meeting. The appellant shall be notified at least three (3) days in advance of the date and time of the city council meeting at which the appeal will
be heard and considered.
(6) The appellant shall have the right to public appearance before the city council to present oral and written statements in support of his/her
appeal. If the city council wishes to consider testimony of witnesses or other evidence beyond that in the record of any hearing before the CEA the
city council may remand the matter to the CEA for the taking of additional testimony or other evidence.
(7) Upon consideration of any written and oral statements made to the city council, as well as the record made before the CEA, the city council
shall act on the appeal by affirming, vacating, or modifying the order of the CEA, and/or by remanding the matter to the CEA for further action.
(8) Following final action by the city council on the appeal, any adversely affected party may challenge such action by the city council in an
appropriate court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-131. Judicial enforcement remedies.
(a) Civil remedies.
(1) Whenever it appears that a person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article that relates to:
(A) The preservation of public safety, relating to the materials or methods used in construction of any structure or improvement of real
property;
(B) The preservation of public health or to the fire safety of a building or other structure or improvement;
(C) The establishment of criteria for land subdivision or construction of buildings, including street design;
(D) Dangerously damaged or deteriorated structures or improvements;
(E) Conditions caused by accumulations of refuse, vegetation, or other matter that creates breeding and living places for insects and rodents;
or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 173/444
(F) Point source effluent limitations or the discharge of a pollutant, other than from a nonpoint source, into the MS4. The city may invoke
sections 54.01154.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, and petition the state district court or the county court at law,
through the city attorney, for either the injunctive relief specified in subsection (a)(2) or the civil penalties specified in subsection (a)(3) below,
or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties.
(2) Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, the city may obtain against the owner or the operator of a
facility a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, that:
(A) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)(A)(F) above; or
(B) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article that relates to any
matter specified in subsections (a)(1)(A)(F) above.
(3) Pursuant to section 54.017 of the Texas Local Government Code, as amended, the city may recover a civil penalty of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified in subsections (a)(1)(A)
(E) above, and a civil penalty of not more than five thousand ($5,000.00) per day for each violation of any provision of this article that relates to
any matter specified in subsection (a)(1)(F) above, if the city proves that:
(A) The defendant was actually notified of the provisions of this article; and
(B) After the defendant received notice of this article provisions, the defendant committed acts in violation of this article or failed to take
action necessary for compliance with this article.
(b) Criminal penalties.
(1) Any person, who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation regardless
of the presence or absence of a culpable mental state, except as expressly provided herein, and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not
more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute.
(2) Any person who has knowingly made any false statement, representation, or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other
documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has falsified, tampered with, or
knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per violation, per day, or any greater fine authorized by state statute.
(3) In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not
limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the
violator, and any other factor as justice requires.
(c) Civil suit under the state water code. Whenever it appears that a violation or threat of violation of any provision of section 26.121 of the Texas Water
Code, as amended, or any rule, permit, or order of the state water commission, has occurred or is occurring within the jurisdiction of the city, exclusive of
its extraterritorial jurisdiction, the city, in the same manner as the state water commission, may have a suit instituted in a state district court through its city
attorney for the injunctive relief or civil penalties or both authorized in subsection (a) of section 26.123 of the Texas Water Code, as amended, against the
person who committed or is committing or threatening to commit the violation. This power is exercised pursuant to section 26.124 of the Texas Water
Code, as amended. In any suit brought by the city under this subsection (c), the Texas Water Commission is a necessary and indispensable party.
(d) Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies that the city may have under state or
federal law or other city ordinances. The city may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a violator. The city is empowered to take more
than one enforcement action against any violator. These actions may be taken concurrently.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Sec. 42-132. Supplemental enforcement action.
(a) Performance bonds. The CEA may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction
or industrial activity to file a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the CEA to be necessary to achieve
consistent compliance with this article, any order issued hereunder, any required best management practice, and/or any SWPPP provision, and/or to
achieve final stabilization of the site. The city may deny approval of any building permit, grading permit, subdivision plat, site development plan, or any
other city permit or approval necessary to commence or continue construction or any industrial activity at the site, or to assume occupancy, until such a
performance bond has been filed.
(b) Liability insurance. The CEA may, by written notice, order any owner or operator of a source of stormwater discharge associated with construction
or industrial activity to submit proof that it has obtained liability insurance, or other financial assurance, in an amount not to exceed a value determined by
the CEA, that is sufficient to remediate, restore, and abate any damage to the MS4, the waters of the United States, or any other aspect of the environment
that is caused by the discharge.
(c) Public nuisances. A violation of any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be
corrected or abated as directed by the CEA. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of the city code governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance.
(Ord. No. 1663,  2, 5-24-16)
Secs. 42-13342-179. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. WIND POWERED SYSTEMS
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 174/444
Sec. 42-180. In general.
This article establishes minimum standards governing the erection, placement and use of wind powered systems and to promote the public welfare through
the built environment.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09)
Sec. 42-181. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article the following are defined:
Code official means the officer or other designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this article, including a duly authorized
representative of the code official.
Habitable structure shall have the same meaning as habitable space as defined in the International Building Code and International Residential Code.
Wind powered system means a machine designed to convert kinetic energy in the wind to mechanical or electrical energy. Wind energy conversion systems
include a tower and all directly connected facilities and associated control equipment, but not including any wired connections stemming from the tower.
Small wind turbines means a wind turbine device recognized and approved by the American Wind Energy Association (AWEA) through its small wind
certification program, with capacities of 100 kW or less.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1622,  1, 1-28-14)
Sec. 42-182. Wind powered systems.
Wind powered systems may exist only as a secondary use. A wind powered system may not be erected on property until a primary structure has been
constructed or as may be conditioned by the building permit for a primary structure.
(1) Design requirements.
a. Freestanding wind powered systems will be limited to no more than 60 feet in total height within residential or commercial zoned districts
and 100 feet in industrial zoned districts.
b. Wind powered systems will be limited to one system for each 5 acres of land within residential or commercial zoned districts and one
system for each 2.5 acres of land in industrial districts.
c. Freestanding wind powered systems shall be setback from all property boundaries of any lot or from a habitable structure by a distance
equal to at least one hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the tower system's height, as measured from average ground level at the tower
foundation to the top of the highest point of the turbines' or wind blades' elevation.
d. Freestanding wind powered systems shall be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations and under the seal of a
professional engineer registered by the state. Wet stamps on engineered plans are required for systems greater than 20.
e. Small systems complying with the provisions established herein, designed to be mounted directly onto buildings, without tower, shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacture's recommendations or as designed by a state registered engineer. Such small systems shall be
setback from property lines the same as the building on which it is mounted but shall not overhang a property line.
f. All wind powered systems are limited to a 60dB noise level at any point along the property line.
g. The freestanding tower shall be a monopole type without guy wires. Small systems, as defined herein, less than 30 feet high, may be
mounted on tripod or quadruped type towers without guy wires.
h. The color of all wind powered systems shall be non-reflective and of neutral tones or of earth tones such as white, tan, subdued green or
brown. Grey, including naturally darkening galvanized grey, is also an acceptable neutral tone. Wind powered systems shall not be finished in
bright or vivid colors intended to draw attention to the structure.
i. Multiple wind powered systems are allowed on any lot greater than five acres, provided they are separated by a distance equal to at least
the height of the tallest such tower system, as measured from average natural ground level to the highest point of the wind blades' elevation
above such ground level.
j. Lighting. All lighting not required by Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations or by the manufacture is prohibited.
k. Signs. There shall be no signage on the tower structure or any rotor blade other than those required by National Codes or Manufacturers'
requirements.
l. Safety shutdown: The system must be designed and equipped with l manual and automatic controls to limit the rotational speed of the
blades within the design limit of the rotor and to shutdown during high wind speeds in excess of 60 mph. In the event the grid shuts down, the
ability to disconnect from the grid will be provided through specific manual and automatic controls as deemed necessary by the electrical
provider.
(2) Required plans and specifications. In addition to the submittals otherwise required upon making application for a building permit, the
application must be accompanied by the following:
a. A site plan of the proposed wind powered system prepared and sealed by a licensed engineer, including:
1. A scaled drawing of the site on which the proposed wind powered system will be constructed;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 175/444
2. The location of the wind powered system in regards to the property on which the system will be constructed; and
3. All components of the system including the distance of the system to the property lines; required setbacks; existing structures on the
site; natural features such as watercourse and trees.
b. Elevation drawings shall include:
1. The design and height of the proposed wind powered system; and
2. Detailed drawings of all system components.
(3) Permitting requirements.
a. Small wind turbines must have been approved under the Emerging Technologies program of the California Energy Commission or any
other small wind certification program recognized by the American Wind Energy Association.
b. Compliance with building code: Building permit applications for wind systems shall be accompanied by standard drawings of the wind
powered system, including the tower, base and footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance with the International
Building Code and certified by a licensed professional engineer registered by the state shall also be submitted. Wet stamps shall be required for
systems greater than 20.
c. Compliance with FAA regulations: Wind powered systems must comply with applicable FAA regulations, including any necessary
approvals for installations close to airports.
d. Compliance with National Electric Code: Building permit applications for wind powered systems shall be accompanied by a line
drawing of the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a determination that the manner of the installation conforms to the
National Electrical Code and UL1741.
e. Utility notification: No wind powered system shall be installed until customer has submitted to the utility a properly completed
application indicating its intent to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Customer shall provide evidence to the city of the
utility's approval of its application and has executed the state-required interconnection agreement with the utility. Off-grid systems shall be
exempt from this requirement.
f. Windstorm compliance: Permit applications for wind systems shall be accompanied by either a letter or official documents from a certified
windstorm engineer/inspector to verify that subject wind powered system complies with anchoring and structural standards to withstand
windstorm forces applicable to the Rockport coastal area.
g. Environmental compliance: Proposed wind energy systems are subject to review by state and federal agencies responsible for the
protection of listed species, migratory bird species, wetlands, and state waters. Permit review may require proof of consultation with
jurisdictional agencies and additional biological assessments may have to be performed on the proposed site if it is determined by the
reviewing agency that protected species are likely to be impacted on the site.
h. Sanctuaries: Proposed wind energy systems located within one (1) mile from designated bird sanctuaries, preserves, rookeries, breeding
or foraging grounds, wildlife state or federal parks, or wildlife resource or management areas will require consultation and review by the Texas
Parks and Wildlife Department and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services and may require mitigation or permitting measures by the applicant.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09; Ord. No. 1622,  2, 1-28-14)
Sec. 42-183. Enforcement.
The code official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of this article. The code official shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this article, and to adopt procedures in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations and procedures shall be in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this article and shall not have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this article.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09)
Sec. 42-184. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, alter, repair or move any wind system or structure regulated by this article, or cause same to be done,
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09)
Sec. 42-185. Notice of violations.
The code official is authorized to serve a notice of violation or order on the person responsible for the erection, construction, alteration, extension or repair
of a wind system or structure in violation of the provisions of this article, or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this article.
Such notice may direct the person to cease and desist the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09)
Sec. 42-186. Penalty.
Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this article or failing to carry out an order made pursuant of this article or violates any condition
attached to a permit, approval or certificate shall be subject to the penalties established by section 1-7, Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1461,  1, 9-8-09)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 176/444
Chapters 43-45 RESERVED
Chapter 46
FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 46-146-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FIRE MARSHAL*
Sec. 46-26. Office created.
The office of fire marshal is hereby created. Such office shall be independent of other city departments, the fire marshal reporting to the mayor and city
council.
(Code 1972,  10-45)
Sec. 46-27. Appointment; qualifications; removal.
The fire marshal shall be appointed by the mayor, by and with the consent of the city council. The fire marshal shall be properly qualified for the duties of
his office, and shall be removed only for cause.
(Code 1972,  10-46)
Sec. 46-28. Duty to investigate fires.
The fire marshal shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring within the city by which property has been destroyed or
damaged, and shall especially make investigation as to whether such fire was the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall be begun within
24 hours, not including Sunday, of the occurrence of the fire.
(Code 1972,  10-47)
Sec. 46-29. Taking of testimony; administration of oaths.
(a) The fire marshal, when in his opinion further investigation is necessary, shall take or cause to be taken the testimony, on oath, of all persons supposed
to be cognizant of any facts or to have means of knowledge in relation to the matter under investigation, and shall cause it to be reduced to writing.
(b) The fire marshal is hereby authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations to any person appearing as witnesses before him.
(Code 1972,  10-48)
Sec. 46-30. Authority to summon witnesses, require production of documents.
The fire marshal shall have the power to summon witnesses before him to testify in relation to any matter which is, by the provisions of this article, a
subject of inquiry and investigation, and may require the production of any book, paper or document deemed pertinent thereto.
(Code 1972,  10-49)
Sec. 46-31. Investigations; sequestering witnesses.
The fire marshal may make investigations, and persons other than those required to be present may be excluded from the place where such investigation is
held, and witnesses may be kept separate and apart from each other and not allowed to communicate with each other until they have been examined.
(Code 1972,  10-50)
Sec. 46-32. Duty when evidence indicates crime in connection with fire.
If the fire marshal is of the opinion that there is evidence sufficient to charge any person with the crime of arson, or with the attempt to commit the crime
of arson, or of conspiracy to defraud, or criminal conduct in connection with any fire, he shall cause such person to be lawfully arrested and charged with
such offenses or either of them, and shall furnish to the proper prosecuting attorney all such evidence, together with the names of witnesses and all of the
information obtained by him, including a copy of all pertinent and material testimony taken in the case.
(Code 1972,  10-51)
Sec. 46-33. Misconduct of witnesses summoned by fire marshal.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 177/444
Any witness who refuses to be sworn, or who refuses to appear or testify, or who disobeys any lawful order of the fire marshal, or who fails or refuses to
produce any book, paper or document touching any matter under examination, or who is guilty of any contemptuous conduct during any of the proceedings
of the fire marshal in the matter under investigation or inquiry, after being summoned to give testimony in relation to any matter under investigation, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and it shall be the duty of the fire marshal to cause all such offenders to be prosecuted.
(Code 1972,  10-52)
Sec. 46-34. Inspection of premises; removal or repair of dangerous conditions.
The fire marshal, upon complaint of any person having an interest in any building or property adjacent thereto, and without any complaint, shall have a
right at all reasonable hours, for the purpose of examination, to enter into and upon all buildings and premises within the city, and it shall be his duty,
monthly or more often, to enter upon and make or cause to be entered and made, a thorough examination of all mercantile, manufacturing and public
buildings, together with the premises belonging thereto. Whenever he shall find any building or other structure which, for want of repair, or by reason of
age or dilapidated condition, or for any cause, is especially liable to fire, and which is so situated as to endanger other buildings or property, or so occupied
that fire would endanger persons or property therein, and whenever he shall find an improper or dangerous arrangement of stoves, ranges, furnaces or other
heating appliances of any kind whatsoever, including chimneys, flues and pipes with which the same may be connected, or a dangerous arrangement of
lighting devices or systems, or a dangerous or unlawful storage of explosives, compounds, petroleum, gasoline, kerosene, dangerous chemicals, vegetable
products, ashes, combustible, inflammable and refuse materials, or other conditions which may be dangerous in character or liable to cause or promote fire
or create conditions dangerous to the firefighters or occupants, he shall order them to be removed or remedied, and such order shall be forthwith complied
with by the owner or occupant of the building or premises. If the owner or occupant deems himself aggrieved by the order, he may, within five days,
appeal to the mayor, who shall investigate the cause of the complaint and, unless by his authority the order is revoked, such order shall remain in force and
be forthwith complied with by the owner or occupant. Any owner or occupant who fails or refuses to comply with such order shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor.
(Code 1972,  10-53)
Cross referenceUnsafe building abatement,  22-336 et seq.
Sec. 46-35. Right of entry in case of fire.
The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night, when necessary in the performance of the duties imposed upon him by the provisions
of this article, to enter upon and examine any building or premises where any fire has occurred, and other buildings and premises adjoining or near the
same, which authority shall be exercised only with reason and good discretion.
(Code 1972,  10-54)
Sec. 46-36. Records kept.
The fire marshal shall keep in his office a record of all fires, together with all facts, statistics and circumstances, including the origin of the fires and the
amount of the loss, which may be determined by the investigation required by this article.
(Code 1972,  10-55)
Sec. 46-37. Monthly reports to state fire marshal.
At the end of each month, the fire marshal shall report to the state fire marshal all existing hazardous conditions, together with a separate report on each
fire in the city during the month.
(Code 1972,  10-56)
Secs. 46-3846-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. FIRE PREVENTION; ARSON REWARD
Sec. 46-61. Code adopted; amendments.
There is hereby adopted by the city council for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and
explosion, that certain code known as the International Fire Code, being particularly, the 2009 edition, including Appendix Chapters B, D, E, F and G as
published by the International Code Council, Inc., thereof, save and except such portions as are in conflict with the Code of Ordinances and such portions
as are deleted, modified or amended in this chapter, of which code not less than one copy in now on file in the office of the city secretary, and the same is
hereby incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and the provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the city, the extraterritorial
jurisdiction of the city where there is a connection to the city's water or sewer system.
(Ord. No. 979,  10-1, 7-12-94; Ord. No. 1373,  1, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 1478,  1, 10-13-09)
Sec. 46-62. Arson reward.
(a) The mayor is hereby required, authorized and empowered to offer a reward of $250.00 payable to any person who shall be responsible for the arrest
and conviction of any person committing the crime of arson in the city, as such crime is defined by the penal code of the state.
(b) Whenever the mayor shall be informed that any fire occurring in the city was of an incendiary origin, he shall call for a report on the fire by the fire
marshal, and if the fire marshal shall report that such fire was caused by arson, it shall be the duty of the mayor to offer the reward above prescribed, which
reward shall be in the form of a proclamation duly issued by the mayor under his official signature and attested by the seal of the city. Such proclamation
shall be posted in conspicuous places, one of which shall be at the city hall, in accordance with the regulations of the state fire insurance department. Upon
information being given by any person, which causes the arrest and conviction of a person guilty of a specific crime of arson, and after conviction of such
person, the person giving the information shall be entitled to receive, from the city out of its general fund, the reward provided for in this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 178/444
(Ord. No. 979,  10-2, 7-12-94)
Sec. 46-63. Restrictions on use of outdoor cooking equipment.
(a) No person shall install and operate a charcoal smoker, barbeque pit or grill, whether portable, temporary or permanent, on a wood deck or under any
overhang or awning.
(b) No bottled gas or electric deep fat fryers (fish fryers) may be used within ten feet of any structure, overhang or awning.
(Ord. No. 979,  10-3, 7-12-94)
Sec. 46-64. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined any sum up to $2,000.00. Each
day the violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. No. 979,  10-4, 7-12-94)
Sec. 46-65. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act required
or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this article shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the proceedings.
(Ord. No. 979,  10-5, 7-12-94)
Secs. 46-6646-85. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
Sec. 46-86. Definitions.
Unless clearly indicated to the contrary, the words and phrases used in this article shall have the same meanings ascribed to them by V.T.C.A., Health and
Safety Code ch. 753, and by the Rules and Regulations for the Safe Storage, Handling and Use of Flammable Liquids at Retail Service Stations,
promulgated by the Texas State Board of Insurance and dated July 15, 1970.
(Code 1972,  10-67)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 46-87. Application of article generally.
This article shall apply to all persons, firms, corporations, copartnerships, government agencies except federal, and voluntary associations storing, handling
or transporting flammable liquids, and to the owner or lessee of any building, premises, equipment or vehicle in or on which flammable liquids are stored,
handled, used or transported.
(Code 1972,  10-68)
Sec. 46-88. Grant of exemptions from article.
The city council shall have the power to grant exemptions from the application of this article upon request in writing so to do when such request shows that
the enforcement of this article will cause unnecessary hardship to the petitioner, provided that such request shall not be granted where the requested use
will constitute a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property. The particulars of such exemptions, when granted, shall be entered upon the approval granted.
A copy thereof shall be retained by the city secretary.
(Code 1972,  10-69)
Sec. 46-89. Nonconforming uses.
Any plant, store, equipment, buildings, structure, installation, or tank vehicle for the storage, handling, use or transportation of flammable liquids which is
in service as of June 22, 1964, and which is not in strict compliance with the provisions of this article, may be continued in such use unless the city council
finds that such use constitutes a distinct hazard to life or adjoining property. When any use or condition is found to be distinctly hazardous to life or
adjoining property, the city council shall notify the owner or operator of the facility, in writing, of such determination, and the owner or operator shall, on
receipt of the notice, eliminate the hazardous condition, within 30 days.
(Code 1972,  10-70)
Sec. 46-90. Adoption of standards.
Containers, tanks, equipment, apparatus, installations, tank vehicles and procedures meeting the applicable standards of the publications known as NFPA
No. 30, Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, issue of 1990 or as amended, and NFPA No. 385, Standard for Tank Vehicles for Flammable and
Combustible Liquids, issue of 1990 or as amended, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts
02269-9101, shall be considered as meeting the requirements of this article.
(Code 1972,  10-71)
Sec. 46-91. General restrictions on location of storage facilities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 179/444
(a) The storage of class I flammable liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the primary fire limits of the city.
(b) No new bulk plant shall be constructed within any portion of the city which, upon consideration of a request for a permit, is deemed primarily
residential by the city council.
(Code 1972,  10-72)
Cross referencePrimary fire limits established,  22-26.
Sec. 46-92. Restriction on location of crude petroleum refinery or plant.
No refinery or plant storing or handling crude petroleum shall be constructed within that part of the city zoned solely for residential occupancies or for
mercantile establishments predominantly retail in character. No such refinery or plant shall be constructed until approval has been given for the proposed
locations with respect to topography, nearness to places of public assembly, and adequacy of water supply for fire control.
(Code 1972,  10-73)
Sec. 46-93. Approval for storage, handling or use; when required.
No one to whom this article applies shall, without first obtaining the approval of the city council:
(1) Store, handle or use class I liquids in excess of one gallon in a dwelling or other place of human habitation, or in excess of six gallons in any
other building or other occupancy, or in excess of ten gallons outside of any building; except that no approval shall be required for the following:
a. For the storage or use of flammable liquids in the fuel tank of a motor vehicle, aircraft, motorboat, mobile power plant or mobile heating
plant.
b. For the storage or use of paints, oils, varnishes or similar flammable mixtures when such liquids are stored for maintenance, painting or
similar purposes for a period of not more than 30 days.
(2) Store, handle or use class II or class III flammable liquids in excess of 25 gallons in a building or in excess of 60 gallons outside of a
building.
(3) Manufacture, process or refine flammable liquids.
(4) Operate a vehicle in the transportation of flammable liquids in bulk quantity, except tank vehicles designed in accordance with and operating
under applicable rules and regulations of the interstate commerce commission, or trucks transporting flammable or combustible liquids in drums,
cans or other containers of less than 60 gallons individual capacity.
(Code 1972,  10-74)
Sec. 46-94. Procedure for obtaining approval; suspension.
(a) Application for approval to construct or erect facilities for storage, handling or use of flammable liquids, or for the operation of tank vehicles in the
transportation of flammable liquids, as required by section 46-93, shall be made in writing to the city council. The council shall then cause to be made an
inspection of the premises, equipment or tank vehicle proposed to be used. If they are found to be in compliance with provisions of section 46-90, a
statement to that effect shall be noted on the application and the application shall be signed by the mayor. The city council shall thereupon grant approval
as applied for.
(b) Before operating any equipment, storing any portion of any such equipment, or operating any tank vehicle for which an approval is required by this
article, notification shall be made to city secretary, and the city council shall, within two working days thereof, cause such premises, equipment or tank
vehicle to be inspected.
(c) The city council may, at any reasonable time, inspect or cause to be inspected, premises, buildings, installations, equipment or tank vehicles used for
the storage, handling, use or transportation of flammable liquids. If a violation of this article is found to exist, the city council shall file with the owner,
occupant or operator a notice citing the violation and ordering its correction. If the order is not complied with, the city council may suspend the approval
for the facility.
(Code 1972,  10-75)
Secs. 46-9546-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. BLASTING*
Sec. 46-116. License required; application; fee.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in or conduct any blasting operations or any other activity in which explosives are used, without having
secured a license therefor. Application for such license shall be made in writing to the city secretary. Each application shall set forth the location at which
explosives are to be kept and shall state whether such explosives are to be in bulk, barrels, canisters, cartridges, or other manner, and the maximum amount
to be kept on hand at any one time. Such application shall also describe the location, amount of charge to be used, and the number and size of holes to be
blasted.
(b) The fee for a license required by this section shall be $100.00.
(Code 1972,  10-86)
Sec. 46-117. Employees of license applicant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 180/444
No license required by section 46-116 shall be issued unless the applicant shall file with the city secretary the name of the persons designated by him to
handle explosives or to load holes or to discharge explosives or to have charge of magazines. No person shall be so designated unless he is:
(1) At least 21 years of age.
(2) Able to understand, read and write the English language.
(3) Of temperate habits.
(4) Familiar with the laws of the state and ordinances of the city governing the storage and use of explosives.
(5) Capable of performing the duties incident to his work without unnecessary hazard to himself or others.
(Code 1972,  10-87)
Sec. 46-118. Findings of council prerequisite to license issuance.
A license to conduct or engage in a blasting operation shall not be issued unless the city council, by resolution duly adopted, finds that the proposed
blasting operation is not against the best interests of the inhabitants of the city.
(Code 1972,  10-88)
Sec. 46-119. Notice to city secretary; secondary shots.
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any blasting in the city without notifying the city secretary at least 24 hours in advance of the time and place at
which the blasting will be done. Secondary shots may be fired in accordance with good practice, provided adequate protection is taken to prevent flying
debris.
(Code 1972,  10-89)
Sec. 46-120. Location to be left in original condition; filling of holes.
Upon completion of each blasting operation at each designated location, the person holding the license for the operation shall leave the location in original
condition, and any hole drilled shall be filled with concrete to prevent seepage which might result in contamination of the city water supply.
(Code 1972,  10-90)
Sec. 46-121. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the fire marshal, chief of police and any other person designated by the city manager to see to the enforcement of the provisions of
this article.
(Code 1972,  10-91)
Secs. 46-12246-140. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. FIREWORKS*
Sec. 46-141. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Fire prevention officer means the chief of the fire department, the fire marshal, the county fire marshal, the sheriff, a constable, any other local
enforcement officer primarily responsible for fire prevention, or, if there is no local fire authority, the state fire marshal.
Fireworks means any composition or device designed to produce a visible or audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration or detonation, and that
is defined as "special fireworks" by 49 CFR 183.88(d) (1983), or as "common fireworks" by 49 CFR 173.100(r) (1983).
(Ord. No. 807,  1, 5-24-88)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
State law referenceDefinitions pertaining to fireworks, V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-4,  1.
Sec. 46-142. Penalty.
Any person violating this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 807,  7, 5-24-88)
Sec. 46-143. Storage.
No person shall store any fireworks anywhere in the city, except as necessary for the performance of a public exhibition to be held pursuant to a permit
issued as provided in this article. Such storage shall be in a safe place, securely locked or guarded so that no child or other person shall have access thereto,
and protected from fire hazards. The fire marshal of the city shall inspect the storage to determine whether it complies with the terms of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 181/444
(Ord. No. 807,  2, 5-24-88)
Sec. 46-144. Possession, sale restricted.
No person shall possess any fireworks in the city except at such times and places as the city may designate from time to time, nor may any person sell any
fireworks in the city or within a distance of 5,000 feet from the city limits.
(Ord. No. 807,  3, 5-24-88; Ord. No. 809,  1, 7-5-88)
State law referenceNuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  217.042.
Sec. 46-145. Unlawful discharge.
No person shall discharge any fireworks anywhere in the city, except at a public exhibition held pursuant to a permit issued as provided in this article or at
such specific times and places as the city may designate from time to time.
(Ord. No. 807,  4, 5-24-88)
Sec. 46-146. Discharge at public display.
No person shall discharge fireworks at any public display without conforming to the provisions of V.A.T.S. Insurance Code, art. 5.43-4, and approval of
the discharge plan by the city fire marshal.
(Ord. No. 807,  5, 5-24-88)
Sec. 46-147. Permit required for public display.
A permit for a public display of fireworks shall be issued by the city council, after examination of the proposal by the city fire marshal. No such permit
shall be issued if it appears from the information available to the fire marshal and to the city council that there are substantial dangers to people or
property, due to the location, the fireworks proposed to be used or the procedures proposed to be used.
(Ord. No. 807,  6, 5-24-88)
Chapters 47-49 RESERVED
Chapter 50
FLOODS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 50-1. Drainage policy, statutory authority, requirements, purpose, jurisdiction.
Stormwater can cause severe injury and property damage. The adoption of a comprehensive policy, which incorporates a master drainage plan with
specific designs relating to the problems associated with stormwater in the city is intended to reduce the risk of injury and property damage, but such
policy cannot prevent these occurrences. In addition, the Legislature of the State of Texas has in the Flood Control Insurance Act, Texas Water Code,
Section 16.315 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses.
As the city grows and more land becomes improved, the stormwater drainage system must be able to accommodate the increased flow of stormwater so as
to reduce the risk of such injury and property damage. Planning for this growth is the purpose of adoption of and adherence to the Storm Drainage Master
Plan and the Storm Drainage Design Manual.
The Storm Drainage Master Plan and Storm Drainage Design Manual, as hereafter adopted or as amended, shall be followed in all planning, design and
construction of storm drainage facilities within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) where applicable.
(Ord. No. 1223,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-2. Storm Drainage Master Plan adopted.
The Storm Drainage Master Plan is hereby adopted in its entirety as if set out at length in this section.
(Ord. No. 1223,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-3. Storm Drainage Design Manual adopted.
The Storm Drainage Design Manual is hereby adopted in its entirety as if set out at length in this section.
(Ord. No. 1223,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 182/444
Sec. 50-4. Permanent record.
A true and correct copy of the Storm Drainage Master Plan and Storm Drainage Design Manual, as adopted or as may be hereafter amended, shall be kept
in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 1223,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Secs. 50-550-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 50-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning
they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application.
Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance.
Appurtenant structure, also referred to as an accessory building, means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure to be
insured and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure.
Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100-year) flood based on future
conditions hydrology.
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map with a one-percent chance or greater annual
chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
The area may be designated as zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, zone A usually is refined into zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
Base flood means the flood having a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study
(FIS) for zones A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30 or VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year - also called the base flood.
Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade below ground level on all sides.
Breakaway walls means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under
specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
Coastal high hazard area means the area subject to high velocity waters, including but not limited to hurricane wave wash or tsunamis. The area is
designated on a FIRM as zone V1-30, VE or V.
Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire
system would be compromised.
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.
Elevated building means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
Enclosure means a fully enclosed area below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement. To qualify as an enclosure, the area must meet the non-elevation design requirements of 44 CFR 60.3. See also the definition of lowest floor.
Existing construction, for the purposes of determining rates, means structures for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of
the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. Existing construction may also be referred to as "existing structures."
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before July 1, 1990.
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 183/444
Flood insurance study means the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface
elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary-floodway map.
Flood elevation study means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or
an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of
the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized floodmodifying
works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.
Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.
Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or
local regulations, or any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
Floodplain or floodprone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see flooding).
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood
damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term
includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair
facilities, but does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
Historic structure means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior.
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
a. By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or
b. Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.
Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not
built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this article (see sections 50-77(2), (3), 50-79(2), 50-
80(4)).
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational vehicle.
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
Mean sea level, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, means the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
New construction, for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after July 1, 1990.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 184/444
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is:
(1) Built on a single chassis;
(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and
(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
Regulatory floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.
Riverine means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
Sand dunes means naturally occurring accumulations of sand in ridges or mounds landward of the beach.
Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act [P.L. 97-348]), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any
wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its condition before damaged would
equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent
of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to ensure safe living conditions; or
(2) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
Variance means a grant of relief to a person from the requirements of Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations when specific
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this
article.
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance as required is presumed to be in violation
until such time as that documentation is provided.
Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of floods
of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 2, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-27. Lands to which this article applies.
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  A, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-28. Basis for establishing areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled "The
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Aransas County, Texas and Incorporated Areas," dated February 17, 2016, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps
(FIRM), dated February 17, 2016, and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  B, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-29. Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  C, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-30. Compliance.
No structure or land shall be located, altered or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 185/444
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  D, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-31. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another
provision conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  E, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-32. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements; liberally construed in favor of the
governing body; and deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  F, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-33. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
(a) The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages.
(b) This article shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 3,  G, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-34. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined as provided in section 1-7(a).
The city may also direct the city attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 6,  A, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Secs. 50-3550-45. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. FINDINGS OF FACT; PURPOSE; METHODS
Sec. 50-46. Findings of fact.
(a) The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
(b) These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by
the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or
otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 1,  B, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-47. Statement of purpose.
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in
specific areas by provisions designed to:
(1) Protect human life and health.
(2) Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects.
(3) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
(4) Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
(5) Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located
in floodplains.
(6) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize future
flood blight areas.
(7) Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 1,  C, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-48. Methods of reducing flood losses.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 186/444
(1) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities.
(2) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
(3) Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of
floodwaters.
(4) Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage.
(5) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 1,  D, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Secs. 50-4950-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. ADMINISTRATION
Sec. 50-61. Designation of floodplain administrator.
The city manager, or the city manager's designee, is appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and
other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood Insurance Program regulations) pertaining to floodplain
management. The floodplain administrator is to be assisted by the building inspector with knowledge of construction practices and representing
developmental services.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 4,  A, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-62. Duties, responsibilities of administrator.
Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article.
(2) Review permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be
reasonably safe from flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by this article.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local
governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior
approval is required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
(6) Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the Texas Water Development Board (TB)
and also the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ), prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of
such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
(7) Ensure that the flood-carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
(8) When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 50-28, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and
reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the
provisions of division 4 of this article.
(9) When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial
improvements or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not
increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community.
(10) The floodplain administrator, or his duly authorized representative, may enter any building, structure or premises to perform any duties
imposed upon him by these regulations.
(11) The floodplain administrator may revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this regulation if there has been any false statement or
misrepresentation as to a material fact in the application or plans upon which the permit or approval was based.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 4,  B, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-63. Permit procedures.
(a) Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him and may include, but not be
limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 187/444
structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the
following information is required:
(1) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures.
(2) Elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed.
(3) A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of section 50-77(2).
(4) Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
(5) Issuance of a development permit does not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of obtaining other required federal, state or local permits.
(6) Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with section 50-62(1).
(b) Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following
relevant factors:
(1) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
(2) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(3) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others.
(4) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development.
(5) The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.
(6) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems.
(7) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
(8) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable.
(9) The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(10) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 4,  C, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-64. Variance procedures.
(a) The city council shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this article.
(b) The city council shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination
made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article.
(c) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city council may appeal such decision in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(d) The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(e) Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not
preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
(f) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in section 50-63(b) have been fully
considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
(g) Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the city council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as
it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (section 50-47).
(h) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
(i) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(1) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
(2) Variances shall only be issued upon showing a good and sufficient cause; a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant; and a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats
to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or
ordinances.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 188/444
(3) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
lowest floor elevation.
(j) Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that the criteria outlined in subsections (a) through (i) of this section are met, and that the structure or other
development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 4,  D, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Secs. 50-6550-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
Sec. 50-76. General standards for all areas of special flood hazard.
In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
(1) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or
lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(2) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
(3) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
(4) All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to be eighteen inches (18") above the base flood elevation or, prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system.
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and
discharge from the system into floodwaters.
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 5,  A, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-77. Specific standards for certain areas.
In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 50-28, section 50-62(8) or section 50-78(c),
the following provisions are required:
(1) Residential construction. New construction or substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect or land
surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection, as proposed in section 50-63(a)(1), is
satisfied.
(2) Nonresidential construction. New construction or substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the base flood level or, together with
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications and plans for the
construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this
article. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation in relation to mean sea level, to which such structures are floodproofed
shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator.
(3) Enclosures. New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding
shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
a. A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
b. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
c. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
(4) Manufactured homes.
a. Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within zone A on a community's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices
which minimize flood damage. For the purpose of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation,
collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 189/444
b. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within zones A1-30, AH and AE, V1-30, VE and/or V on the
community's FIRM on sites: outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; in an
expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of
the manufactured home is elevated a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the base flood elevation and is securely anchored to an
adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement.
c. Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision
within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of this subsection be elevated so that either:
1. The lowest floor of the manufactured home is a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the base flood elevation; or
2. The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are
no less than 36 inches in height above grade and is securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation,
collapse and lateral movement.
(5) Recreational vehicles.
a. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the permit requirements of subsection (1) of this section and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes
in subsection (4)a of this section.
b. Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within zones V1-30, V or VE on the community's FIRM either:
1. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
2. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
3. Meet the requirements of subsections (1) and (4)c of this section.
c. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type
utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
d. All recreational vehicles shall be capable of evacuation under its own power or if dependent on external power, the vehicle proposed for
external power shall be in running condition.
e. Egress of recreational vehicles shall not be prevented by stored or fixed items such as stairs, porches, store rooms, etc.
f. Recreational vehicles stored on a homeowner's lot where the home is the primary residence are exempt from the 180-day permit
regulations, subject to other ordinances or restrictions. These recreational vehicles must be unoccupied, not connected to neither water nor
wastewater services, have a current motor vehicle license and inspection sticker and be capable of highway use.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 5,  B, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-78. Standards for subdivision proposals.
(a) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 50-46 through 50-48.
(b) All proposals for the development of subdivisions including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements
of sections 50-29 and 50-63, and the provisions of this division.
(c) Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed developments including manufactured home parks and
subdivisions which are greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, if not otherwise provided pursuant to sections 50-28 or 50-62(8).
(d) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(e) All subdivision proposals including manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 5,  C, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-79. Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones).
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-28, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood
hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions shall
apply:
(1) All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated a
minimum of eighteen inches (18") above base flood elevation or a minimum of eighteen inches (18") above the highest adjacent grade at least as
high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 42 inches if no depth number is specified).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 190/444
(2) All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall:
a. Have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet
on the community's FIRM (at least 42 inches if no depth is specified); or
b. Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(3) A registered professional engineer, architect or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of
this section, as proposed in section 50-63(a)(1), are satisfied.
(4) Require within zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 5,  D, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Sec. 50-80. Standards for coastal high hazard areas.
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 50-28 are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (zones V1-30, VE and/or V).
These areas have special flood hazards associated with high velocity waters from tidal surges and hurricane wave wash; therefore, in addition to meeting
all provisions outlined in this article, the following provisions shall also apply:
(1) Obtain the elevation, in relation to mean sea level, of the bottom of the lowest structural member of the lowest floor (excluding pilings and
columns) of all new and substantially improved structures, and whether or not such structures contain a basement. The floodplain administrator
shall maintain a record of all such information.
(2) All new construction shall be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
(3) All new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall be elevated on pilings and columns so that:
a. The bottom of the lowest horizontal structural member of the lowest floor (excluding the pilings or columns) is elevated a minimum of
eighteen inches (18") above the base flood level.
b. The pile or column foundation and structure attached thereto is anchored to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement due to the
effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components. Water loading values used shall be those associated with the
base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local building standards.
c. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop or review the structural design, specifications and plans for the construction
and shall certify that the design and methods of construction to be used are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the
provisions of subsection (3)a. and b. of this section.
(4) Provide that all new construction and substantial improvements have the space below the lowest floor either free of obstruction or constructed
with nonsupporting breakaway walls, open wood lattice work, or insect screening intended to collapse under wind and water loads without causing
collapse, displacement or other structural damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. For the purpose of this
section, a breakaway wall shall have a design safe loading resistance of not less than ten and no more than 20 pounds per square foot. Use of
breakaway walls which exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square foot (either by design or when so required by local or state
codes) may be permitted only if a registered professional engineer or architect certifies that the designs proposed meet the following conditions:
a. Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and
b. The elevated portion of the building and supporting foundation system shall not be subject to collapse, displacement or other structural
damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components (structural and nonstructural). Water
loading values used shall be those associated with the base flood. Wind loading values used shall be those required by applicable state or local
building standards.
(5) If breakaway walls are used, such enclosed space shall be usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage. Such spaces shall
not be used for human habitation.
(6) Prohibit the use of fill for structural support of buildings.
(7) Prohibit manmade alteration of sand dunes and mangrove stands which would increase potential flood damage.
(Ord. No. 857, art. 5,  E, 5-22-90; Ord. No. 1658,  1, 1-12-16)
Chapters 51-53 RESERVED
Chapter 54
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 191/444
HEALTH AND SANITATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 54-154-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS*
Sec. 54-26. Adoption of Texas Food Establishment Rules.
(a) The City of Rockport adopts by reference the provisions of the current rules or rules as amended by the Executive Commissioner of the Health and
Human Services Commission found in 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228, regarding the regulation of food establishments in this jurisdiction.
(b) Definitions.
The words authorized agent or employee shall mean the employees of the regulatory authority.
The words food establishment mean a food service establishment, a retail food store, a temporary food establishment, a mobile food unit, and/or a
roadside food vendor.
The words Municipality of Rockport in this article shall be understood to refer to the City of Rockport.
The words state rules mean the state rules found at 25 Texas Administrative Code, chapter 228. These rules are also known as the Texas Food
Establishment Rules.
The words regulatory authority mean the Aransas County Environment and Health.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-27. Permits and exemptions.
(a) A person may not operate a food establishment without a permit issued by the regulatory authority. Permits are not transferable from one person to
another or from one location to another location, except as otherwise permitted by this article. A valid permit must be posted in or on every food
establishment regulated by this article.
(b) A food establishment operated solely by a nonprofit organization is exempt from the permitting requirements of this article, but is not exempt from
compliance with state rules. The
regulatory authority may require any information necessary to determine whether an organization is nonprofit for purposes of this exemption.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-28. Application for permit and fees.
(a) Any person desiring to operate a food establishment must make a written application for a permit on forms provided by the regulatory authority. The
application must contain the name and address of each applicant, the location and type of the proposed food establishment and the applicable fee. An
incomplete application will not be accepted. Failure to provide all required information, or falsifying information required may result in denial or
revocation of the permit. Renewals of permits are required on an annual basis and the same information is required for a renewal permit as for an initial
permit.
(b) Prior to the approval of an initial permit or the renewal of an existing permit, the regulatory authority shall inspect the proposed food establishment
to determine compliance with state laws and rules. A food establishment that does not comply with state laws and rules will be denied a permit or the
renewal of a permit.
(c) Fees applicable to permits issued for food establishments are approved on a yearly basis by Aransas County Commissioner's Court.
(d) Permits are required for all temporary events such as carnivals, festivals or other related events if they sell food or beverages to the public. The
regulatory authority does not differentiate between full-time and part-time employees. All food-service permits are required and must be paid prior to the
last working day in January.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-29. Review of plans.
(a) In addition to any other regulatory requirements and review by other local, state or federal agencies, whenever a food establishment is constructed or
extensively remodeled and whenever an existing structure is converted to use as a food establishment, properly prepared plans and specifications for such
construction, remodeling or conversion shall be submitted to the regulatory authority for review before work is begun. Extensive remodeling means that 20
percent or greater of the area of the food establishment is to be remodeled. The plans and specifications shall indicate the proposed layout, equipment
arrangement, mechanical plans and construction of materials of work areas, and the type and model of proposed fixed equipment and facilities. The plans
and specifications will be approved by the regulatory authority if they meet the requirements of the rules adopted by this article. The approved plans and
specifications must be followed in construction, remodeling or conversion.
(b) Failure to follow the approved plans and specifications will result in a permit denial, suspension, or revocation.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 192/444
Sec. 54-30. Suspension of permit.
(a) The regulatory authority may, without warning, notice, or hearing suspend any permit to operate a food establishment if the operation of the food
establishment constitutes an imminent hazard to public health. Suspension is effective upon service of the notice required by subsection (b) of this section.
When a permit is suspended, food operations shall immediately cease. Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit shall be afforded an
opportunity for a hearing within 20 days of receipt of a request for a hearing.
(b) Whenever a permit is suspended, the holder of the permit or the person in charge shall be notified in writing that the permit is, upon service of the
notice, immediately suspended and that an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority
by the holder of the permit within ten days. If no written request for hearing is filed within ten days, the suspension is sustained. The regulatory authority
may end the suspension at any time if reasons for suspension no longer exist.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-31. Revocation of permit.
(a) The regulatory authority may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements
of these rules or for interference with the regulatory authority in the performance of its duties. Prior to revocation, the regulatory authority shall notify the
holder of the permit or the person in charge, in writing, of the reason for which the permit is subject to revocation and that the permit shall be revoked at
the end of the ten days following service of such notice unless a written request for a hearing is filed with the regulatory authority by the holder of the
permit within such ten-day period.
(b) If no request for hearing is filed within the ten-day period, the revocation of the permit becomes final.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-32. Administrative process.
(a) A notice as required in these rules is properly served when it is delivered to the holder of the permit or the person in charge, or when it is sent by
registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last known address of the holder of the permit. A copy of the notice shall be filed in the records
of the regulatory authority.
(b) The hearings provided for in these rules shall be conducted by the regulatory authority at a time and place designated by it. Based upon the recorded
evidence of such hearing, the regulatory authority shall make final findings, and shall sustain, modify or rescind any notice or order considered in the
hearing. A written report of the hearing decision shall be furnished to the holder of the permit by the regulatory authority.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-33. Remedies.
(a) Any person who violates a provision of these rules and any person who is the permit holder of or otherwise operates a food service establishment that
does not comply with the requirements of these rules and any responsible officer of that permit holder or those persons shall be fined not more than
$500.00.
(b) The regulatory authority may seek to enjoin violations of these rules.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Sec. 54-34. Examination and condemnation of food.
The authorized agent or employee may examine food as often as necessary for the enforcement of this article and the state laws and rules. The authorized
agent may, upon written notice to the owner or person in charge, place a hold order on any food, which it believes is in violation of any state laws. A
written notice must specify the reason for the hold order. The authorized agent shall tag, label, or otherwise identify any food subject to the hold order. No
food subject to the hold order shall be used, served or moved from the establishment. The authorized agent shall permit storage of the food under
conditions specified in the hold order, unless storage is not possible without risk to the public health, in which case immediate destruction shall be ordered
and accomplished.
(Ord. No. 1168,  2, 11-28-00; Ord. No. 1661,  1, 5-10-16)
Secs. 54-3554-55. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SMOKING*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 54-56. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Employee means any person who is employed by an employer in consideration for monetary compensation or profit.
Employer means any person, partnership, corporation, association or other entity that employs one or more persons.
Place of employment means any enclosed indoor area under the control of an employer to which employees have access during the course of employment,
including but not limited to work areas, employee lounges, employee public restrooms, conference rooms and employee cafeterias. A private residence is
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 193/444
not a place of employment.
Public place means any enclosed indoor area that is used by the general public, or that is a place of employment, and includes but is not limited to stores,
offices and other commercial establishments; restaurants; public and private institutions of higher education; health care facilities; nursing and
convalescent homes; and government subsidized senior citizen residential facilities; and public restrooms.
Service line means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the
exchange of money.
Smoke or smoking includes the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted smoking equipment or device, and
the lighting of, emitting or exhaling the smoke of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(a), 3-23-93)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 54-57. Compliance with applicable laws.
Nothing in this article excuses noncompliance with any state or federal law, city ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, which
prohibits smoking.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 2, 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-58. Violations.
The violation of any provision of this article shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor offense.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(j), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-59. Penalty.
Violation of any provision of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-7(b).
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 4, 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-60. Offenses enumerated.
A person commits an offense if he:
(1) Knowingly or intentionally smokes in a public place and is not in an area designated as a smoking area under this article.
(2) Knowingly or intentionally smokes in a taxicab that is not a taxicab in which smoking is permitted.
(3) Is the owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place, and knowingly or intentionally permits, or fails to make a reasonable effort to
prevent commission, by another, of the offense described in subsection (1) of this section within such public place.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(b), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-61. Designation of smoking areas in public places.
(a) The owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place may, but is not required to designate one or more areas as smoking areas.
(b) A public place engaged in the sale of produce, meat and other food subject to contamination shall be a nonsmoking facility. Employee or public
smoking areas may be provided subject to subsection (c) of this section only if separate from areas where such food is displayed, stored or sold.
(c) If a smoking area is designated in a public place, each smoking area shall:
(1) Be not larger in size than proportionate to the preference of the users normally requesting a smoking area, as can be demonstrated by the
owner, lessee or other person in charge.
(2) Be situated so the ventilation minimizes the effect of smoke in adjacent nonsmoking areas, and so that air from the smoking area is not drawn
into or across a nonsmoking area.
(3) Be designated by appropriate signs which are clearly visible to patrons in or entering the area.
(4) Contain ashtrays, containers or other facilities for the extinguishment of smoking materials.
(5) Be set apart or separated from nonsmoking areas.
(6) Not include service line or cashier areas.
(d) If the owner, lessee or person in charge of a public place can demonstrate that the users or patrons normally requesting a smoking area constitute
such a large portion of the users of the public place that it is impracticable for the owner, lessee or person in charge to meet the requirements of subsections
(c)(2) and (c)(5) of this section without structural or other physical changes or significant expenditures, the owner, lessee or person in charge may
designate an area not meeting the requirements of subsection (c)(1) of this section (including the entire public place), except for those areas designated in
subsection (c)(6) of this section as a smoking area. If the entire area is designated a smoking area, the owner, lessee or person in charge shall place a sign at
each entrance to the premises which is clearly visible and states that smoking is permitted throughout the premises.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 194/444
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(c), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-62. Posting of signs in public place.
Except as provided by section 54-61, the owner, lessee or other person in charge of a public place shall place a sign, visible at each entrance to the
premises, notifying persons entering the premises that smoking is prohibited, or that smoking, other than within designated smoking areas, is prohibited.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(d), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-63. Smoking in taxicabs.
(a) The holder of any franchise to operate a taxicab service within the city may, but is not required to, designate one or more of the taxicabs operated
pursuant to the franchise as taxicabs in which smoking is permitted.
(b) Each taxicab shall be designated by notices clearly visible to persons entering or in the taxicab as a taxicab in which smoking is permitted or a
taxicab in which smoking is not permitted.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(e), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-64. Employers to have written smoking policy.
Each employer who operates a place of employment in the city shall adopt, implement and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain, at a
minimum, the following provisions and requirements:
(1) Any nonsmoking employee may object to his employer about smoke in any portion of his place of employment normally frequented by the
employee. Using already available means of ventilation, separation or partition, the employer shall attempt to reach a reasonable accommodation,
insofar as possible, between the preferences of nonsmoking and smoking employees. An employer is not required by this provision to incur any
expense or make structural or other physical modifications to accommodate the preferences of nonsmoking or smoking employees.
(2) If an accommodation which is satisfactory to all affected nonsmoking employees cannot be reached as to any portion of the place of
employment about which complaint has been voiced, the preferences of nonsmoking employees shall prevail, to the end that nonsmoking
employees may work in a smokefree environment. No such portion of the place of employment shall be designated as a smoking area. However,
the requirements of this subsection shall not apply to nonsmoking employees whose job duties include serving of or routine interaction with
members of the general public within designated smoking areas, nor to any private, enclosed office workshop occupied exclusively by smokers,
even though such office may be visited by nonsmokers.
(3) The smoking policy shall be announced within three weeks of adoption to all employees working in the place of employment and posted
conspicuously in all workplaces under the employer's jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(f), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-65. Exceptions for private use of public places.
It is an exception to the application of section 54-60(1) that the person smoking tobacco or in possession of the burning tobacco product is in a situation in
which the person is present at an event in which an entire room or confined area is used for a private social function and the event is under the control of
the sponsor of the function and not of the owner, proprietor or person in charge of the public place. This exception includes, but is not limited to, areas of
public places, such as hotels, which are normally rented out to private groups, and to areas of bowling centers used by bowling leagues during league play.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(g), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-66. Certain public places exempt.
The following public places are not subject to sections 54-60(3) and 54-61(c), but such public places are encouraged, whenever possible, to follow the
guidelines established in section 54-61(c):
(1) An establishment in which more than 50 percent of its annual gross sales is from alcoholic beverages sold for on-premises consumption.
(2) A separated bar area of a restaurant.
(3) A tobacco specialty retail shop.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(h), 3-23-93)
Sec. 54-67. Duty of owner, lessee, person in charge of conveyance or place.
The owner, lessee or other person in charge of any conveyance or place described in V.T.C.A., Penal Code  48.01(a), as amended, commits an offense if
he fails to have:
(1) Prominently displayed a reasonably sized notice that smoking is prohibited by state law in such conveyance and/or place; or
(2) Such conveyance or place equipped with facilities for extinguishment of smoking materials.
(Ord. No. 941, pt. 1(i), 3-23-93)
Secs. 54-6854-75. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CHILDREN AND TOBACCO
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 195/444
Sec. 54-76. Definitions.
[As used in this division, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
(1) Permit holder means any retailer that has a permit, issued by the Texas Comptroller's office to sell tobacco.
(2) Tobacco product means any product that contains tobacco, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars and smokeless tobacco products,
such as chewing or dipping "spit" tobacco.
(3) Vending machine means any mechanical device used to dispense tobacco products to the public.
(4) Employer has the same meaning as permit holder.
(5) Employee means anyone that is required as a duty of employment to sell tobacco products to the public.
(6) Billboards include all billboards, as well as signs, placards, and advertising in arenas and stadiums, whether open-aired or enclosed.
Billboards include transit advertisements on private or public vehicles and all advertisements placed at, on or within any bus stop, taxi stand, transit
waiting area, train station, or any similar location. Billboards do not include any advertisements placed on or outside the premises of retail
establishments licensed to sell tobacco products or any retail point-of-sale if these locations are not within 1,000 feet of a school, playground, or
church.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-77. Sale or provision of tobacco products to minors prohibited.
(a) Sale or provision of tobacco products to anyone under the age of 18 is prohibited. A person commits an offense if the person:
(1) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given a tobacco product to someone who is younger than 18 years of age.
(2) Sells, gives or causes to be sold or given a tobacco product to another person who intends to deliver it to someone who is younger than 18
years of age.
(b) An offense under paragraph (a) of this section is punishable by a fine set forth in section 1-7 of the Code of Ordinances.
(c) An offense for permit holders or owners of retail establishments is punishable by the following:
(1) On the first offense in a one year period, the permit holder may be required to pay a fine not to exceed $500.00;
(2) On the second offense in a one year period, the permit holder may be required to pay a fine not to exceed $ $750.00;
(3) On third offense in a one year period, the permit holder may be required to pay a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and the comptroller's office
may be requested to suspend the permit for not more than three days;
(4) On four or more offenses in a one year period, the comptroller's office may be requested to revoke the permit for six months after which the
permit holder may apply again for a permit.
(d) It is a defense to prosecution under this part that the person to whom the tobacco product was sold or given presented to the defendant apparently
valid proof of identification.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-78. Proof of identification required.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, give, or cause to be sold, or given a tobacco product to someone who is younger than 27 years of age unless
the person to whom the tobacco product was sold or given presents an apparently valid proof of identification.
(b) A proof of identification satisfies the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section if it contains a physical description and photograph consistent with
the person's appearance, purports to establish that the person is 18 years of age or older, and was issued by a governmental agency. The proof of
identification may include a driver's license issued by this state or another state, a passport, or an identification card issued by a state or the federal
government.
(c) The penalty for failure to verify the age of young tobacco purchasers shall be identical to those listed under paragraph (a) of this section.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-79. Posting of warning notices.
The warning notice regarding tobacco sales to minors that is required and provided by the state comptroller's office shall be posted at all retail locations
that sell tobacco.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-80. Notification of employees.
(a) Each tobacco permit holder is required to inform employees that:
(1) State law prohibits the sale or distribution of cigarettes to persons younger than 18 years of age and that violation is a Class C Misdemeanor;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 196/444
(2) State law requires that the sign provided by the state be displayed and that a violation is a Class C Misdemeanor.
(b) Permit holders must inform employees of the content of paragraph (a) of this section on the date the employee begins selling tobacco products.
(c) Permit holders must have employees sign a form stating that the law in paragraph (a) of this section has been fully explained, that the employee
understands the law and that the employee agrees to comply with the law.
(d) Each form signed by an employee must indicate the date of the signature and the current address and social security number of the employee. The
permit holder shall retain the forms signed by each employee until the 60th day after the date the employee is no longer employed by the employer.
(e) A permit holder commits an offense if the permit holder, on demand of a peace officer, a health department official, or an agent of the Texas State
Comptroller, fails to provide the form referenced in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-81. Vendor assisted sales required; vending machines.
(a) Except as provided by paragraph (b) of this section, a retailer or other person may not:
(1) Offer tobacco products for sale in a manner that permits a customer direct access to the tobacco products; or
(2) Install or maintain a vending machine containing tobacco products.
(b) Paragraph (a) of this section does not apply to a facility or business that is not open to persons younger than 18 years of age.
(c) A city police officer, health department official or an agent of the state comptroller may, with or without a warrant, seize, seal, or disable a vending
machine installed or maintained in violation of this part. Property seized under this section must be seized in accordance with, and is subject to forfeiture to
the state in accordance with subchapter H, chapter 154, Tax Code, and subchapter E, chapter 155, Tax Code; an agent of the state.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-82. Distribution of tobacco products.
(a) A person may not distribute:
(1) A free sample of a tobacco product; or
(2) A coupon or other item that the recipient may use to receive a free or discounted tobacco product or a sample tobacco product.
a. A permit holder may not accept or redeem, offer to accept or redeem, or hire a person to accept or redeem a coupon or other item that the
recipient may use to receive a free or discounted tobacco product or a sample tobacco product.
b. A person commits an offence if the person violates this part.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-83. Inspections.
(a) Random unannounced inspections by the city police department and/or health department may be conducted at various locations where tobacco
products are sold or distributed to ensure compliance with this division.
(b) The city department conducting inspections may recruit persons younger than 18 years of age to test compliance.
(c) The police department may apply to the state comptroller's office for the funding of enforcement of this division.
(d) The police department shall notify the comptroller's office on the 19th day of each month, or the first working day after that date, of any violation
occurring in the preceding month that is detected, investigated, or prosecuted.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-84. Tobacco use by minors.
(a) An individual who is younger than 18 years of age commits an offense if the individual:
(1) Possesses, purchases, consumes, or accepts a tobacco product; or
(2) Falsely represents himself or herself to be 18 years of age or older by displaying proof of age that is false, fraudulent, or not actually proof of
the individual's own age in order to obtain possession of, purchase, or receive a tobacco product.
(b) It is an exception to the application of paragraph (a) of this section if the person younger than 18 years of age is participating in an inspection or test
of compliance in accordance with section 54-83, paragraph (b).
(c) An offense under paragraph (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $250.00.
(d) On conviction of an individual for an offense under paragraph (a) of this section, the court shall suspend execution of the fine and shall require the
defendant to attend a tobacco awareness program approved by the Texas Department of Health. The court may require the parent or guardian of the
defendant to attend the tobacco awareness program with the defendant.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 197/444
(e) If a tobacco awareness program is not available, the court shall require the defendant to perform eight to 12 hours of tobacco-related community
service instead of attending the tobacco awareness program.
(f) The tobacco awareness program and the tobacco-related community service is remedial and is not punishment.
(G) Not later than the 90th day after the date of a conviction under this section, the defendant shall present to the court, in the manner required by the
court, evidence of satisfactory completion of the tobacco awareness program or the tobacco-related community service.
(h) On receipt of the evidence under paragraph (g) of this section, the court shall:
(1) If the defendant has been previously convicted of an offense under this section, execute the sentence and, at the discretion of the court, reduce
the fine imposed to not less than half the fine previously imposed by the court; or
(2) If the defendant has not been previously convicted of an offense under this section, discharge the defendant and dismiss the complaint.
(i) If the defendant does not provide the evidence required under paragraph (g) of this section, within the period specified by that paragraph, the court
shall order the department of public safety to suspend or deny issuance of any driver's license or permit to the defendant. The order must specify the period
of the suspension or denial, which may not exceed 180 days after the date of the order.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-85. Sale of cigarettes of less than 20 per package.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to sell cigarettes in quantities less than an individual package containing at least 20 cigarettes.
(b) An offense under paragraph (a) of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed $100.00.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Sec. 54-86. Outdoor advertising.
Pursuant to the January 1998 agreement with the Texas Attorney General and tobacco industry and, in compliance with the FDA regulations and Senate
Bill 55, all billboards advertising tobacco products are prohibited except advertisements placed on or outside the premises of retail establishments licensed
to sell tobacco that are not within 1,000 feet of a church, school, or playground. If the sign is not removed within one week, an offense under this section is
punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 per day for each day the sign is not removed following one week after the citation.
(Ord. No. 1078,  1, 2-24-98)
Chapters 55-57 RESERVED
Chapter 58
LAW ENFORCEMENT*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 58-1. Establishment, composition of police department.
There is hereby created a police department for the city, which shall consist of the chief of police and such other members as may be provided for by the
council.
(Code 1972,  19-2)
State law referencePolice department authorized, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  341.003.
Sec. 58-2. Chief has supervision of department.
The chief of police shall be the head of the police department and he shall have supervision over all members of the department.
(Code 1972,  19-4)
Cross referenceAdministration, ch. 2.
Sec. 58-3. General duties of chief; members of department subject to chief's orders.
The chief of police shall make such reports concerning the activities of the police department as may be required by statute or by the city council. The
chief shall be responsible for the performance, by the police department, of its functions, and all persons who are members of the police department shall
serve subject to the orders of the chief of police.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 198/444
(Code 1972,  19-5)
State law referenceHate crime reporting, V.T.C.A., Government Code  411.046; report of death of person in custody, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 49.18.
Sec. 58-4. Departmental rules and regulations.
The chief of the police department may make or prescribe such rules and regulations governing the conduct of the police department as he shall deem
advisable. Such rules and regulations, when approved by the council, shall be binding on the members of the department. Such rules and regulations may
cover the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worked or carried, hours of service, vacations, and all other similar matters necessary or
desirable for the better efficiency of the department.
(Code 1972,  19-6)
Sec. 58-5. Departmental divisions.
With the approval of the city council, the chief of police may establish divisions within the police department, assigning such police officers to such
divisions and designating such duties therefor as may be deemed necessary.
(Code 1972,  19-7)
Sec. 58-6. Chief to have custody of lost, abandoned and stolen property.
The chief of police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen property recovered in the city.
(Code 1972,  19-8)
State law referenceDisposition of stolen property, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. art. 47.01 et seq.
Sec. 58-7. Duty to enforce law, preserve order, make arrests.
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to enforce all ordinances of the city and all statutes applicable therein, and to preserve order
and prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof.
(Code 1972,  19-9)
State law referenceArrest, commitment and bail, Vernon's Ann. C.C.P. ch. 14 et seq.
Sec. 58-8. Duties in event of fire.
It is hereby the special duty of the chief of police and other police officers who are on duty and available for fire duty, to respond to all fire alarms and
assist the fire department in the protection of life and property, in regulating traffic, and in maintaining order.
(Code 1972,  19-11)
Cross referenceFire prevention and protection, ch. 46.
Sec. 58-9. Duty to appear as witness; witness fee.
Every member of the police department shall appear as a witness whenever this is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state
or federal law. Except as otherwise provided by law, no such member shall retain any witness fee for service as a witness in any action of suit to which the
city is a party; and any fees paid for such service shall be turned over to the police chief, who shall deposit them with the city secretary.
(Code 1972,  19-12)
State law referencePayment for court appearances of police officers, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  142.009.
Secs. 58-1058-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
Sec. 58-31. Authority to sell.
All abandoned, stolen or recovered property of every kind, including motor vehicles, which shall remain unclaimed with the police department for a period
of one month, without being claimed or reclaimed by the owner, whether known or not, may be sold and disposed of at public auction as provided for in
this article; provided, however, that any junked motor vehicle in the possession of the police department pursuant to article II of chapter 12 of this Code
shall be subject to the provisions of that article.
(Code 1972,  19-23)
Sec. 58-32. Property subject to sale to be listed with and delivered to city secretary; exception.
The chief of police shall give to the city secretary a list of all property subject to sale under this article and shall thereafter deliver such property, except
motor vehicles, to the city secretary before the date of sale. Motor vehicles shall be kept by the chief of police until a sale has been made.
(Code 1972,  19-24)
Sec. 58-33. Notice of sale.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 199/444
Thirty days' notice of the time and place of a sale under this article, and a descriptive list of the property and motor vehicles or both to be offered for sale,
shall be posted at the courthouse door of the county and at any regular entrance to the city hall and a copy thereof sent by registered mail to the last known
address of the owner, if his name is known, to the city secretary.
(Code 1972,  19-25)
Sec. 58-34. Conduct of sale.
The city secretary shall sell, at public auction, the property covered by the notice given pursuant to section 58-33. Such property shall be sold to the highest
bidder for each piece of property separately or assembled in lots, whichever in the discretion of the city secretary shall offer the best price obtainable for
the property, except motor vehicles, which shall be sold separately. The public auction shall be conducted by the city secretary at the place and hour
designated in the notice and all sales shall be for cash.
(Code 1972,  19-26)
Sec. 58-35. Record, report of sale.
The city secretary shall keep an accurate record of each article and motor vehicle sold under this article and the price bid and paid therefor, and shall file
with the city council a complete report, in writing, of the time, place and manner of conducting the sale.
(Code 1972,  19-27)
Sec. 58-36. Disposition of proceeds of sale.
The city secretary is hereby required to place all funds received by him under and by virtue of this article to the credit of the general fund, to be thereafter
disbursed as the city council shall order.
(Code 1972,  19-28)
Sec. 58-37. Disposition of worthless property.
Any property which has been listed and offered for sale under this article, and for which no price or sum has been offered, if deemed by the city secretary
to be worthless and without value, shall be disposed of in such manner as the city secretary shall prescribe. The description of the property destroyed or
disposed of by the city secretary as worthless shall be reported to the city council, together with the date and manner of disposal.
(Code 1972,  19-29)
Chapters 59-61 RESERVED
Chapter 62
NATURAL RESOURCES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 62-162-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. OIL AND GAS WELLS*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 62-26. Drilling within 2,000 feet of shoreline.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill, or commence to drill, any well for oil or gas within 2,000 feet of the shoreline, mean low tide, in any bay area
within the corporate limits of the city.
(Code 1972,  14-1)
Secs. 62-2762-35. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT*
Sec. 62-36. Applicability.
The provisions of this division shall be applicable to all drilling within bay areas within the corporate city limits.
(Code 1972,  14-10)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 200/444
Sec. 62-37. Required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to drill or commence to drill a well for oil or gas within the limits of the city, or to work upon or assist in any way
in the prosecution of the drilling of any such well, unless a permit for the drilling, completion and operation of such well has first been issued by authority
of the city council in accordance with the provisions of this division.
(b) Nothing contained in this division shall be interpreted to require a permit for the reworking, deepening or plugging back of any well or completing
any well for the sole purpose of injection of water, gas or other substances.
(c) If an emergency arises in the course of conducting his operations which, in the good faith opinion of the permittee, constitutes a serious hazard to life
and property, the permittee may undertake such emergency operations as he deems necessary under the circumstances without first obtaining a permit,
such emergency action to include, without limitation, the drilling of a relief well, or other emergency operations. Such emergency operations shall not be
considered as a violation of this article or any other ordinance of the city. Within 24 hours after the commencement of any such emergency operations, the
permittee shall notify the city secretary that such operations have been commenced, and as soon as practicable, but in any event within seven days, the
permittee shall file a written report with the city secretary setting forth a summary of the emergency and the actions taken by the permittee to combat it.
(Code 1972,  14-11)
Sec. 62-38. Application generally.
(a) An application for a permit to drill, complete and operate a well for oil or gas shall be in writing and shall be signed by the applicant or by some
person duly authorized to sign on his behalf. The application shall be filed with the city secretary.
(b) Each application for a permit under this article shall state the particular lot and location where the proposed oil or gas well is to be located, and shall
have attached to it a description of the oil and gas leases or drilling contracts with the owners of land covering the lots, blocks or tracts in the drilling unit
over which the applicant has control of oil rights or gas rights, to the end that the application will show what proportion and what parts of the land the
applicant owns in fee or holds under lease or drilling contract from the owners. The application shall also be accompanied by a plat or map showing the
designation of the lots, blocks or tracts owned or controlled by the applicant and showing the proposed site of the well.
(Code 1972,  14-12)
Sec. 62-39. Required interest of applicant in land.
No permit shall be granted or issued under this division for the drilling of a well, except upon ground owned by the applicant or held by him under an oil
and gas lease or drilling contract from the owner, giving the owner's permission or authority to drill a well thereon.
(Code 1972,  14-13)
Sec. 62-40. Fee.
The fee for a permit required by this division shall be $300.00, which fee shall be paid, in cash, at the time the permit application is filed.
(Code 1972,  14-14)
Sec. 62-41. Notice of and hearing on application.
(a) Upon the filing of an application for a permit under this article, the city secretary shall set a date for a hearing on the application. Notice of the filing
of such application shall be given by the applicant as follows: At least ten days prior to the date of hearing on the application, a copy of the notice, in the
form prescribed, shall be sent by registered mail to each owner and lessee of lots, blocks and tracts in the drilling unit not owned by or under lease to the
applicant, addressed to the last known address of such land and lease owners, if known to the applicant. A copy of such notice shall likewise be posted at
three public places in the city at least ten days prior to the date of such hearing. Such notice shall state the lot and block number (or otherwise adequately
identify the premises) on which the applicant is asking for a permit to drill and the date and place of hearing, and shall be in words and figures as follows:
"Notice is hereby given that ____________, acting under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of Chapter 62 of the Code of Ordinances, City of
Rockport, Texas, did, on the ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 19____________, file with the City Secretary of the
City of Rockport an application for a permit to drill a well for oil or gas upon Lot No. ____________, Block No. ____________, ____________,
Rockport, Texas, in (Oil) (Gas) Unit shown on plat attached hereto. A hearing upon such application will be held in the Chamber of the City Council at the
City Hall of the City of Rockport, Texas, on the ____________ day of ____________/____________/____________, 19____________, at ____________
M."
(b) Proof of notice shall be made by the applicant by filing with the city secretary an affidavit containing a copy of the notice and stating the date on
which such notice was posted at three public places in the city, and an affidavit of the applicant showing the date and persons to whom and the addresses to
which the notice was mailed by the applicant.
(c) At the time fixed in the notice, a hearing on such application shall be held by the city council in the council chamber of the city hall.
(Code 1972,  14-15)
Sec. 62-42. Refusal or issuance generally.
The city council shall have the power, and reserves the authority, to refuse any application for a permit under this division when, by reason of the location
of the proposed well and the character and value of the permanent improvements already erected on the drilling unit in question or adjacent thereto, and
the use to which the land and surroundings are adapted for civic purposes, or for sanitary reasons, the drilling of an oil or gas well will be a serious
disadvantage to either the health, safety, morals or welfare of the city and its inhabitants. When a permit is refused for any of these reasons, but not
otherwise, the fee paid by the applicant shall be returned to him. Except as hereinbefore provided, if an applicant is found by the city council to comply in
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 201/444
all respects with the terms of this article and other applicable ordinances of the city, the city secretary shall issue a permit for the drilling, completion and
operation of the well applied for.
(Code 1972,  14-16)
Sec. 62-43. Prescribed conditions, standards to be included in permit.
(a) Whenever it is determined by the city council that a permit applied for under this division should be issued, the council shall prescribe the conditions
and standards under which the proposed well is to be drilled and operated. Such conditions and standards shall include insurance and bonding requirements
for the permittee, safety rules and regulations to be followed by the permittee, and any other requirements which the council feels should be met in order to
protect the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its inhabitants.
(b) The conditions and standards prescribed by the council under subsection (a) of this section shall be set out, at length, in the permit issued.
Acceptance of the permit shall constitute acceptance of such conditions and standards by the permittee.
(Code 1972,  14-17)
Sec. 62-44. Violation of terms or conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to whom a permit is issued under this article, or any person acting on his behalf or as his agent, servant or employee, to
violate or fail or refuse to comply with the terms and conditions prescribed in the permit.
(Code 1972,  14-18)
Sec. 62-45. Effect of issuance with respect to zoning ordinance and building regulations.
It is hereby determined by the council that any well structure, facility or installation regulated by this article shall, if permitted by a permit duly issued and
subsisting under this article, in no wise be considered in violation of the zoning ordinance of the city, or to require compliance with the building
regulations.
(Code 1972,  14-19)
Cross referenceBuildings and building regulations, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 118.
Sec. 62-46. Termination.
A permit issued under this division shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of the city council unless, within 180 days from
the date of issuance, actual operations for drilling of the well are commenced.
(Code 1972,  14-20)
Sec. 62-47. Revocation.
A permit issued under this division may be revoked by the city council whenever any condition or standard prescribed by the permit is violated or
whenever, after a public hearing, the council determines that continued operations under such permit would be detrimental to the health, safety or general
welfare of the city or its inhabitants.
(Code 1972,  14-21)
Secs. 62-4862-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. OIL AND GAS EXPLORATION
Sec. 62-60. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the words and terms used in this article shall have the same meaning as defined in title 31, Texas
Administrative Code, section 9.4, as amended.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Sec. 62-61. Penalties for exploration without permit.
(a) Criminal.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any operator to conduct geophysical or geochemical oil and gas exploration within the city limits of the city in
violation of the provisions of this article.
(2) Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of
the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punished by a fine of up to
$500.00.
(b) Civil. The city may file a civil action in the district court seeking an injunction and civil penalties of up to $1,000.00 per day for each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed or continued.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Sec. 62-62. Permit required/procedures.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 202/444
(a) Geophysical or geochemical exploration may not be conducted within the city limits without a permit issued by the city council.
(b) Permits shall be issued jointly to, and are the mutual responsibility of, the client and the operator. Permits shall not be transferred or assigned.
(c) Application for a permit shall be made by the operator. The application shall include the following:
(1) The name, address, phone numbers, and taxpayer ID numbers of the client and the operator. If an applicant is a corporation, it shall include
the names of the corporate representatives authorized to execute legal documents;
(2) Maps showing the location of shot lines;
(3) A complete description of the number and spacing of shots, the size of charge per shot, and a description of the energy source to be used
during exploration activities.
(d) Applications must be received by the city at least 14 working days before proposed commencement of operations. The application processing period
may extend beyond this time period. Operations, including surveying of the area, shall not begin until operator receives written approval by the city.
(e) The application shall be accompanied by a fee of $250.00.
(f) Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicant may be required to submit additional information.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Sec. 62-63. Liability insurance.
Prior to the issuance of a permit, applicant shall file with the city proof of current liability insurance from a company approved by the Texas Board of
Insurance or alternatively such other evidence as may reasonably be required by the city to establish the applicant's financial ability to self-insure against
potential liability. The extent of the insurance coverage shall be in the amount deemed sufficient by the city.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Sec. 62-64. Exploration restrictions/precautions.
(a) Permits shall be granted for a maximum of 30 days. A permit may be extended for a maximum of an additional 30 days at the discretion of the city
council and upon payment of the additional permit fee.
(b) City may require special conditions to be met before issuance of permit, and to be reimbursed regarding any cost incurred by the city to enforce
compliance with such special conditions. Failure to comply with any conditions included in the permit shall be considered a violation as specified in
section 62-66 of this article.
(c) The client or operator shall give verbal notice to the city prior to commencement it's operations.
(d) Geophysical crews operating within the city limits of the city shall have the following items in their possession and available for inspection at the
project site by a designated representative of the city, upon request:
(1) A copy of the seismic permit, including any special conditions imposed by the city;
(2) A copy of city's rules governing geophysical and geochemical exploration; and
(3) Detailed maps showing the approved shot lines and shot points covered by the permit.
(e) No high-velocity shots may be used within the city limits.
(f) No shots shall be discharged other than in daylight hours.
(g) No shots shall be detonated within three miles of a recreational beach between May 1 and September 10.
(h) All operations shall be conducted using the highest degree of care to prevent damage to or pollution of all lands and waters. Any physical
modification of the surface shall be remedied upon completion of the work and the area returned to its original condition as nearly as possible.
(i) Prior to conducting any operations, the permittee shall coordinate with the police department of the city regarding their operations.
(j) No geophysical surveying or shooting shall be performed within the Connie Hager Wildlife Sanctuary as set forth in Texas Parks and Wildlife Code,
section 82.101; or within 500 yards of a bird nesting area.
(k) Any person conducting geophysical or geochemical activities under this section must immediately advise the city council of the following which
presently exist or can reasonably be anticipated:
(1) The location and type of any dangerous condition which may constitute an imminent threat to human activity; or
(2) Activities or situations, whether caused by permittee's activities or otherwise, which may adversely affect the environment, aquatic life or
wildlife, cultural resources, or other uses of the area in which the exploration activity is conducted.
(l) Any pollution, fish or wildlife kill, or loss of property known to the operator shall be immediately reported to the city.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 203/444
Sec. 62-65. Enforcement/inspection.
All operations shall be subject to inspection by the city's representatives at any time. Upon reasonable notice, the permittee shall furnish the city's
representatives with transportation over submerged lands from the normal staging site to and from the operations site.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Sec. 62-66. Violations.
(a) A permittee that violates or fails to comply with any provision of the Texas Natural Resources Code or this article is subject to immediate revocation
of the permit and may be prohibited from further geophysical or geochemical exploration within the city limits. A permittee who commits such violation
will be liable for any costs incurred from any damage resulting from the violation.
(b) Upon discovery of any violations, the city or a designated representative may order temporary discontinuance of seismic operations until completely
reviewed by the city council.
(c) The city may seek an injunction or other order of restraint or abatement that requires the operator to immediately stop any exploration operations.
(Ord. No. 1091,  2, 9-8-98)
Chapters 63-65 RESERVED
Chapter 66
OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 66-1. Trespassing upon or obstructing public ways or private property, generally.
No person shall stand, sit or otherwise obstruct passage:
(1) In or on any private property, without the permission of the owner or person in lawful possession thereof, under such circumstances and in
such manner as would be reasonably likely to disturb, annoy or frighten persons thereby.
(2) In or on any street, alley, sidewalk or other public property, in any manner.
(3) In or on any private property, in any manner, after having been directed or requested to leave by the owner or person in lawful possession
thereof.
(Ord. No. 1181,  2, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 1490,  1, 2-23-10)
Sec. 66-2. Discharge of firearms.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm as defined in title 10, chapter 46, section 46.01 of the Texas Penal Code within the
corporate limits of the city.
(b) This section shall not apply to police officers in the discharge of their duties.
(c) A person who is lawfully defending person of property shall have a defense to prosecution for a violation of this section.
(Ord. No. 1181,  2, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 1230,  1, 10-29-02)
Secs. 66-366-35. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. MINORS; CURFEW*
Sec. 66-36. Definitions.
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Curfew hours, as listed below and shown in the table 1 below, means:
(1) Sunday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m.
(2) Monday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 204/444
(3) Tuesday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m.
(4) Wednesday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m.
(5) Thursday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. to 11:59 p.m.
(6) Friday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m.
(7) Saturday - Midnight to 6:00 a.m.
(8) Aransas County Independent School District regular sessions Monday through Friday - 9:00 a.m. until 3:30 p.m.
Table 1  Curfew Hours
Time Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday
Midnight
12:30
a.m.
1:00 a.m.
1:30 a.m.
2:00 a.m.
2:30 a.m.
3:00 a.m.
3:30 a.m.
4:00 a.m.
4:30 a.m.
5:00 a.m.
5:30 a.m.
6:00 a.m.
6:30 a.m.
7:00 a.m.
7:30 a.m.
8:00 a.m.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 205/444
8:30 a.m.
9:00 a.m.
9:30 a.m.
10:00
a.m.
10:30
a.m.
11:00
a.m.
11:30
a.m.
Noon
12:30
p.m.
1:00
p.m.
1:30
p.m.
2:00
p.m.
2:30
p.m.
3:00
p.m.
3:30
p.m.
4:00
p.m.
4:30
p.m.
5:00
p.m.
5:30
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 206/444
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
6:30
p.m.
7:00
p.m.
7:30
p.m.
8:00
p.m.
8:30
p.m.
9:00
p.m.
9:30
p.m.
10:00
p.m.
10:30
p.m.
11:00
p.m.
11:30
p.m.
In effect only when Aransas County Independent School District is in session.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited
to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of
amusement or entertainment.
Guardian means:
(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or
(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.
Minor means any person under 17 years of age.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 207/444
Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the
members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation.
Parent means a person who is:
(1) A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or
(2) At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.
Public place means any place to which the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools,
hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.
Remain means to:
(1) Linger or stay; or
(2) Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or
impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
(Ord. No. 1181,  4, 4-10-01; Ord. No. 1283,  1, 2-24-04; Ord. No. 1603,  1, 4-9-13; Ord. No. 1660,  1, 3-22-16)
Sec. 66-37. Offenses.
(a) A minor commits an offense if he remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(b) A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public
place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.
(c) The owner, operator, or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during curfew hours.
(Ord. No. 1181,  4, 4-10-01)
Sec. 66-38. Defenses.
(a) It is a defense to prosecution under section 66-37(b) that the minor was:
(1) Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian;
(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;
(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
(4) Reserved;
(5) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour;
(6) Involved in an emergency;
(7) Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization or
another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and
the right assembly;
(9) During the scheduled vacation of or on a holiday observed by the school in which the minor is enrolled; or that the minor had graduated from
high school or received a high school equivalency certificate; or that the minor had permission to be absent from school or to be in the public place
from an authorized school official (suspension or expulsion shall not constitute permission). In the case of a child being educated in a home school,
a parent shall be deemed a school official; or
(10) Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Chapter 31 of the Texas Family Code.
a. It is a defense to prosecution under section 66-37(c) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the
police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.
(Ord. No. 1181,  4, 4-10-01)
Sec. 66-39. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on
any response and other circumstances, no defense in section 66-38 is present.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 208/444
(Ord. No. 1181,  4, 4-10-01)
Sec. 66-40. Penalties.
(a) A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during which the violation is committed,
continued or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b) When required by section 51-08 of the Texas Family Code, as amended, the municipal court shall waive original jurisdiction over a minor who
violates section 66-37(a) and shall refer the minor to juvenile court.
(Ord. No. 1181,  4, 4-10-01)
Secs. 66-4166-59. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PREPAYMENT OF FUEL
Sec. 66-60. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Employee means person(s) other than the owner or manager/supervisor employed to perform services on the premises of a retail fuel business who have no
supervisory responsibilities.
Manager/supervisor means the person(s) granted authority or responsibility by the owner for the operations of the retail fuel business.
Owner means the individual, group, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or other group or entity that owns a retail fuel business.
Payment means payment by any legal means including cash, credit card, debit card, check or otherwise. Presenting a form of payment to be finalized at the
conclusion of the transaction shall be considered payment in full.
(Ord. No. 1401,  2, 9-11-07)
Sec. 66-61. Prepayment required for gasoline or diesel fuel dispensed at a retail fuel business; offense; defense.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a retail fuel business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee] to knowingly:
(1) Activate any gasoline or diesel fuel pumping device prior to receiving payment in full for the gasoline or diesel fuel.
(2) Allow or permit any person to dispense gasoline or diesel fuel from a pumping device at a retail fuel business unless the person has first made
payment in full.
(b) It shall be a defense if the owner, manager/supervisor or employee of a retail fuel business allows the dispensing of gasoline or diesel fuel for repair
and/or testing of the dispensing devices used by the retail fuel business.
(Ord. No. 1401,  2, 9-11-07)
Sec. 66-62. Penalty.
Any business owner, manager/supervisor, or employee who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00 for
each offense.
(Ord. No. 1401,  2, 9-11-07)
ARTICLE IV. SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCE AND LOITERING RESTRICTIONS
Sec. 66-70. Definitions.
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning described to them in this article, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Child means an individual younger than seventeen (17) years of age.
Child-care facility as defined by Human Resources Code  42.002, and shall include a foster home, a foster group home, a day-care center, a group daycare
home, an agency foster group home, and an agency foster home, also defined by Human Resources Code  42.002.
Child safety zone means private and public preschool, primary and secondary schools, public library, amusement arcades, video arcades, indoor and
outdoor amusement centers, park, amusement parks, public or commercial and semi-private swimming pools, child-care facility, public youth soccer, or
baseball field, skate park or rink, public or private youth center, movie theater, bowling alley, or offices for child protective services.
Loiter means standing or sitting idly, whether in a vehicle or not, in and around an area.
Park means any land, including improvements to the land, that is administered, operated, or managed by the City of Rockport, County of Aransas, or
Aransas County Independent School District, Aransas County Navigation District, State of Texas, or U.S. Government for the use of the public as a
recreational area, as well as any land, including improvements to the land, which are privately owned and used frequently by children.
Park safety zone in the context of this article means all city parks, with the exception of cemeteries and golf courses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 209/444
Residence means a place where a person abides, lodges or resides for fourteen (14) or more consecutive days, a place where a person abides, lodges or
resides for a period of fourteen (14) or more days in the aggregate during any calendar year and which is not the person's permanent address, or a place
where the person routinely abides, lodges or resides for a period of four (4) or more consecutive or nonconsecutive days in any month and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
School means a private or public elementary or secondary school.
Sex offender means an individual who has been convicted of or placed on deferred adjudication for a sexual offense involving a child for which the
individual is required to register as a sex offender under chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
Sec. 66-71. Sex offender residency restrictions; measurements; culpable mental state not required.
(a) It is unlawful for a sex offender to establish a residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of a child safety zone.
(b) It is unlawful for a sex offender to establish a residence within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residence of another sex offender.
(c) The distance of one thousand (1,000) feet shall be measured on a straight line from the closest boundary line of the sex offender's residence to the
closest boundary line of the child safety zone or residence of another sex offender.
(d) Neither allegation nor evidence of a culpable mental state is required for the proof of an offense defined by this section.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
Sec. 66-72. Exceptions.
A person does not commit an offense under section 66-71 if the person:
(1) Is required to serve a sentence at a jail, prison, juvenile facility, or other correctional institution located within one thousand (1,000) feet of
the real property comprising a child safety zone;
(2) Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of this article;
(3) Has established and continues to maintain the residence prior to the effective date of this article and, subsequently, a child safety zone is
constructed or located within one thousand (1,000) feet of the sexual offender's residence;
(4) Is under eighteen (18) years of age or a ward under a guardianship who resides with a parent or guardian;
(5) Has been exempted by a court order from registration as a sex offender under chapter 62, Texas Code of Criminal Procedure; or
(6) Has had the offense for which the sex offender registration was required, reversed on appeal, or pardoned.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
Sec. 66-73. Sex offender entry and loitering restrictions.
(a) It is an offense for a sex offender to intentionally or knowingly enter a park safety zone.
(b) It is an offense for a sex offender to intentionally or knowingly loiter within three hundred (300) feet of a park safety zone.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
Sec. 66-74. Penalties.
(a) A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be fined a sum not to exceed
five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, and each day such violation shall continue or exist, shall be deemed a separate offense.
(b) The penal provisions imposed under this section shall not preclude the city from filing suit to enjoin a violation of this section. The city shall retain
all legal rights and remedies available to it pursuant to local, state and federal law.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
Sec. 66-75. Civil enforcement.
Pursuant to section 54.016 of the Texas Local Government Code, the city may obtain against any person in violation of section 66-71 a temporary or
permanent injunction together with attorney's fees and court costs, as appropriate, that:
(1) Prohibits any conduct that violates any provision of this article that relates to any matter specified above; or
(2) Compels the specific performance of any action that is necessary for compliance with any provision of this article that relates to any matter
specified above.
(Ord. No. 1679,  1, 4-25-17)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 210/444
Chapters 67-69 RESERVED
Chapter 70
PARKS AND RECREATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 70-1. Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and punished by a fine as provided in section 1-
7(a).
(Ord. No. 922,  I(2), 8-11-92)
Sec. 70-2. Municipal parks designated; hours of operation.
(a) For the purpose of this section the following locations are designated as municipal parks of the city:
(1) Mathis Park, 801 Live Oak Street.
(2) Memorial Park, 1601 F.M. 2165.
(3) Spencer Park, 400 E. Bay Street.
(4) Zachary Taylor Arboretum Park, 702 S. Pearl Street.
(5) Compass Rose Park, 811 State Hwy. 35 N.
(6) Tule Park, 2105 Picton Lane.
(7) Magnolia Park, 909 N. Magnolia Street.
(8) Community Aquatic and Skate Park, 2001 Stadium Drive.
(9) Hummingbird Garden Boardwalk/Observation Area, State Hwy. 35 N.
(10) Tule Hike & Bike Trail, from Hwy .35-North to Enterprise Boulevard.
(b) For the purpose of this section the following hours of operation for municipal parks of the city is as follows:
(1) Tule Hike & Bike Trail shall be 30 minutes before sunrise and 30 minutes after sunset;
(2) Except as otherwise provided above the hours of operation for municipal parks shall be 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
(3) It shall be unlawful to enter a park or remain in a park during non-operational hours.
(Ord. No. 922,  I(1), (3), (4), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  2, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1482,  1, 11-17-09; Ord. No. 1520,  1, 10-
12-10; Ord. No. 1562,  1, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 1582,  1, 2, 8-28-12)
State law referencePublic use of parks, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  331.007.
Sec. 70-3. Littering, dumping prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, discard, dump, deposit or leave in and upon the grounds of a public park or recreation area any litter,
cigarette butts, fishing line, charcoal, garbage, trash, refuse or debris except in receptacles provided for this purpose. Where public receptacles are not
provided, all such litter, garbage, refuse and the like shall be picked up, carried away from the park grounds and otherwise disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(b) Persons placing litter in public receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon
the park grounds or other public places.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person, while a driver or passenger in or upon a motor vehicle, to throw or deposit litter, garbage, refuse or the like onto
the grounds of a city park.
(d) It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain or conduct, on the grounds of a city park, any activity that is elsewhere declared or defined in this
chapter to constitute a public nuisance.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(1), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1327,  3, 5-24-05)
State law referenceTexas Litter Abatement Act, V.T.C.A., Health and Safety Code ch. 365.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 211/444
Sec. 70-4. Loud noises prohibited.
(a) A person commits an offense if he knowingly makes or causes to be made any loud and raucous noise in any public park or recreation area of the
city.
(b) The following enumerated acts are presumed to constitute loud and raucous noises for the purposes of this section:
(1) The sounding of any horn or signal device on any automobile, motorcycle, bus, or other motor vehicle except as a danger signal in
accordance with state law.
(2) The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier for the purpose of attracting the attention of other persons by the creation of the
noise.
(3) The use of any mechanical loudspeaker or sound amplifier to broadcast any musical recording or performance.
(4) The playing of any radio, television, tape machine, musical instrument or other machine or device for the production or reproduction of sound
at such a volume that the sound produced is audible for a distance in excess of 150 feet.
(c) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the person:
(1) Is a city employee acting within the scope of his duties; or
(2) First obtained a written use agreement or from the city authorizing the conduct of a special event.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(2), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1327,  4, 5-24-05)
Sec. 70-5. Operation of motor vehicles; speed limit.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle upon the grounds of any public park or recreation
area except upon a public street, road, or parking area designated for this purpose.
(b) A person commits an offense if he knowingly:
(1) Stops, stands or parks a motor vehicle, in whole or in part, upon the grounds of a public park or recreation area except upon those areas
specifically designated for parking.
(2) Stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct, in whole or in part:
a. Any parking space or area specifically reserved for disabled and conspicuously identified as such according to law.
b. Any point of ingress or egress to such park or recreation area.
c. Any roadway, trail or parking area established for motor vehicle use.
(3) Stops, stands or parks a commercial vehicle in or upon the grounds of any public park or recreation area.
(4) Fails to park the entire motor vehicle within the limit lines of a designated stall where such lines have been provided.
(5) Otherwise stops, stands, or parks a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited or declared unlawful by this chapter or state law.
(c) If a motor vehicle is stopped, parked or left standing in violation of this section, and the owner cannot be found, any peace officer having jurisdiction
within the city may remove or impound the vehicle or cause the same to be removed or impounded in accordance with the provisions of this Code.
(d) The speed limit in all parks operated by the city shall be fixed at 20 miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motorized vehicle upon the grounds of any public park, exceptions include maintenance and
emergency vehicles, and to disabled travelers.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(3), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  5, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1536,  1, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 1562,  2, 3-27-12; Ord.
No. 1582,  3, 4, 8-28-12)
State law referenceParking privileges of disabled persons, V.T.C.A., Transportation Code,  681.009.
Sec. 70-6. Possession of firearms.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any firearm within a public park or recreation area.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that:
(1) The person was a peace officer of the city in the performance of his official duties.
(2) The person was a certified or licensed security guard engaged for the purpose of providing security for a special event authorized in writing
by the director of parks and recreation as hereinafter provided.
(3) The person was a member of the armed forces of the United States or the state engaged in the performance of his duties or the conduct of a
patriotic or ceremonial event and with written persmission of the city.
(c) It shall be unlawful for any person to hunt wildlife in a public park or recreation area with a weapon or archery equipment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 212/444
(Ord. No. 922,  II(4), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1582,  5, 8-28-12)
State law referenceDisorderly conduct, V.T.C.A., Penal Code  42.01.
Sec. 70-7. Possession, sale, discharge of fireworks.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, sell, or discharge any fireworks within a public park or recreation area, except as provided in this
Code.
(b) It shall be a defense to the prosecution under this section that such possession and discharge were during the course of a special event authorized in
writing by the city.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(5), 8-11-92)
Sec. 70-8. Fires prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to build, ignite or maintain a fire within a public park or recreation area except in bar-b-que grills provided
specifically for such purposes, unless approved in advance by rental agreement, lease, or other written contract with the city.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the fire:
(1) Was built, ignited or maintained in a fire containment vessel or structure provided for this purpose by the parks and leisure services
department.
(2) Was built, ignited or maintained in a fire containment vessel or device approved by the fire marshal in consultation with the city.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(6), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  7, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1582,  6, 8-28-12)
Sec. 70-9. Temporary structures.
(a) Temporary structures used for protection from the sun during normal daytime use of the parks are permitted. Such structures may include but not be
limited include tents, canopies, and umbrellas. All temporary structures will be removed on the same day as erected.
(b) Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to:
(1) An employee of the city acting within the scope of his official duties.
(2) A contractor, concessionaire or other person acting under or authority of a written contract, lease or special event permit issued and approved
in accordance with this chapter.
(3) Awnings or umbrellas used for temporary protection from the sun during normal daytime use of the parks.
(c) Nothing stated in this section shall relieve any person acting under a written contract, lease or special event permit from his responsibility to ensure
that any tent, stand, building or structure placed on the grounds of a public park or recreation area:
(1) Is properly permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section.
(2) Is duly inspected by the relevant authority.
(3) Is certified for occupancy or compliance with city codes and otherwise provided in this Code.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(7), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  8, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1582,  7, 8-28-12)
Sec. 70-10. Camping, sleeping overnight, remaining after closing hours prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to camp in or sleep overnight in a public park or recreation area.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to remain on the grounds of a public park or recreation area after the posted closing hour of the park or recreation
area.
(c) It shall be a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) of this section that the person:
(1) Was an employee of the city in the performance of his official duties.
(2) Was acting pursuant to a written contract, lease or other agreement to operate a concession or business in a designated park or recreation area.
(3) Was acting pursuant to a written special event permit issued by the city.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(8), 8-11-92)
Sec. 70-11. Damage to plants and trees.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, remove, damage or destroy any trees, shrubs, flowers or other growing plants, in and upon the grounds of
any public park or recreation area.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the preceding subpart that such cutting, removal, damage or destruction of trees, shrubs, flowers or other
growing plants was done by an employee of the city in the performance of his official duties.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 213/444
(Ord. No. 922,  II(9), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1562,  3, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 1582,  8, 8-28-12)
State law referenceDunes, V.T.C.A., Natural Resources Code ch. 63.
Sec. 70-12. Commercial sales prohibited; concessions management.
(a) Except as provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any goods in a public park or recreation area, or to
distribute commercial printed matter in aid of any such sale, or to otherwise engage in any other commercial activity.
(b) A person may sell goods or engage in a commercial activity in a public park or recreation area only if:
(1) Doing so is in connection with official government business.
(2) Doing so is by authority of a contract, lease or other agreement with the city to operate a business or concession in designated areas of public
property.
(3) Doing so in a not for profit manner under the authority of a special event permit or rental contract issued by the city.
(c) The city staff is permitted to solicit proposals for concession operations within the parks for sale of food, sundry items, and provision of various
classes to park patrons.
(d) All concession contracts are to be reviewed by the city manager and legal counsel, prior to the city entering into such agreements.
(e) The city manager or the parks and leisure services director, with city manager approval, is authorized to enter into a contract without city council
approval for concession operations within the parks for sale of food, sundry items, rental of beach-related equipment, and provision of various classes to
park patrons, but not otherwise. Contracts outside of the scope permitted herein shall be approved the by city council.
(f) The city manager may establish the appropriate means for accurate reporting and auditing of concession contracts or other commercial activity.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(10), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  9, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1543,  1, 8-16-11; Ord. No. 1543,  1, 8-16-11;
Ord. No. 1562,  4, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 1582,  9, 8-28-12)
Sec. 70-13. Posting of signs.
(a) Except as provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to post any sign, notice or handbill in a public park or recreation area.
(b) The posting of signs, notices, or handbills is authorized if:
(1) The sign, notice, or handbill was posted on a board or area designated for the posting of public notices by the city.
(2) The sign, notice or handbill was posted in connection with official government business.
(3) The sign, notice or handbill was posted by authority of a contract, lease or other agreement with the city to operate a business or concession
in designated areas of public property.
(4) The sign, notice or handbill was posted by authority of a written special event permit issued by the city.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(11), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  10, 5-24-05)
Sec. 70-14. Animals prohibited.
(a) Except for dogs in any enclosed area specially designed for dogs to run at large it shall be unlawful for any owner, keeper or other person having
custody or control of any animal to allow such animal to run at large in and upon the grounds of any public park or recreational area. Animals must be on a
leash no longer than eight feet in length.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person that enters in and upon the grounds of any public park or recreational area with an animal to fail or refuse to pick
up and dispose of properly in a designated animal waste receptacle or transport out of the area any waste droppings deposited on the ground by the animal.
(c) As utilized in this section, the term "livestock" shall include, but not be limited to, horses, cattle, pigs, goats, poultry, mules, and the like normally
kept for farm, ranch, breeding or similar purposes.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the person was acting pursuant to a written special event permit issued by the city upon a
proper showing that such animals will be restrained and that proper precautions will be taken to prevent injury to the public.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(12), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1001,  1, 7-11-95; Ord. No. 1327,  11, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1562,  5, 3-27-12)
Cross referenceAnimals, ch. 18.
Sec. 70-15. Possession of alcoholic beverages; consumption of alcohol.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to consume alcoholic beverages or to posses an open container containing alcoholic beverages within a public
park or recreational area.
(1) Athletic facilities including but not limited to baseball and softball diamonds, athletic fields, tennis and other game courts.
(2) Swimming pools.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 214/444
(3) Playgrounds.
(4) Vehicle parking areas on a public park or recreational area.
(5) Interior roadways contained within a public park or recreational area.
(6) Inside recreational centers, concession buildings, and restroom facilities.
(b) For purposes of this section, the term "alcoholic beverages" is used as defined in the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(13), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1135,  1, 10-26-99; Ord. No. 1327,  12, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 1536,  2, 3-22-11; Ord. No. 1562,  6, 3-27-12)
Cross referenceAlcoholic beverages, ch. 10.
State law reference"Alcoholic beverage" defined, V.T.C.A., Alcoholic Beverage Code  1.04(1).
Sec. 70-16. Glass containers.
(a) It shall be unlawful for a person to possess any glass beverage containers or other glass containers within any public park or recreational area.
(b) It shall be a defense to prosecution under this section that the person is a city employee acting within the scope of his duties.
(Ord. No. 922,  II(14), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1327,  13, 5-24-05)
Sec. 70-17. Golfing prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for a person to hit golf balls on the grounds of any city park.
(Ord. No. 1341,  2, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1562,  8, 3-27-12)
Sec. 70-18. Swimming/wading prohibited.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person, or animal controlled by a person, to enter into a pond or stream of water located within a park or recreational
area, either bodily or by floatable vessel.
(b) It shall be a defense if the person is performing duties of city, or has received city approval.
(Ord. No. 1582,  10, 8-28-12)
Secs. 70-1970-40. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1562,  7, adopted Mar. 27, 2012, deleted  70-17, 70-18, which pertained to designated swimming area; vehicle parking permit at
Rockport Beach Park required, exemptions, fee; respectively. For complete derivation see the Code Comparative Table at the end of this volume.
ARTICLE II. PARK AND LEISURE SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
Sec. 70-41. Composition; appointments.
(a) The park and leisure services advisory board shall consist of seven qualified voters of the city.
(b) All appointments to the park and leisure services advisory board shall be made by the city council. Such appointments will be made from a pool of
individuals to represent each of the four city wards and three representatives appointed by the mayor who have made application to serve on the park and
leisure services advisory board. The park and leisure services advisory board may offer recommendations to the city council regarding appointments to the
board.
(c) Appointments to the board shall be for a period of three years, unless the appointment is made to fill an unexpired term, and in such case of a
vacancy, the appointment shall be only for such unexpired term. The terms of the board members shall be overlapping. There is no limit placed upon the
number of terms an individual may serve.
(d) Any appointee who misses three consecutive regular meetings or four regular meetings in any 12-month period may be removed by majority vote of
the city council.
(Ord. No. 1204,  2, 1-22-01; Ord. No. 1401,  2, 9-11-07)
Sec. 70-42. Function; organization.
(a) The park and leisure services advisory board shall:
(1) Hold at least one regular meeting per month and additional meetings as needed.
(2) Present a verbal summary of the monthly meeting, to include any resolutions, recommendations or reports at the first regularly scheduled
council meeting the month after the board meeting.
(3) Adopt a set of operating procedures and guidelines establishing the conduct and organization of the park and recreation leisure services
advisory board.
(4) Elect a chairman and vice-chairman to serve out a term of one calendar year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 215/444
(b) The city manager shall ensure that the park and leisure services advisory board receives the staff support necessary to prepare minutes,
correspondence and other written material.
(Ord. No. 1204,  2, 1-22-01)
Sec. 70-43. Duties.
The duties of the park and leisure services advisory board are to advise the city council on general matters of recreation and park policy, to include:
(1) Serving as an advocacy group on all park and leisure service matters, where timely and possible.
(2) Actively participating in the development and implementation of funding strategies for park and leisure services.
(3) Participate in developing and recommending a capital improvement plan (CIP) for parklands and leisure service facilities for the area.
(4) Assist in the execution of the park, recreation and open space master plan.
(Ord. No. 1204,  2, 1-22-01)
Sec. 70-44. Authority; responsibilities.
The park and recreation leisure services advisory board shall have the authority (responsibility) to:
(1) Advise the council on matter of policy, courses of action and receive results of the action.
(2) Offer a recommendation on the proposed park and recreation leisure services annual operating budget as early in the budget process as
possible.
(3) Assist in the development of park and leisure services programs.
(4) Participate in special programs and special events sponsored by parks and leisure services.
(5) Assist the park and leisure services director by reporting any defects or other safety hazards found in the municipal parks.
(Ord. No. 1204,  2, 1-22-01)
Sec. 70-45. Liaisons.
(a) With the approval of the council, the mayor shall designate one council member to serve as the council liaison to the park and leisure services
advisory board. The appointed individual shall receive notice of all park and leisure services advisory board meetings, minutes of all meetings and all other
materials submitted to or from the park and leisure services advisory board.
(b) The park and leisure services director will serve as a staff advisor to the park and leisure services advisory board.
(Ord. No. 1204,  2, 1-22-01)
Secs. 70-4670-79. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PARK FACILITY RESERVATIONS
Sec. 70-80. Intent.
The intent of the facility reservation policy is to:
(1) Permit individuals, groups or organizations to have exclusive use of a designated area or facility during the reservation period only.
(2) Facilitate the scheduling of maintenance and repair of facilities.
(3) Permit the planning and implementation of events and programs in which a large number of people are expected to participate.
(4) Establish the general guidelines for the implementation and administration of this policy.
(5) Insure a minimum of conflict between individual, group or organizational use of specific facilities.
(6) It is NOT the intent of the reservation policy to approve the use of public facilities for personal gain or to practice or permit any form of
discrimination.
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07)
Sec. 70-81. Facility reservations.
(a) Eligible facilities. The following facilities may be reserved for exclusive-use in the following Rockport City Parks:
(1) Memorial Park
a. Memorial Park Shelter; and
b. Athletic fields, tennis courts, and basketball court.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 216/444
(2) Zachary Taylor Arboretum Park-Gazebo
(3) Compass Rose Park-Gazebo
(4) Mathis Park-Basketball Court
(b) Availability and priorities.
(1) Athletic fields and courts are available for public use on a first come, first serve basis free of charge during park operating hours.
(2) City park athletic fields and courts may be reserved for exclusive use. A user-fee will be accessed in accordance with this policy.
(3) Priority for use of athletic fields and sport courts will be given to City of Rockport sponsored leagues, tournaments, and other events.
(c) Park facility rental fees. Reservations will be made on a first come, first served basis. The schedule of reservation fees shall be as follows unless
otherwise approved by the city council.
(1) Park rental facilities
Facility Park Days Daily Cost
Main Picnic Shelter Memorial Park MondaySunday $60.00
Gazebo Compass Rose Park MondaySunday $45.00
Gazebo Zachary Taylor
Arboretum Park
MondaySunday $45.00
(2) Park deposits
Facility Park Rental Cost
Main Picnic Shelter* Memorial Park Per Rental $45.00 key and
equipment
Gazebo Compass Rose Park Per Rental $25.00
Gazebo Zachary Taylor
Arboretum Park
Per Rental $25.00
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1520,  2, 10-12-10; Ord. No. 1563,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 70-82. Skate park facility user-Fee.
A user-fee applies to facilities where a partial recovery of maintenance and replacement costs is desired.
Skate park userfees:
$1.00Daily admission
$5.00Coupon book of ten daily admissions
$1.00Spectator-only fee
$100.00Two-hour private facility rental
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07)
Sec. 70-83. Reservation procedure.
A reservation is considered made and confirmed upon completion of the following steps:
(1) Complete the reservation request form;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 217/444
(2) Submit payment for rent and applicable deposit;
(3) Receive a receipt.
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07)
Sec. 70-84. Forfeiture of reservation fee.
Any group wishing to cancel a reservation shall give notice of intent to cancel to the parks and leisure staff. Cancellations occurring within 30 days of the
reservation date will result in the forfeiture of 50 percent of paid reservation fees. In emergency situations, as determined by the city manager, reservations
may be cancelled and payments fully refunded.
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07)
Sec. 70-85. Athletic facilities/park grounds.
(a) General use: Athletic facilities and park grounds are available, without fee, for public use on first come, first served basis during regular park
operating hours.
(b) Special events/tournaments/programs use and, fees:
(1) A facility license agreement, approved by the city manager, is required when athletic fields/courts or park grounds are desired for exclusive
use. A daily use fee of $50.00 and a $10.00 per hour field light fee (if applicable) will be accessed for each athletic field or grounds location. The
facility license agreement will not be in effect until the agreement is approved, signed, and fees are paid.
(2) A discounted field/court exclusive use fee is available for local youth sports leagues with documented verification showing that 50 percent or
greater of the registered participants are Aransas County residents. The daily athletic field field/court use fee is $12.50 per field/court, per day. This
fee includes the use of field/court lights. This fee may be offset in part by in-kind services provided by the league. The value of in-kind services
will be determined by the director, parks and leisure services, and will be detailed in the facility license agreement presented to the city manager for
approval.
(c) Programs sponsored or co-sponsored by the city: Athletic fields/courts may be reserved for the purpose of conducting programs sponsored or cosponsored
by the city. In the instance of a co-sponsored program, an approved facility license agreement is required, however, user fees may be waived by
the city manager.
(Ord. No. 1383,  3, 4-24-07; Ord. No. 1576,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1624,  1, 2-25-14)
Chapters 71-73 RESERVED
Chapter 74
PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 74-174-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. ITINERANT MERCHANTS; ITINERANT VENDORS*
Sec. 74-26. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them:
Charitable purpose means the use of money or property for the benefit of a duly incorporated and tax-exempt nonprofit corporation or entity, which is
certified as being tax exempt under state or federal law.
City right-of-way means any area open to public use including but not limited to such areas as public streets, sidewalks, roadways, highways, parkways,
alleys, parks, as well as the areas surrounding and immediately adjacent to public buildings.
Solicitor means any person who goes from house to house or from place to place in the city soliciting, selling or taking orders for any services, goods,
wares, or merchandise, of any nature or kind whatsoever.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 74-27. License required.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 218/444
(a) Unless otherwise exempt as set forth in this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself as a solicitor without having first obtained
a license from the city as set forth in this article, except that where the person who will be soliciting is under the age of 16, such person shall be at all times
supervised by a person who is over the age of 18 who shall have obtained a license individually and on behalf of the person to be supervised.
(b) Upon issuance, the license shall be carried with any licensee at all times during which solicitation activity is being conducted. Further, the licensee
must ensure that the license is properly displayed while conducting solicitor activities. Properly displayed shall mean attached to or hung from the
solicitor's clothing so that the license is clearly visible to the public and law enforcement officials.
(c) All persons conducting themselves as a solicitor on city right-of-way shall at all times during which solicitation is being conducted wear orange
traffic safety vests.
(d) Unless otherwise exempt as set forth in this article, no solicitation is permitted on, in or upon city right-of-way, without a license.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-28. Application.
(a) Each prospective solicitor shall submit an application for a license which application shall be in writing, made under oath, and shall set out the
following:
(1) Name of applicant, with his permanent address, telephone number, proof of identify, together with two full-face photographs of the applicant
two inches square;
(2) Name and address of the person or entity he represents;
(3) Kind, type and character of goods he will offer sale, or type of solicitation he will undertake;
(4) The specific location(s) where he will solicit;
(5) The names of any cities where applicant has worked in the previous 90 days;
(6) Whether or not applicant has ever been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor, and if the applicant has been so convicted, state the nature of
the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed thereof;
(7) An authorization to conduct a criminal background check on the applicant; and
(8) The license and investigation fees as provided in this chapter.
(b) Failure to provide a complete and thorough application or the falsification of any part of the application shall be grounds for the denial or revocation
of a license.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-29. License fees; term; exemptions from license fees.
The license fee for a solicitor under this chapter shall be $50.00. Provided, however, when a person engages in any such activity, through one or more
agents or employees, such person shall, in addition to the $50.00 fee above mentioned, pay a license fee of $20.00 for each agent or employee so engaged.
Any license issued under this article shall be valid for one calendar year from the date of its issuance. If the solicitor (or his/her agent/employee) loses
his/her license the fee for a replacement license made within the one year from the original date of issuance shall be $20.00. In addition to the license fee,
each applicant must pay any required investigation fee.
No license fee shall be required of solicitations solely for charitable purposes.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-30. Investigation of applicant.
In addition to the license fee, each applicant shall pay a fee to cover the cost of conducting a criminal background check on the applicant. The investigation
fee, as determined by the city manager, or his designee, shall cover but not exceed all actual expenses incurred by the city to conduct the required
background check.
Before issuance of any license, the city secretary shall process each application made for a license under this article, and when such application (including
the required background check) is complete, shall make a report to the city manager or his designee.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-31. Issuance.
(a) It shall be the duty of the city manager, or his designee to issue or refuse to issue a license under this chapter not later than five days from the time
the report from the city secretary is received. If a license contemplated by this article is refused to be issued by the city manager, or his designee, written
notice of such decision shall be timely provided to the applicant by certified mail.
(b) The city manager, or his designee, may refuse to issue any license contemplated by this article should the required background check on the
applicant reveal any of the following, to wit: 1) a felony conviction; 2) a state jail felony conviction; 3) a current probationary period existing on a deferred
adjudication for a felony or state jail felony; 4) a federal felony conviction; or 5) a conviction of theft or any other crime involving moral turpitude.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 219/444
Sec. 74-32. Exemptions to licensing requirements.
The following shall be exempt from the licensing requirements of this article:
(1) Religious organizations exclusively for the distribution of literature and other items for the purpose of proselytizing, provided that no fees are
charged and no donations are solicited.
(2) Anonymous political speech.
(3) Sales made under authority and by order of law, nor to persons, or their authorized representatives, who have previously established with the
owners or occupants of such private residences or property a regular business, trade, service or other contractual relationship.
(4) Newspaper solicitations. The licensing requirements of sections 74-26 through 74-31 shall not apply to newspaper solicitations. However, it
shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to conduct newspaper solicitations except in compliance with this section and the other
applicable sections of this chapter.
Each newspaper is required to notify the city secretary during the regular business hours of the city, and at least 12 hours in advance of such solicitation, of
the date, time, and general location of the solicitation, and of the number of persons who will be soliciting. Each person conducting himself as a newspaper
solicitor shall wear a badge or other form of identification, which identifies the newspaper and is worn on a clearly visible location on the person.
(5) Any operation, which is exempted by state or federal statute from this chapter, only to the extent of such applicable exemption.
Any person claiming to be legally exempt from the provisions of this chapter, including the payment of the license or investigation fee shall make such a
claim in writing to the city manager, or his designee, citing the applicable statute or authority, and providing proof of its applicability.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-33. Appeals.
If the city manager or his designee refuses to issue a license under this chapter, the applicant shall have the right to appeal to the city council within ten
days from the date notice of refusal was mailed to the applicant. The applicant must request in writing the hearing on his/her appeal within the ten-day
period. The appeal hearing shall be placed on the next regular council meeting agenda which is at least three days after the date the notice of appeal is
received from the applicant by the city.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-34. Hours of operation.
It shall be unlawful for any person acting as a solicitor to go in or upon the premises of a private residence in the city prior to 9:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m.
on any day, Monday through Saturday, or at any time on Sunday or any other federally designated holiday, or, on any day where the department of
homeland security has declared an orange or red state of alert. This section shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a result of a request or invitation
made by the occupant.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-35. Health certificate for peddlers of food products.
Peddlers of food products shall be subject to all requirements of Chapter 54 of the Code of Ordinances, as amended, relating to health and sanitation.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-36. Cleanliness of food products and vehicles; honest weights and measures.
It shall be unlawful for any licensed solicitor, or their agent or employee, to sell, or offer for sale, any edible goods, produce, or any other packaged food
product, whether pre-cooked or not, which are or have at all times not been kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It shall also be unlawful for licensed
solicitor, or their agent or employee to fail to keep their wagons, vehicles, or other means of transporting food products for sale in a clean and sanitary
condition. No solicitor shall sell, or offer for sale, any unsound or unwholesome article, nor shall they give, or make, any false weights or measures of any
of the various articles as specified and covered by this section.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-37. Prohibited conduct.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any solicitor to:
(1) Misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation;
(2) Misrepresent the affiliation of those engaged in the solicitation;
(3) Continue efforts to solicit from an individual once that individual informs the solicitor that he does not wish to give anything to or to buy
anything from that solicitor; or
(4) Represent the issuance of any license under this chapter as an endorsement or recommendation of the solicitation; or
(5) Solicit at any residence or building which has posted a no solicitor sign; or
(6) Act in any manner, which is contrary to local, state, or federal law.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 220/444
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Sec. 74-38. Penalties; civil remedies; license forfeiture.
(a) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed $2,000.00 for each offense relating to fire safety, zoning, or public health and sanitation, including
dumping of refuse, not to exceed $500.00 for each offense for all other violations, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
(b) In case of any willful violation of any of the terms and provisions of this chapter, the city, in addition to imposing the penalties above provided, may
institute any appropriate action or proceeding in any court having proper jurisdiction, to restrain, correct or abate such violations; and the definition of any
violation of the terms of this chapter as a misdemeanor, shall not preclude the city from invoking the civil remedies given it by the laws of the state, but
same shall be cumulative and subject to prosecution as hereinabove prescribed for such violations.
(c) Each day's engaging in the business regulated by this chapter without the payment of the fee due thereon, and procuring a receipt or license therefore,
and each day's failure to comply with any of the other provisions of this chapter, shall constitute a separate offense, and the person so found guilty of such
violation, or failing to comply with the provisions hereof shall, upon conviction, be punished therefore as hereinabove provided.
(d) In addition to the sanctions provided for above, any person, firm, or corporation violating any term or provision of this chapter shall be subject to
forfeiture of their solicitor license. In the event of such forfeiture of license, no part of such license fee as may have been so paid shall be refunded to such
person, and no further license shall be issued to such person for the remaining period of such license year under this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1314,  1, 12-14-04)
Secs. 74-3974-55. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 74-56. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Charitable means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, religious, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual
or purported.
Contributions means and includes the words alms, food, clothing, money, subscription, property or donations under the guise of a loan of money or
property.
Person means any individual, firm, copartnership, corporation, company, association, or joint stock association, church, religious sect, religious
denomination, society, organization or league, and includes any trustees, receiver, assignee, agent or other similar representative thereof.
Promoter means any person who promotes, manages, supervises or organizes or attempts to promote, manage, supervise or organize a campaign of
solicitation.
Solicit and solicitation means a request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other thing of value on the plea of
representation that such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value will be used for a charitable purpose. These words shall also
mean and include the following methods of securing money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value on the plea or representation that it
will be used for a charitable purpose:
(1) Any oral or written request.
(2) The distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or publication.
(3) The sale of, or offer or attempt to sell, any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon, device, magazine, membership,
merchandising, subscription, ticket or other thing in connection with which any appeal is made for any charitable purpose, or where the name of
any charitable person or organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement or reason for making any such sale, or when or
where in connection with any such sale, any statement is made that the whole or any part of the proceeds from any such sale will go or be donated
to any charitable purpose.
A solicitation shall be deemed completed when made whether or not the person making the same receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in
this article.
(Code 1972,  16-40)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 74-57. Solicitors' credentials.
All persons to whom permits have been issued under this article shall furnish proper credentials to their agents and solicitors for such charitable
solicitations campaign.
(Code 1972,  16-41)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 221/444
Sec. 74-58. Responsibility for acts of solicitors.
The recipient of a permit under this article for a charitable solicitations campaign shall be responsible for the acts of his authorized representatives in
connection with such campaign.
(Code 1972,  16-42)
Secs. 74-5974-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PERMIT
Sec. 74-71. Required; exceptions.
(a) No person shall solicit contributions for any charitable purpose within the city, without a permit from the city secretary authorizing such solicitation.
(b) This section shall not apply to any charitable solicitation conducted or sponsored by a recognized local civic club or organization, school or church,
or to any other local nonprofit organization, club or association approved by the city council.
(Code 1972,  16-48)
Sec. 74-72. Application.
An application for a permit under this division shall be made to the city secretary. Such application shall be filed with the city secretary at least five days
prior to the time at which the permit applied for shall become effective; provided, however, that the city secretary may, for good cause shown, allow the
filing of an application less than five days prior to the effective date of the permit. Such application shall contain the following information, or in lieu
thereof, a detailed statement of the reason why such information cannot be furnished:
(1) The name, address or headquarters of the person applying for the permit.
(2) If the applicant is not an individual, the names and addresses of the applicant's principal officers and managers and a copy of the resolution, if
any, authorizing such solicitation, certified to as a true and correct copy of the original by the officer having charge of applicant's records.
(3) The full name of the person residing in the city who will be in charge of or endorse the charitable solicitations campaign within the city.
(4) The purpose for which such solicitation is to be made, the total amount of funds proposed to be raised thereby, and the use or disposition to be
made of any receipts therefrom.
(5) A specific statement, supported by reasons and, if available, figures, showing the need for the contributions to be solicited.
(6) The names and addresses of the persons by whom the receipts of such solicitations shall be disbursed.
(7) The name and address of the person who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation and the names of all promoters connected or to
be connected with the proposed solicitation.
(8) An outline of the methods to be used in conducting the solicitation.
(9) The time when such solicitation shall be made, giving the preferred dates for the beginning and ending of such solicitation.
(10) The estimated cost of the solicitation.
(11) The amount of any wages, fees, commissions, expenses or emoluments to be expended or paid to any person in connection with such
solicitation, and the names and addresses of all such persons.
(12) A financial statement for the last preceding fiscal year of any funds collected for charitable purposes by the applicant, such statement giving
the amount of money so raised together with the cost of raising it, and final distribution thereof.
(13) A full statement of the character and extent of the charitable work being done by the applicant within the city.
(14) A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any way as an endorsement by the city or by any
department or officer thereof.
(15) A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, the solicitation will be restricted to daylight hours.
(16) Such other information as may be reasonably required by the city secretary in order for him to determine the kind and character of the
proposed solicitation and whether such solicitation is in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare.
(Code 1972,  16-49)
Sec. 74-73. Notice of change in information given in application.
If, while any application for a permit under this division is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or
method that would alter the information given in the application, the applicant or permittee shall notify the city secretary in writing of such change, within
24 hours after the change.
(Code 1972,  16-50)
Sec. 74-74. Issuance or refusal generally.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 222/444
A permit applied for under this division shall be issued by the city secretary, if the applicant has complied with this division and if the city secretary finds
that the proposed solicitation will be in the interest of, and not inimical to, the public welfare; provided, however, that no permit shall be issued by the city
secretary unless the organization making the application has a person who resides in the city who will be either in charge of or endorse the campaign
within the city.
(Code 1972,  16-51)
Sec. 74-75. Transfer.
Any permit issued under this division shall be personal to the applicant and shall not be assigned or transferred to any other person. Any such attempted
assignment or transfer shall render the permit void.
(Code 1972,  16-52)
Sec. 74-76. Appeal from refusal.
Every applicant who is refused a permit under this division shall have the right to appeal to the city council. Such appeal, if taken, must be in writing
addressed to the city council and filed with the city secretary within ten days from the date of the refusal. The city council shall hold an open public
hearing on such appeal, at either a regular or special meeting, after furnishing notice of such hearing to the applicant. The appeal shall be de novo.
(Code 1972,  16-53)
Chapters 75-77 RESERVED
Chapter 78
PLANNING*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 78-1. Comprehensive plan, adopted.
(a) The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockport, Texas, as reflected on the accompanying text and maps described in Ordinance No. 1113, which is
incorporated herein by reference, is hereby adopted.
(b) The Comprehensive Plan of the City of Rockport, Texas, as adopted by Ordinance No. 1113, is hereby supplemented as reflected on the
accompanying map described in Ordinance No. 1569 as the City of Rockport April 2012 Supplement to the Comprehensive Plan, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
(c) A copy of the comprehensive plan of the city, together with any adopted supplement(s) thereto, shall be kept in the office of the city secretary and
shall be available for inspection during regular business hours.
(Ord. No. 1113,  2, 3, 4-13-99;Ord. No. 1573,  1, 6-12-12)
Secs. 78-278-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION*
Sec. 78-26. General powers.
The planning and zoning commission shall have the full authority and power provided to be exercised and invoked by such commission under V.T.C.A.,
Local Government Code ch. 211, and under and in pursuance of all other applicable laws now in force and effect and which may be enacted by the
legislature of the state as laws of the state.
(Code 1972,  2-37)
Sec. 78-27. Members to serve without pay and hold no other municipal office.
All members of the planning and zoning commission shall serve without pay and shall hold no other municipal office.
(Code 1972,  2-39)
Sec. 78-28. Removal of members.
Any member of the planning and zoning commission may be removed at any time by a majority vote of the city council for inefficiency, neglect of duty or
malfeasance in office.
(Code 1972,  2-40)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 223/444
Sec. 78-29. Election and terms of officers.
The planning and zoning commission shall elect such officers as may be deemed necessary, all of whom shall serve as such for one year.
(Code 1972,  2-41)
Sec. 78-30. Meetings generally.
The planning and zoning commission shall hold meetings from time to time upon call of the chairman.
(Code 1972,  2-42)
Sec. 78-31. Minimum number of members for hearings.
All cases to be heard by the planning and zoning commission shall be heard by a minimum of four members.
(Code 1972,  2-43)
Sec. 78-32. Joint public hearings with city council.
The mayor shall provide for the holding of any public hearing of the city council jointly with any public hearing required to be held by the planning and
zoning commission.
(Code 1972,  2-44)
State law referenceNotice of joint public hearing, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  211.007(d).
Sec. 78-33. Adoption of rules; records kept.
The planning and zoning commission shall adopt such rules for the transaction of its business as may be deemed necessary and shall keep a record open to
the public of all of its resolutions, findings and determinations.
(Code 1972,  2-45)
Sec. 78-34. Reports to mayor.
It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning commission to file with the mayor a written report consisting of the minutes of each meeting of the
commission, together with a list of the members of the commission who are absent.
(Code 1972,  2-46)
Chapters 79-81 RESERVED
Chapter 82
SOLID WASTE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Secs. 82-182-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. REFUSE COLLECTION*
Sec. 82-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Account means the name and address to which the utility bill is sent, often referred to as the "account owner." An account may include the amount billed
for one or more collection points.
Bags means plastic sacks designed to store refuse with sufficient wall strength to maintain physical integrity when lifted by top. Total weight of a bag and
its contents shall not exceed 35 pounds.
Biohazardous waste means waste in any amount is defined characterized or designated as biohazard medical waste by the occupational safety and health
administration or appropriate state or federal agency.
Bulk refuse means material that cannot be properly placed in a 30-gallon trash bag, or bags placed in a 33-gallon trash can or container of equivalent size,
i.e., crates, pallets, lumber, tires, furniture, car or truck parts, appliances, mattresses or other large and bulky items.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 224/444
Bulky waste means stoves, refrigerators and air conditioning units which are de-energized of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs); water tanks, washing machines,
furniture and other waste materials other than construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste or stable matter with weights or volumes greater than
those allowed for containers.
Business trash means refuse resulting from the operation of an office, store, business or other commercial enterprise that can be placed in a 30-gallon trash
bag, or bags placed in a 30-gallon trash can or containers of equivalent size.
Bundle means tree, shrub and brush trimmings or newspaper and magazines securely tied together forming an easily handled package not exceeding three
feet in length or 35 pounds in weight.
City means City of Rockport, Texas.
Collection point means the point or location where trash is placed for the purpose of scheduled pickup, or the site where one or more dumpsters are located
adjacent to each other. Note: One or more dumpsters paid through one bill that are located on the same piece of property but that are not adjacent may be
defined as a collection point by mutual agreement of the city's agent and the customer.
Commercial refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a commercial industrial unit.
Commercial unit means a commercial establishment within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or persons who are engaged in the
business of selling, or offering for sale, any goods or services. A commercial unit shall be deemed occupied when either water, sewer or electricity services
are being supplied thereto.
Commodity means material that can be sold in a spot or future market for processing and use or reuse. Each commodity shall retain its own identity and be
kept separate.
Commodity buyer means a buyer or processor, selected by the contractor.
Construction debris means waste building materials resulting form construction, remodeling, repair or demolition operations at a residential unit or
municipal facility.
Container or (bin) means a receptacle designed for the purpose of curbside collection recyclable material. The receptacle shall be one made of plastic that
has been accepted by other cities with experience in curbside recycling.
Container pickup means the dumping of a trash dumpster that has been provided by the city or its agent.
Contractor means the person, corporation or partnership performing collection under contract with the city.
Customer means the account owner, i.e., the person, party, association or corporation responsible for the utility account.
Dead animals means animals or portions thereof equal to or greater than ten pounds in weight that have expired from any cause, except those slaughtered
or killed for human use or consumption.
Disposal site means a refuse depository including, but not limited to, sanitary landfills, transfer stations, incinerators, and waste processing/separation
centers licensed, permitted or approved by all governmental bodies and agencies having jurisdiction and requiring such licenses, permits or approvals to
receive refuse and dead animals for processing for final disposal.
Hand pickup means the method of refuse collection whereby 30-gallon trash bags, the bags placed in 30-gallon trash cans or containers of equivalent size
are picked up and thrown into the city's or its agent's refuse disposal vehicle.
Household trash means refuse resulting from the occupancy of living quarters that requires routine disposal and that can be disposed of through placement
in a 30-gallon trash bag, or bags put in 30-gallon trash cans, or containers of equivalent size. Excluded from the definition of household trash are items
such as: crates, pallets, lumber, tires, furniture, natural debris, car or truck parts, appliances, mattresses or other large and bulky items that cannot fit into a
30-gallon trash bag, or bags placed in can and are not disposed of on a regular basis by a household.
Garbage means an and all dead animals of less than ten pounds weight, except those slaughtered for human consumption; every accumulation of waste
(animal, vegetable and/or or other matter) that results from the preparation, processing, consumption, dealing in, handling, packaging, canning, storage,
transportation, decay or decomposition of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, grains or other animal or vegetable matter (including, but not by way of
limitation, used tin cans and other food containers: and all put rescible or easily decomposable animal or vegetable waste matter which is likely to attract
flies or rodents): except (in all cases) any matter included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, hazardous waste, rubbish or
stable matter.
Hazardous waste means waste, in any amount, which is defined, characterized or designated as hazardous by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency or appropriate state agency by or pursuant to federal or state law, or waste, in any amount, which is regulated under federal or state law. For
purposes of refuge contract, the term hazardous waste shall also include motor oil, gasoline, paint and paint cans.
Kitchen garbage means refuse resulting from the storage, processing, preparation and serving of food.
Medical debris means material used in the care of medical or dental patients and the medical or dental care of rest home or nursing home occupants.
Natural debris means grass clippings or cuttings, lawn or garden weeds, tree or bush prunings, leaves and other organic refuse generated through the
maintenance of lawns and gardens that can be placed in a 30-gallon trash bag, or bags placed in a 30-gallon trash can or containers of equivalent size or is
tied into bundles not exceeding four feet in length.
Premises means any business, house, office, theater, hotel, restaurant, cafe, tourist court, trailer or mobile home park, apartment or apartment complex,
condominium or condominium complex, school, motel, travel trailer park, hospital, medical or dental office, nursing center, rest home, private or public
mall, vacant lot, private residence, or other place within the city limits where refuse of any kind accumulates or may accumulate.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 225/444
Producer means an occupant of a residential or commercial unit who generates refuse.
Recycle means to reclaim waste materials such as glass, plastic, cans, etc., by using in the manufacture of new products.
Recyclable materials means those commodities which are collected by contractor pursuant to the contract documents such as newsprint, aluminum, and
metal cans, plastics, or any other commodity set forth in contract documents and specifications for solid waste collection and disposal.
Refuse means the term shall refer to residential and commercial refuse and bulk waste, commercial debris and stable matter generated at a residential or
community unit unless context otherwise requires.
Residential refuse means all garbage and rubbish generated by a producer at a residential unit.
Residential unit means a dwelling within the corporate limits of the city occupied by a person or group of persons comprising not more than four families.
A residential unit shall be deemed occupied when either water, sewer or domestic light and power services are being supplied thereto. A condominium
dwelling, whether of single or multi-level construction, consisting of four or less contiguous or separate single-family dwelling units, shall be treated as a
residential unit, except that each single-family dwelling within any such residential unit shall be billed separately as a residential unit.
Rubbish means all waste wood, wood products, tree trimmings, dead plants, weeds, leaves, dead trees or branches thereof, chips, shavings, sawdust,
printed matter, paper, pasteboard rags, straw, used and discarded mattresses, used and discarded clothing, used and discarded shoes and boots, combustible
waste pulp and other products such as are used for packaging, or wrapping crockery and glass, ashes, cinders, floor sweeping, glass, mineral or metallic
substances, and any and all other waste materials not included in the definition of bulky waste, construction debris, dead animals, garbage, hazardous
waste or stable matter.
Stable matter means all manure and other matter normally accumulated in or about a stable, or any animals, livestock or poultry enclosure, and resulting
from the keeping of animals, poultry or livestock.
(Ord. No. 949,  2, 8-10-93; Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 82-27. Statement of purpose and responsibility.
(a) It shall be the duty of every person, firm, corporation, owner, manager, tenant, lessee, lessor or occupant to ensure that the premises in which they
have an interest, occupy, manage or represent are kept free of all forms of refuse, garbage, trash and debris by utilizing the legal methods and procedures
for the disposal of waste and refuse as outlined in this article and the appropriate state and federal statutes pertaining to environmental protection, health
and sanitation.
(b) The city shall provide a means for the disposal of kitchen garbage, household trash, business trash and natural debris subject to the limitations and
conditions stipulated in this article, charge a fee for the provision of this service, require the appropriate disposal of other forms of refuse, and ensure
compliance with this article through application of the enforcement provisions and penalties of this article.
(Ord. No. 949,  3, 8-10-93)
Sec. 82-28. Types of service provided.
(a) Except as allowed by subsection (b) below, every account in the city will be provided with and billed for garbage service whether it is used or not.
(1) Six basic kinds of service are to be provided as follows:
a. Residential hand pickup.
b. Commercial hand pickup.
c. Dumpster service.
d. Compactor container service.
e. Pickup of natural debris.
f. Recycling.
(2) The regular types of service provided will be as follows:
a. Single-family residence, duplex, triplex: Hand pickup. The bill is to be sent to the name appearing on the utility bill.
b. Owner occupied business sites, freestanding business locations or co-located businesses not having the same manager or owner: Option of
hand pickup (commercial schedule) or dumpster service subject to the restrictions outlined below. The bill is to be sent to the name appearing
on the utility bill.
c. Three or more co-located businesses (i.e., strip shopping center, malls, office park, etc.) having a common manager, owner or landlord:
Dumpster service. The bill is to be sent to the property manager (account owner).
d. Quadraplex; apartment buildings; condominiums; all establishments processing, preparing, selling or serving food; all hotels, motels,
travel trailer parks, RV parks, bed and breakfast establishments having four or more rooms (spaces) for rent: Dumpster service. The bill is to be
sent to the account owner.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 226/444
e. Compactor container service shall be made available to those listed above in b, c and d, provided that such are equipped with a compactor
type system acceptable to the city. The bill for compactor container service shall be mailed directly to customer by the city's authorized agent.
(b) The following types or kinds of service shall not be exclusive, nor the rates or billing thereof determined, by the city:
(1) Temporary cleanup or construction containers.
(2) Medical or industrial waste.
(Ord. No. 949,  4(A), 8-10-93; Ord. No. 1003,  1, 8-8-95; Ord. No. 1020,  1, 2-13-96; Ord. No. 1298,  1, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-29. Collection requirements.
(a) Contractor shall provide curbside collection service for the collection of residential refuse and hand collected commercial refuse to each such
residential and commercial unit two time(s) per week. With a maximum of six 30-gallon containers or 30-gallon trash bags per collection. Containers and
bags shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day.
(b) Contractor shall provide curbside collection service for the collection of recyclable material from each residential unit one time each week.
Containers shall be placed at curbside by 7:00 a.m. on the designated collection day.
(c) Contractor shall not provide for the collection from residential or hand collected commercial units construction debris, noncontainerized rubbish and
stable matter.
(d) Hand collected commercial units shall be entitled to the same services (without recycling or brush collection) as a residential unit. Collection shall be
twice a week but shall not exceed six 30-gallon containers per pickup. Businesses that exceed the six can limit will be required to contract for a dumpster
and choose a size and pickup schedule.
(e) Each dumpster bin shall be placed in an accessible outside location on a hard surface on the private property of the customer according to individual
agreement. Such locations must not interfere with or endanger the movement of vehicles, pedestrians, or obstruct alleys. Contractor may decline to collect
refuse in bins not so placed.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-30. Location of containers, bags and bundles for collection.
Each container, bag or bundle shall be placed at curbside for collection: curbside refers to that portion of right-of-way adjacent to paved or traveled city
roadways. Containers, bags and bundles shall be placed as close to the roadway as possible without interfering with or endangering the movement of
vehicles or pedestrians. When construction work is being performed in the right-of-way, containers, bags and bundles shall be placed as close as possible
to an access point for the collection vehicle. Contractor may decline to collect any container, bag or bundle not so placed. EXCEPT those containers
located at the dwelling of a handicapped or disabled person (in those instances a suitable location agreed upon by the person and contractor shall be used).
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-31. Hours of operation.
Collection of residential refuse and hand collected commercial refuse shall not start before 7:00 a.m. or continue after 7:00 p.m. on the same day.
Exceptions to collection hours shall be effected only upon the mutual agreement of the city and contractor or when contractor reasonably determines that
an exception is necessary in order to complete collection on an existing collection route due to unusual circumstances. Collection of commercial refuse in
bins shall take place according to individual agreement between contract and commercial customer.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-32. Service delivery limitations.
The following limitations and restrictions apply to the service to be provided by the city or its authorized agent.
(1) Under no circumstances shall the city or its authorized agent be required to pick up natural debris that is not containerized or bundled,
medical debris, bulk waste or refuse not properly placed in bags or bags placed in cans or dumpsters as part of the base fee.
(2) The city or its authorized agent will not be required to collect those commodities which are mixed with garbage, trash and rubbish normally
collected by sanitation crews. The authorized agent will tag the container as being unacceptable for collection.
(3) Holidays. No collection will be provided on: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and
Christmas Day. Contractor may decide to observe any or all of the aforementioned holidays by suspension of collection service on the holiday, but
such decision in no manner relieves contractor of its obligation to provide collection service at residential units and hand collected commercial
units at least one time per week.
(4) Severe weather conditions. The city's authorized agent shall provide all supervision, materials, equipment, labor and all other items necessary
to complete said work in accordance with contract. The work under said contract does not include the collection of any increased volume resulting
for a flood, hurricane, or similar or different act of God over which the authorized agent has no control. In case of a storm, flood, hurricane or other
disaster or other acts of God, the city shall grant its authorized agent reasonable variances from regular schedules and routes.
(5) Disposal of medical debris. The city shall not be responsible for the removal of medical debris; however, those customers having medical
debris may contract with the city's authorized agent for its removal.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 227/444
Sec. 82-33. Hand pickup requirements.
(a) Garbage cans must be kept in a sanitary condition at all times, have a tightly fitting lid and two handles on the can. Garbage bags are to be tied or
sealed so as to prevent the scattering of the contents when placed at the collection point.
(b) Residential hand pickup customers are to place the refuse for pickup at a curbside for collection.
(c) Commercial hand pickup customers are to ensure that the refuse is placed at a collection point that is acceptable to the city's authorized agent, but
shall be kept as far away as practical from residential property.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-34. Dumpster requirements.
(a) Dumpster customers are to ensure that the dumpster is placed in an outside location on a hard surface according to individual agreement, but shall be
kept as far away as practical from residential property. All dumpsters located within 100 feet of a residential neighborhood shall not be picked up before
7:00 a.m. Pickups may be declined if bins are not so placed.
(b) The number of dumpsters and any changes in the number of pickups per week are to be arranged by the customer with the city's authorized agent.
Resolution of any conflict in this manner shall be made by the city manager or his designee. In all cases the determination of the city staff shall be final.
(c) Dumpster customers are required to arrange for enough dumpsters and/or pickups so as to comply with the sanitation requirements and the
cleanliness standard.
(d) A collection point for dumpsters is a place where one or more dumpsters are located adjacent to each other. The total bill appearing on an account
will be determined by computing the number of dumpsters and pickups.
(e) Mattresses are not acceptable in dumpsters.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-35. Additional pickup request.
Customers desiring to have an additional pickup are to contact the city's authorized agent directly. The agent and the customer shall agree on the
scheduling and fee for the special pickup; the agent shall bill the customer directly for this service. Bulk waste, refuse above the standard residential or
commercial limits or natural debris that is neither containerized or bundled or other refuse not included in the standard pickup shall be determined by the
city's authorized agent, and agreed to by the customer, prior to the pickup.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-36. Required deposit.
Any refuse customer not already having a deposit on record with the city shall be required to establish a deposit in the amount equal to the bill for two
months based upon the level and type of service provided.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-37. Billing procedure.
Except as provided in this section, the billing for refuse service shall coincide with the billing for other utility services provided by the city. Refuse service
shall be billed jointly with utility services and shall be due and payable, by the 15th day of each month for service rendered for previous month and shall
be considered to be delinquent after the 25th of the month; such accounts shall be paid at the city hall. The city's authorized agent shall bill each customer
directly for compactor container service as the parties may agree, in accordance with the fee schedule as determined by the city.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-38. Disconnection of service for nonpayment.
(a) If any person shall be considered delinquent in payment of charges for refuse collection, the city shall have the right to take the following action:
(1) If water is provided water will be disconnected and refuse service shall be suspended; and
(2) If wastewater is available, wastewater will be disconnected and refuse service shall be suspended; and
(3) If only refuse only is available, collection shall be suspended.
(b) Any time refuse collection is suspended pursuant to subsection (a) above.
(c) When water and/or wastewater service is so disconnected as herein provided, the code enforcement officer shall be notified immediately, so as to
ensure the appropriate action on behalf of the city in accordance with the requirements to maintain public health, sanitation and safety. The city shall
charge and before any reconnection of service is made, or service resumed, collect a reconnection fee, in addition to all sums in arrears. The reconnect fee
is $20.00 if made during regular business hours and $30.00 if made after regular working hours.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-39. Fee schedule.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 228/444
(a) Monthly fees: The monthly fees charged for refuse collection shall be as follows:
(1) Residential 96-gallon cart rate: $22.70.
(2) Additional 96-gallon residential cart rate: $19.36.
(3) Residential 65-gallon cart rate: $22.16.
(4) Commercial 96-gallon cart rate: $32.80.
(5) Commercial container customers, each additional container price and extra pickup charges:
Commercial Container Customers
Container Size 1X 2X 3X 4X 5X 6X
2 cu yd $87.84 $172.38 $217.90 $266.71 $339.67 $390.64
3 cu yd $105.34 $208.98 $264.24 $317.20 $370.47 $441.92
4 cu yd $123.98 $234.38 $333.38 $460.70 $568.23 $701.48
6 cu yd $146.12 $280.92 $416.53 $547.53 $698.63 $710.91
8 cu yd $184.71 $360.25 $501.24 $612.76 $797.46 $955.48
Each Additional Container
Container Size 1X 2X 3X 4X 5X 6X
2 cu yd $67.63 $113.57 $151.55 $198.35 $253.63 $292.61
3 cu yd $75.81 $142.16 $177.82 $224.57 $279.90 $334.78
4 cu yd $90.18 $172.45 $254.99 $347.06 $427.93 $530.32
6 cu yd $108.05 $219.75 $306.70 $416.88 $532.56 $626.50
8 cu yd $138.03 $257.31 $377.19 $471.35 $612.62 $734.89
(b) Special fees: The one-time fees charged for refuse collection shall be as follows:
(1) Overload/violation fee: $50.00 for each separate occurrence.
(2) Lock device installation fee: $50.00 for initial installation.
(3) Exchange fee: $95.00 for a dumpster that must be exchanged due to miss-use of equipment.
(4) Relocation fee (customer requested): $50.00 for a customer requested relocation of dumpster.
(5) Extra lift fee: $80.00.
(6) Delivery fee: $50.00.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1521,  1, 10-26-10; Ord. No. 1583,  1, 9-11-12; Ord. No. 1611,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1634,  12, 8-26-14;
Ord. No. 1654,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1730,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 82-40. Disposal of recyclables.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 229/444
Collection routes shall be established by the contractor. Collection routes shall be modeled as closely as possible to existing routes to minimize customer
confusion. Contractor shall submit a map designating the collection routes to the city for their approval.
(Ord. No. 1410,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 82-41. Exceptions to service, fees.
If the city determines that due to the unusual nature of an account or collection point the provisions of this article cannot be fairly and properly applied,
then the authorized agent, the staff and the customer shall negotiate a reasonable service delivery schedule and schedule of fees. Under no circumstances
shall the city or the authorized agent be expected to underwrite or subsidize the service to be provided.
(Ord. No. 949,  10, 8-10-93)
Sec. 82-42. Enforcement.
(a) It shall be the duty of the code enforcement officer to ensure compliance with this article and to file the necessary complaints in municipal court to
prosecute violations of this article.
(b) It shall be the duty of the health officer to make inspections in accordance with the health and sanitation codes of the city and of the state and to
inform the code enforcement officer of violations and any special (required) remedial actions.
(Ord. No. 949,  8(A), 8-10-93)
Sec. 82-43. Illegal acts.
(a) It shall be illegal for any person or party to dump any form of refuse on any premises inside the city limits other than as stipulated in this article.
(b) It shall be illegal for any person or party to permit their premises to be used as a dump site.
(c) It shall be illegal for any person or party to place refuse in the trash can or dumpster of another party without first obtaining their consent. (This shall
not be construed as making it illegal for two or more parties to agree to share a dumpster. The customer shall be the party receiving the bill; the other
parties will have to be identified.)
(d) It shall be illegal for any person or party to accept refuse from off of the premises for the purpose of disposing of it under the services and fees
established by the city.
(e) It shall be illegal to dump anything other than natural debris in the community compost pile.
(f) It shall be illegal to mix medical debris with other forms of refuse.
(g) It shall be illegal to fail to maintain a premises in accordance with the standards outlined in section 82-27
(Ord. No. 949,  8(B), 8-10-93)
Sec. 82-44. Penalty.
Each day of violation and each illegal act may be separately punishable as a class C misdemeanor, having a maximum fine as provided in section 1-7(a), in
the municipal court of the city. Complaints may be brought by the code enforcement staff of the city or the owners, managers or occupants of premises
where a violation has occurred.
(Ord. No. 949,  6(A), 8, 8-10-93)
Chapters 83-85 RESERVED
Chapter 86
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 86-1. Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code.
Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance:
(1) Dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, improving or vacating any street or other public way in
the city.
(2) Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 230/444
(3) Establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city.
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code.
(Code 1972,  20-1)
Sec. 86-2. Permit for pipe or pole line in street, alley or easement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, lay, construct or maintain any pipe or pole line for any purpose within a city street, alley or easement
unless such person first obtains a permit from the city to build, erect, lay, construct or maintain such line. Such permits shall be issued by the director of
public works and shall be conditioned as he deems necessary to protect the best interest of the inhabitants of the city.
(Code 1972,  20-2)
Secs. 86-386-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. STREET NAMES, SIGNS AND ADDRESS NUMBERS
Sec. 86-26. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Addressing agent: The Aransas County Appraisal District.
Appraisal district: The Aransas County Appraisal District.
City: The City of Rockport, Texas.
City council: The governing body of the City of Rockport, Texas.
Commissioners court: The governing body of Aransas County.
County road engineer: The county road engineer for Aransas County, as appointed by Aransas County Commissioners Court.
Director of public works: The public works director for the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city manager.
Streets: A traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane,
place or however otherwise designated.
Sub-divider/developer: A person, persons or corporation undertaking the procedures of subdividing and platting of land for the purpose of development.
The term "developer" may be synonymous with "owner of property" or "property owner" and may be the agent of same.
(Ord. No. 878,  A, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 1570,  1, 5-22-12)
Sec. 86-27. Standards for street naming, street signs, and house/address numbering.
(a) Street naming: Street names are declared public property. Street names shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the city/county,
with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council/commissioners' court.
(1) An alphabetized master street name list shall be maintained by the county clerk and appraisal district.
(2) The name of a new street shall not duplicate the name of an existing street within the city/county (also reference city platting regulations).
(3) The continuation of an existing street shall have the same name even if in different jurisdictions and even though it may change directions
(also reference city platting regulations).
(4) New street names shall be no more than 20 characters in length.
(5) Street name abbreviations shall follow the guideline as set by the U.S. Postal Service.
(6) Street prefixes of "N", "E", "S", and "W" indicates direction and are to be used only with streets in two or more of the north, east, south, or
west quadrants.
(7) Street suffixes for new streets "Street", "Road", "Lane", "Boulevard", "Drive", "Parkway", "Avenue", "Place", "Court", "Cove", "Trail",
"North", "East", "South" and "West" shall be used based upon the discretion of the cities' council/commissioners' court only.
(8) Street suffixes "Circle", "Loop", "Cul-de-Sac" if used in conjunction with the street name shall be used only for streets which actually form a
circle, loop, or cul-de-sac.
(9) Streets in new subdivisions shall comply with items (1) through (8) above. The sub-divider/developer shall provide a plat to the
cities/county/appraisal office at a scale of one to 400 with proposed names of streets and house numbers. Said house numbering shall be on the
basis of one number for every individually buildable lot. Said house numbers shall conform to standards in this ordinance/court order under
house/address numbering. The sub-divider shall provide street signs, meeting cities/county specifications, at the intersection of all streets.
a. All houses, buildings or addresses shall be numbered following nearby streets in style.
b. As the blocks progress in distance from the base line, the beginning number shall be raised 100 with each block.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 231/444
(b) Street signs: Street signs are declared public property. Street signs shall be public property and shall be subject to change by the cities/county, with or
without notice, at the discretion of the cities' council/commissioners' court.
(1) Location: Street signs shall be installed at the intersection of all streets and highways and at such other locations as may be determined to be
necessary by the director of public works/county road engineer.
(2) Plates: Extruded, aluminum, .080 thickness, six inches high by 24 inches, 30 inches or 36 inches wide as necessary. Thermo-setting acrylic
baked enamel, green background with reflectorized copy.
(3) Copy: Four-inch standard alphabet "B" series. Prefix and suffix abbreviations are two-inch standard alphabet "C" series. Block numbers,
which are required in order to indicate address range, must be two-inch copy on top of suffix. All copy shall be white in order to contrast with green
background.
(4) Hardware: Smooth finish, diecast of high strength aluminum alloy no. 380 under 400 tons pressure with minimum tensile strength of 45,000
P.S.I. Special sawtooth heat treated plated steel fasteners secure sign blades against removal by vandals, and minimize fatigue failures in the sign
blade resulting from wind vibration. For 23/8? O.D. galvanized tubular sign posts.
(5) Height: Street signs shall be erected with a minimum height of seven feet from the level of the near edge of the pavement to the bottom of the
sign. If, however, a traffic control sign is mounted below a street sign, the bottom of the street sign shall be at least nine feet and the bottom of the
traffic control sign at least six feet above the level of the pavement edge.
(c) House/address numbering: House numbers are declared public property. Assigned house numbers shall be public property and shall be subject to
change by the cities/county, with or without notice, at the discretion of the city council/commissioners' court.
(1) The appraisal district shall assign the proper numbers for houses upon application.
(2) A complete, current record of the numbering of all houses, buildings, and addresses shall be maintained at the appraisal office as a public
record.
(3) The owner or occupant of every house, building, or address shall place the number assigned by the appraisal office in a conspicuous place on
or near such house, building, or address so that it may be plainly seen from the street. It shall be the owner or occupant's responsibility to purchase
the numbers wherever they desire.
(4) House numbers shall be at least three inches high and shall be of a contrasting color to the background and shall be plainly legible and visible
from the street or road fronting the property. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public
way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address numbers shall be Arabic or alphabetical letters. The
sizing of house numbers regulated herein shall trump the city's building/residential codes requirements for sizing.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to alter, deface, or take down any number placed on any property except for repair or replacement of such
numbers.
(6) No building permit shall be issued for any building until the owner or developer has procured from the Aransas County Appraisal District the
official number of the premises. Final approval for a certificate of occupancy of any building erected or repaired after the effective date of the
ordinance/court order from which this section derives shall be withheld until permanent and proper numbers have been displayed in accordance
with the requirements.
(7) House/address numbers for apartments, trailer parks, and motels shall use the primary number assigned into the private driveway or main
entrance office followed by a suffix number or letter to designate the specific building or lot as designated by the addressing agent.
(8) Condominiums developed on named streets shall be treated as individual residences for the purposes of addressing. Those complexes which
are not on named streets shall be treated the same as apartments and motels in the preceding paragraph.
( Ord. No. 1570,  1, 5-22-12)
Sec. 86-28. Nonconforming street signs.
Any street signs found to be nonconforming shall remain in place unless or until it becomes necessary to replace them in the normal course of maintenance
and repair.
(Ord. No. 878,  B, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 1570,  1, 5-22-12)
NoteFormerly numbered as  86-27
Sec. 86-29. Requests for modification, delay or exemption.
Any petition or request for modification, delay or exemption to the adopted standards must be approved by the city council prior to its implementation.
(Ord. No. 878,  C, 2-12-91; Ord. No. 1570,  1, 5-22-12)
NoteFormerly numbered as  86-28
Secs. 86-3086-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. CONSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS*
Sec. 86-51. Permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 232/444
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, remove or replace any sidewalk, driveway or other way for the use of any
character of vehicle on or across any sidewalk, parkway or other space between any public roadway or right-of-way and any private property, without first
securing a permit so to do from the city building and development department; provided, that the approval by the department for driveway shall constitute
a permit for a driveway complying with the indicated specifications.
(b) Application for a permit under this section shall be made at the building and development department, together with a map, plat or a sketch drawn to
scale fully detailing the nature of the proposed improvements and the location thereof. If the application complies with the requirements of this article and
such other regulations concerning the matter as may be provided, a permit shall be issued by the city building and development department on the form
established by the department.
(c) The fee for a permit required by this section shall be as prescribed under Chapter 22, Article IX of the City Code.
(Code 1972,  20-12; Ord. No. 1210,  1, 2-9-02)
Sec. 86-52. Compliance with article, other ordinances.
All improvements for which a permit is required by this article shall be constructed in accordance with the regulations set forth in this article and other
ordinances adopted by the city council.
(Code 1972,  20-13)
Sec. 86-53. Specifications prescribed.
Driveways providing access from private property to any public right-of-way or roadway shall be constructed in accordance with the following
requirements:
(1) No driveway shall have a width measured along the boundary line between the public right-of-way and the private property of more than 35
feet, except that, upon a showing under the provisions of section 86-54, such driveway may be not in excess of 45 feet in width.
(2) Every driveway shall be so designed and constructed as to provide for a sidewalk having a minimum width of five feet measured at right
angles to the boundary line between the public right-of-way and the private property. Such sidewalk shall be constructed so as to have one edge
thereof in line with any existing sidewalk, and if there is no existing sidewalk the sidewalk shall be so constructed as to have one edge thereof
coinciding with the boundary line between the public right-of-way and the private property line, or in keeping with the general practice established
by the existence of sidewalks on a majority of the property within the block where the driveway in question is to be placed.
(3) Except where the curb is a roll type curb, the curb return on all driveways shall have a radius of not less than three feet and the point where
the return falls tangent to the curb shall be within the property lines extended of the property which the driveway is designed to service.
(4) Sidewalks shall be constructed at an elevation so as to provide for a minimum of one-fourth inch per foot fall from the edge of the sidewalk
farthest from the property line to the top of the curb; provided that, where the established practice in the block of the majority of the existing
sidewalks, on the plat approved by the planning and zoning commission for the subdivision, provides for a roll type curb, the sidewalk shall be
constructed so that the edge farthest from the property line shall be at the same grade as the top of the curb.
(5) Where a ramp section of the driveway is to be constructed, the ramp shall reach the grade of the sidewalk at a distance of not less than five
feet from the outside edge of the street curbline.
(6) The grade for all curbs, sidewalks, driveways and ramps shall be fixed by the city council.
(7) All driveway approaches, ramps, sidewalks and curbs constructed in connection therewith shall be constructed of concrete having a minimum
of 2,500 psi in 28 days, and shall have a minimum thickness of six inches, and shall have reinforcing consisting of a minimum of six-inch by sixinch
No. 6 wire mesh.
(Code 1972,  20-14)
Sec. 86-54. Variances from prescribed specifications.
Upon a showing that unusual circumstances exist, or that a need for a driveway of greater width exists, or some variance from the requirements set forth in
section 86-53 should be made, where such variances will not be contrary to the public interest, and that literal enforcement of the provisions of section 86-
53 will result in unnecessary hardship such regulations may be varied by approval of the city council, provided that, in no instance, shall any driveway
opening be in excess of 45 feet in width. Any person requesting that the regulations prescribed in section 86-53 be varied because of unusual
circumstances shall file a written request therefor with the city secretary, setting forth the circumstances to show that literal enforcement of the provisions
of such section will result in unnecessary hardship.
(Code 1972,  20-15)
Secs. 86-5586-75. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. CLOSING PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 86-76. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 233/444
Contractor means any person or group of persons entering into an agreement with the city.
Detour means an alternate route in which vehicular traffic is directed around a street which is closed.
Emergency means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state, that calls for immediate action.
Manual means the Manual on Uniform Barricading Standards.
Permit means a written letter of approval from the responsible person or his appointed representative.
Public right-of-way means any public street, highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk.
Responsible person means the responsible person of the designated department of the city or any appointed representative.
Streets and alleys. The term "street" shall mean a traveled way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway,
throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated.
(1) Major thoroughfares or arterial streets are principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended to connect
remote parts of the city and which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic and shall include but not be limited to each street designated
as a major street on the major street plan.
(2) Collector streets are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the major system of arterial streets and highways including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such development.
(3) Minor streets are those which are used primarily for access to abutting residential properties which are intended to serve traffic within a
limited residential district.
(4) Alleys are minor traveled ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting
on a street.
(Ord. No. 573,  II(A)-(E), (H)-(J), 8-9-82)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 86-77. Construction procedures generally.
(a) Any person who undertakes to perform any work upon, in, under, above or about any public street, highway, roadway, alley or sidewalk, hereafter
collectively called public right-of-way, which requires that the street be partially or completely closed for construction and/or maintenance operation which
work shall require excavation within or occupancy of the whole or a portion of the width of any such public right-of-way by equipment, materials, debris
or workers shall use barricades, signals, flares, flags and all other traffic control and warning devices and procedures about the work area during the
duration of the work within the public right-of-way of the type and in the manner required by the Uniform Barricading Standards adopted in this article.
Such persons shall also be required to obtain a permit from the responsible person if the specifications stated in section 86-79 are applicable, with the
exception of the state department of transportation conducting work on any state designated system. In such cases no permit is required. This permit must
be acquired before construction is begun. Purpose of the permit is to ensure that ample consideration has been given to the effect of the construction work
on the flow of traffic.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to provide, erect, place and maintain all warning signs, traffic control devices and barricades
required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices or the responsible person. All such signs, devices and barricades shall be in good
condition, clean and legible and shall be of the type required by the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices; provided, that the responsible
person may authorize the use of different special devices and equipment if, in his opinion, such equipment will be at least as effective for its intended
purpose as that set forth for such purpose in the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices. When additional regulatory signs are deemed
necessary by the responsible person such signing will be installed as directed by the designated department along with such regulatory signs as are required
to be provided by the city as required by the manual.
(Ord. No. 573,  I, 8-9-82)
Sec. 86-78. Permit required.
(a) Application. When a permit is required, the permit application shall unless otherwise authorized by the responsible person for good cause shown, be
filed with the responsible person at least five days prior to the day the applicant seeks to first close or block any part of the roadway and shall contain the
following information:
(1) The name, telephone number, local address and principal place of business of the applicant.
(2) The name and day and night telephone number of the engineer, foreman or other person who will be in charge of the construction or repairs
for which the application is requested.
(3) The times of the day and total number of calendar days the applicant seeks to block the roadway.
(4) A statement signed by the applicant or a person authorized to bind the applicant, that the applicant will indemnify and forever hold the city
harmless against each and every claim, demand or cause of action that may be made or come against it by reason of or in any way arising out of the
closing or blocking of the roadway by the applicant under a permit from the city, if the permit is granted.
(5) A standard barricading layout showing the placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project.
(6) An explanation as to the nature or type of work that is to be performed along with its location.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 234/444
(7) Any other information deemed necessary by the responsible person.
(b) Approval or disapproval. The responsible person shall either approve or disapprove the application in five business days after it is submitted. The
responsible person may approve an application either as applied for or subject to special requirements, as provided in subsection (c) of this section, which
special requirements shall be endorsed on the permit when issued and become a part thereof. If an application is not approved, the responsible person shall
so notify the applicant in writing stating the reasons for disapproval. An applicant may, if he so desires, undertake the revision of the unapproved
application and resubmit it to the responsible person who shall approve, approve subject to special requirements, or disapprove the amended application
within two business days. The responsible person may disapprove applications for permits under this article only for the following reasons:
(1) The proposed barricading, channelizing, signing, warning or other traffic control procedures or the equipment therefor do not comply with the
requirements of the manual.
(2) The nature of the work to be performed or its location is such that the work may, without imposing any undue hardship on the applicant, be
performed without the necessity of blocking or closing the roadway.
(3) The work or the manner in which it is to be performed will violate a city ordinance or a state statute.
(4) Failure to furnish all of the information required by this article or, except for good cause shown, to file the application within the time
prescribed by this article.
(5) Misrepresenting or falsifying any information in the application.
(c) Special requirements. The responsible person may at the time he approves an application or anytime after a permit is issued require:
(1) The use or specific location of additional barricades, signals, signs or other traffic control or safety devices or the pursuance of special traffic
control or safety procedures.
(2) That the work be performed only at certain hours during the day or night, or during the specified days of the week.
(3) That only a specified area or not more than a specified number of lanes shall be blocked at the same time or at specified times of the day.
(4) That materials and equipment used in the work site and dirt removed from any excavation be located other than in the vehicle traffic lanes of
such roadway.
(5) That all equipment be moved from the traffic lanes and any excavation in the traffic lanes be covered or filled with materials of sufficient
strength and construction to permit vehicular traffic to pass over such excavation during all or part of the peak traffic periods or at night.
When such requirements are deemed necessary by the responsible person in the interest of public safety and to avoid traffic congestion, any such special
requirements shall be endorsed on the permit and shall be a part thereof.
(d) Revocation. Any designated responsible person or his authorized representative may revoke a permit issued under this article if any of the permit
holder's barricading, signing, channelizing, warning or other traffic control procedures or the equipment at the work site do not comply with the
requirements of the manual, or with any special requirements imposed by the responsible person. The permit holder, or the person named as responsible
for or in charge of the work in the permit, shall first be notified of the failure or defect and be given a reasonable time, such length of time to be determined
by the responsible person and not to exceed 24 hours, to correct same before such permit is revoked. If a permit issued under this article is revoked, it shall
be unlawful to continue to block the roadway, except to restore the site to its proper condition as required in this article.
(e) Restoration. If a permit is revoked, the permit holder shall immediately commence operations to restore the work area within the roadway to its
proper condition, such work to be completed within 24 hours. In addition, except as required to restore the work area to its proper condition, the permit
holder shall remove all equipment, materials and debris from the roadway. If such restoration is not done, the city shall be authorized, at its election, to
take charge of the work and restore the premises to its proper condition and shall be entitled to recover from the permit holder by civil action the actual
expenses incurred by the city in restoring the premises, including but not limited to, cost of labor, materials, overhead, rental of any equipment used by the
city in restoring the site and attorney's fees, and for such purposes the city shall have a right of action against any bonds in effect running from the holder
of the permit to the city, conditioned upon compliance with the ordinances of the city in the performance of the work.
(f) Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine as
provided in section 1-7(a). Such penalty shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other rights or remedies the city may have.
(Ord. No. 573,  III(A), 8-9-82)
Sec. 86-79. Persons requiring permits.
(a) Contractor's requirements.
(1) Any contractor undertaking any work whether of his own, or under contract for any other person, and such work is within a city street and
requires that a set of plans be drawn up due to the extensive and/or complex nature of the work, will be subject to the provisions set forth in this
section, and must file for a permit before beginning construction. Proof must also be shown that he has obtained approval by other affected agencies
of the city to actually perform the work.
(2) A plan must be prepared by the contracting agency showing where work is to be performed. The plan will include a standard barricading
layout showing placement of barricades, cones and informational signs used on the project. In most cases, layouts will be similar to those shown in
the latter part of the attached manual. Deviation from the manual will be allowed only with approval of the responsible person or his appointed
representative.
(3) The plan as mentioned in subsection (a)(2) of this section must be submitted a minimum of five business days prior to actual beginning of the
construction work. This time period will allow the designated department the opportunity to survey the construction site in an attempt to uncover
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 235/444
any traffic problems which might develop as a result of the barricading.
(4) Each contractor or construction agency will provide with his barricading plan a listing of all persons directly responsible for the safety on
each project to include an address or a telephone listing at which the person can be reached at any hour of the day if a hazardous condition
develops.
(b) Contract work by city-prepared construction plans. If the contractor undertakes work based on plans prepared by the designated department, all
detour and barricading requirements will be inserted as part of the construction plans. In this situation, the contractor's acceptance of the construction
project will serve as indication that he understands the layout and is responsible subject to the penalties established in this article.
(c) City forces and public utility company requirements.
(1) All city forces, as well as public utility companies performing construction work within a street which requires that a set of plans be drawn up
due to the extensive and/or complex nature of work, will be subject to the same requirements established in subsection (a) of this section. Such
work would include major street construction (street cuts, street widening, etc.), water and sewerage line laying or relocation or off-street
construction which requires that a portion of the adjacent roadway be barricaded.
(2) Construction work performed by city forces or utility companies, minor enough such that a set of plans need not be drawn up, will not be
subject to the same requirements established in subsection (a) of this section. Such work includes minor street construction (resurfacing, patching,
striping), minor utility work (usage of manholes such that a lane must be barricaded), etc. These forces will be required, however, to comply with
all other provisions set forth in this manual as to the construction site barricade layout and signing. In addition, the responsible person or his
authorized representative shall be contacted before the construction work is begun and be informed of the location and nature of construction. This
work shall not be performed during the peak hour congestion periods of 7:00-9:00 a.m. and 4:00-6:00 p.m. unless approved by the responsible
person.
(Ord. No. 573,  III(B), 8-9-82)
Sec. 86-80. Emergency situations.
The requirements of this article are to be used for all planned construction projects. In the event of an emergency-type situation, notification of work to be
done can be made by telephone directly to the responsible person or his appointed representative, thereby, bypassing the requirements of this article. Under
these conditions the contractor or agency will still be required to follow the basic barricading standards as outlined in the manual.
(Ord. No. 573,  III(C), 8-9-82)
Secs. 86-8186-84. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. PUBLIC WAY CLOSURE POLICY
Sec. 86-85. Policy.
No street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, shall ever be closed, narrowed or vacated if doing so would result in a violation of or be in conflict
with the city's land development codes, or otherwise be contrary to the best interest of the public, considering all reasonable future use of such street, alley
or other public way. Any petitioner requesting a street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, be closed, narrowed or vacated must comply with all
the following sections of this policy, but such shall constitute only a request and not be permitted except pursuant to the provisions hereof.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-86. Petition required.
Any person or persons (herein "petitioner") desiring to have the city council exercise its powers regarding the closing, narrowing or vacating of streets,
alleys or other public ways, or portions thereof, must file with the city secretary a petition, on a form acceptable by the city, directed to the city council
requesting that such action be taken. The petition must be signed and acknowledged by all current owners of property abutting the street, alley or public
way or portion thereof sought to be closed. The petitioner may not rely solely on the most recent county certified tax rolls to determine the current names
and addresses of all abutting property owners. A list of the owners' names and addresses of all property abutting the street, alley, public way or portion
thereof that is the subject of the petition must be attached to the petition. The city may require the petitioner to provide copies of documents filed in the
Aransas County Deed Records to evidence the current abutting owners. The petition shall not be accepted unless and until all requirements of this policy
have been met and the city is satisfied that all current abutting property owners have signed the petition. Upon acceptance, the city secretary shall provide
copies of the petition to the city manager and all other city staff or officials whom the city manager directs.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-87. Fee.
Upon the filing of a petition with the city secretary, an administration fee shall be paid to the city in an amount equal to $50.00 for the first 100 linear-foot
length of affected property and $10.00 for each 35 feet of affected length, or portion, thereafter.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-88. Survey required.
For a petition to be accepted, petitioner must provide a survey or plat, together with a typed legal description, of the street, alley or other public way, or
portion thereof, sought to be abandoned, altered, closed or vacated and the property abutting thereon, prepared by a licensed land surveyor. The costs of the
survey or plat shall be paid by the petitioner.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 236/444
Sec. 86-89. Review by city staff.
The city staff shall review the request as to the impact on utilities, drainage and/or the future traffic needs and circulation, and shall issue a report to the
city secretary and city manager, outlining the staff's findings and its recommendation for consideration by the city council. A staff report finding no
objection to the request shall not bind the city council to grant the petition, and is as such only advisory upon the council.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-90. Notice of public hearing on the petition.
After receipt of the staff report, the city secretary shall cause a public hearing to be set on this petitioner's request. Notice of such public hearing on the
petition must be given by publication in the official newspaper of the city no more than 30 days nor fewer than 15 days proceeding the date of that set for
public hearing on the proposed request. Such notice shall fairly state the action requested giving a description of the property or street affected.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-91. Appraisal.
The city manager or the city council may, at any time, request and obtain an independent appraisal of the value of the property sought by petitioner to be
closed, narrowed or abandoned. Such appraisal may be used to determine what consideration, if any, may be required to be paid by petitioner or anyone
else to be benefitted by the petitioner's request, should final action be taken by the city council pursuant to this policy.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-92. Public hearing.
The city council shall hear evidence as to the reasons why such street, alley, public way or portion thereof should or should not be abandoned, altered,
vacated or closed. The city council may adjourn or continue the public hearing as it alone deems necessary and in the best interest of the public. Upon
close of the public hearing, the council shall either grant or deny the request by petitioner. Such petition, if not acted upon at the meeting at which it
appears on the agenda for public hearing, may at such time be passed, tabled or continued on the agenda to any subsequent city council meeting.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-93. Passage of ordinance.
The council may grant the petition only by adoption of an ordinance, pursuant to its Charter. However, a three-fourths majority of votes of the city council
shall be necessary to adopt an ordinance to abandon, alter, vacate or close the street, alley, public way or portion thereof.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-94. Conditions precedent to granting of petition.
(a) The council shall determine what consideration, if any, shall be paid by the abutting property owners, pursuant to chapter 272 of the Local
Government Code, which may be equal to or less than the fair market value as determined by recent city appraisal obtained pursuant to this policy.
(b) The council may retain utility and/or drainage easements across those portions of the street, alley or other public way, or portion thereof, if it deems
such reservation necessary.
(c) The council may require written verification from any or all franchised utilities, including but not limited to electric, gas, telephone or cable,
evidencing such utilities' current or anticipated future use of the street, alley or other public way sought to be closed, narrowed or vacated.
(d) Prior to granting the petition, the council may require all the abutting property owners to execute with the city a written agreement accepting any and
all council-imposed conditions required pursuant to this section.
(e) Prior to granting the petition, the council may require all abutting property owners to execute with the city a written agreement between themselves,
stating what interest each claims or will claim, if any, in the underlying fee simple, should the petition be later granted.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Sec. 86-95. City may act without petition.
Nothing herein shall be construed so as to limit the city's right to close, narrow or abandon any dedicated street, alley, public way or portion thereof in the
valid exercise of its police power.
(Ord. No. 1092,  1, 7-27-99)
Secs. 86-9686-99. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. PARADES
Sec. 86-100. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
Applicant means a person who has filed a written application for a parade permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 237/444
Commercial parade means a parade sponsored other than by a nonprofit organization, the purpose of which is to advertise a product, whether tangible or
intangible, to advertise or promote an exhibition or theatrical performance, or otherwise operate to the pecuniary benefit of the sponsor.
Parade means an assembly of three or more persons gathering for the common design of moving in or upon any public street from one location to any
other location, whether on foot, on horseback, or by mechanical conveyance, as a part of a procession, march, pageant, ceremony, or like event.
Parade permit means a written consent or permit to conduct a parade issued pursuant to written application and approval hereunder.
Permittee means a person to whom a parade permit has been granted under this article.
Street means the entire width between the boundary lines of every road or way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for vehicular traffic.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-101. Permit required; exceptions.
(a) It shall be unlawful to commence, conduct, aid, or engage in a parade upon any public street without having first secured a parade permit therefor
from the chief of police.
(b) The following activities shall be exempt from the requirement of a permit hereunder:
(1) Funeral processions supervised by a licensed mortuary proceeding by a reasonable route from a funeral home, church, or residence of a
deceased to a memorial service or place of interment;
(2) Picketing or other peaceful demonstrations at a fixed location that is not a street;
(3) Sidewalk processions conducted in accordance with all traffic regulations and other applicable laws and ordinances;
(4) Processions, convoys, marches, or similar activities conducted by members of the armed forces of the United States or the State of Texas
while acting in the regular course and scope of their duties;
(5) Processions, convoys, or the like conducted by members of the Rockport Police Department while acting in the regular course and scope of
their duties;
(6) Wedding processions preceding by a reasonable route by and between the residence of a member of the matrimonial party, the place of
performance of the matrimonial service, the place of the reception or matrimonial celebration;
(7) Official motorcades escorted by members of the Rockport Police Department.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-102. Application for permit.
(a) Applications for a parade permit must be filed with the chief of police no less than 21 calendar days prior to the date and time for commencement of
such parade.
(b) Each application for a parade permit must be made on a form provided for this purpose by the chief of police.
(c) Each application for a parade permit shall be signed by the applicant, sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, and contain the
following information:
(1) The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
(2) The name, address, and telephone number of any organization, firm, association, corporation, or other entity on whose behalf application is
made;
(3) Date and time proposed for commencement of the parade;
(4) A statement of the anticipated duration of the parade;
(5) A description of the specific parade route listing all streets to be utilized and the direction of flow from the point of commencement to
termination;
(6) The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade;
(7) The estimated number of vehicles, floats, animals, motorized displays and the like to be utilized in the parade;
(8) The estimated number of marching units, bands, color guards, drill teams and the like to participate in the parade.
(9) The name, address, and telephone number of the person applicant designates as a co-responsible party for removal of animal fecal matter.
(d) If the applicant is acting on behalf of a corporation, association, firm, or other organization sponsoring the parade, the application must be
accompanied by a copy of an appropriate resolution of the governing body of such corporation, firm, or other organization indicating its sponsorship of
such parade and authorizing the applicant to act in its behalf in securing a permit therefor.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 1227,  1, 10-29-02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 238/444
Sec. 86-103. Standards for permit issuance; action on application.
(a) A parade permit shall be issued at least five working days prior to the proposed time for commencement of the parade, if the chief of police
determines that the parade will be conducted without substantial danger to the health, welfare, or safety of the public and in conformity with applicable
laws, ordinances, and regulations.
(b) The chief of police may approve an application for a parade permit subject to reasonable terms and conditions relating to the time, place or manner
for conduct of the parade, including, but not limited to:
(1) The establishment of an alternate time for conduct of the parade;
(2) The establishment of an alternate route for conduct of the parade;
(3) Reasonable regulations regarding the width and length of the parade.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-104. Denial or revocation of permit.
(a) A parade permit may be denied or revoked under this article where it shall appear that:
(1) The information contained in the application for the parade permit is found to be false or incomplete in any material aspect; or
(2) The permittee has conducted or is conducting a parade in violation of this article or other applicable laws and ordinances affecting such
activity; or
(3) The permittee fails to obey any lawful order of the chief of police, fire chief, fire marshal, or their respective designees, respecting the
conduct of the parade, or any term or condition to which the approval of the parade permit is made subject; or
(4) The parade fails to commence within 30 minutes of the appointed time for commencement; or
(5) Conduct of the parade at the time and place or in the manner proposed will substantially disrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic
contiguous to the parade route; or
(6) The parade will require diversion of so great a number of police officers that the provision of adequate police service to the remainder of the
city will be rendered impossible; or
(7) The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at points of assembly and disassembly is reasonably likely to interfere with the
provisions of adequate fire, police, and other emergency services to other parts of the city; or
(8) Emergency conditions or other exigent circumstances then existing within the city require that the public streets remain open to the free and
unencumbered transportation of emergency crews, equipment and materials.
(b) In the event of denial of a parade permit hereunder, the chief of police shall within five working days prior to the proposed time for commencement
of the parade provide written notice of such adverse action to the applicant setting forth the specific reasons forming the basis for the denial.
(c) In the event of revocation hereunder, the chief of police or his designee shall provide, at the time of revocation, such oral or written notice of
revocation that is feasible under the circumstances then existing and in addition, shall within 5 working days thereafter, provide written notice to the
permittee setting forth the specific reasons forming the basis for revocation.
(d) Upon receipt of a notice of denial or revocation, the applicant or permittee shall cease and refrain from commencing, conducting, aiding, or engaging
in any parade within the city.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-105. Appeal procedure; final decision.
(a) Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a parade permit hereunder may appeal such action within ten days from the date of such action
in the manner and in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 74-76 of this Code.
(b) In the absence of an appeal made in accordance with the procedures above described, the decision of the chief of police shall be final.
(c) Where an appeal is timely prosecuted as above provided, the finality of the decision thereon shall be governed by the rules set forth in section 74-76
of this Code.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-106. Interference with parade; driving through; parking on parade route.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct, impede, or interfere in any form or manner with the progress of any parade or the persons, vehicles or
animals comprising the parade from the point of commencement to the point of disassembly.
(b) It shall be unlawful for any person to drive through or between the persons, vehicles, or animals comprising a parade from the point of
commencement to the point of disassembly.
(c) It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle along a public street constituting a portion of the parade route and conspicuously marked as such; in this
connection, the chief of police is authorized to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along the parade route and to cause the route to be conspicuously
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 239/444
marked as such.
(d) It shall be a defense to prosecution under the preceding subsection that the place where the vehicle was parked was not conspicuously designated as
a parade route at the time of parking.
(e) This section shall not apply to any member of the Rockport Police Department acting in the course and scope of their duties in monitoring, regulating
and policing parade activity or otherwise.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97)
Sec. 86-107. Removal of fecal matter.
It shall be unlawful for any parade applicant and any designated co-responsible party to fail to remove animal fecal matter form public streets or rights-ofway
during a parade or immediately thereafter.
(Ord. No. 1227,  2, 3, 10-29-02)
Sec. 86-108. Penalty; enforcement.
(a) Any person conducting, commencing, aiding or engaging in a parade without a parade permit, or otherwise violating any provisions of this article, is
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00.
(b) The chief of police or any officer of the Rockport Police Department, is hereby authorized to issue summons and citations, as applicable, for
violations of this article.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 1227,  2, 3, 10-29-02)
Sec. 86-109. Cumulative effect.
The provisions of this article are cumulative and nothing herein shall prevent, alter or diminish the applicability or enforcement of other ordinances
restricting, regulating or governing the subject matter hereof.
(Ord. No. 1058,  1, 7-8-97; Ord. No. 1227,  2, 3, 10-29-02)
Secs. 86-11086-115. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. STREET ASSESSMENT POLICY
Sec. 86-116. Purpose, scope of project, applicability of policy.
(a) The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines for assessment paving and associated cost distribution for existing street improvement projects
when petitioned by adjoining property owners as set forth herein. The adjoining properties to the street must bear an equitable share of the total project
cost in accordance with Texas law. When value has been added to the adjoining property an equitable assessment should be made to each property on both
sides of the improvement.
(b)(1) Unless determined to be inequitable, all assessments will be developed and administered on a linear foot basis. The front-foot assessment
rates are developed based on the total estimated applicable cost. The items that may be considered as construction costs are:
a. Drainage improvements;
b. Preparation of roadway bore and all asphalt or concrete materials necessary to meet the city's building standards for the type of street
required;
c. Curbing, gutter, inlets and other drainage structures; and
d. Sidewalks or pedestrian paths.
(2) The total assessment to be made to a particular property owner, is the estimated project cost divided by the total length of the street (including
improvements to side streets and/or intersections) then multiplied by the participation percentages; and then multiplied by one-half; then multiplied
by the linear feet of property to be assessed.
Example: Length of street, 3,200 feet, Cost of project improvements $200,000. Front yard linear feet for Lot A equals 80 feet.
$200,000.00  3,200 x 60% x 50% x 80 feet = $1,350.00
(3) The provisions of this article apply only to streets petitioned for improvements by the adjoining property owners. Nothing herein shall limit
or prohibit the authority of the city, through the powers granted to the city council, to make improvements to streets without receipt of a requesting
petition by the adjoining property owners, and to make assessments for such improvements in accordance with Texas state law.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 1126,  1, 8-24-99)
Sec. 86-117. Assessment by categories.
The type of land use of adjacent property is considered in calculation of the assessment rates. There are two assessment categories, residential and
nonresidential. The residential categories include properties with the following zoning categories:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 240/444
Zoning Description
R-1 1st Single-Family
R-2 2nd Single-Family
R-2B Zero Lot Line Single-Family
R-2M Mobile Home
R-3 Duplex
The nonresidential category includes properties with the following zoning classifications:
Zoning Description
R-4 1st Multifamily
R-5 2nd Multifamily
R-6 Hotel/Motel District
R-7 Residential/Office
B-1 General Business
B-2 Central Business
I-1 Light Industrial
I-2 Heavy Industrial
P.U.D. Planned Unit Development
Assessments to adjacent property owners are adjusted based on the assessment category of the property. The following table shows the participation
percentages applied to the front-foot costs based on the assessment category.
Construction Item (1)Residential Nonresidential
Curb and Gutter 30/40/30* 50/50**
Sidewalks/Pedestrian
Path 30/40/30* 50/50
Paving 30/40/30* 50/50
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 241/444
Drainage 30/40/30* 50/50
*Middle percentage is the city's participation (30/40/30) 40 percent equals city's share.
** The city does not participate in nonresidential category.
(1) City maximum participation will be 40 percent to include the state mandated 10 percent on value added.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Sec. 86-118. Front, side, rear yard assessments.
The orientation of existing homes or primary structures relative to the centerline of the street is considered in the assessment calculations. The following
factors are applied to the computed assessment rate per front foot for all adjacent properties for both residential and nonresidential categories:
Property
Description
Curb & Gutter
%
(1)Sidewalks % Paving % Drainage %
Front Yard 30/40/30* 30/40/30* 30/40/30* 30/40/30*
Side Yard 23/54/23* 23/54/23* 23/54/23* 23/54/23*
Rear Yard 2.5/75/12.5 2.5/75/12.5 2.5/75/12.5 2.5/75/12.5
*Middle percentage is the city's participation.
(1) Assessments on sidewalks assume there will be a sidewalk on each side of the street. No assessment for single sidewalk on one side of street.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Sec. 86-119. Other factors may be considered.
Lots with non-typical front footage will be on a case by case basis. The assessment will be minimum of the average front footage of lots within the project.
(An example is a lot within a cul-de-sac.) The city's participation in driveway approaches shall be a maximum width of 24 feet on existing driveways per
property. The drive approach shall extend from front of curb to ten feet past the back of the curb. The drive approach will be standard concrete. The cost
for over sizing above the standard drive approach of 24 feet will be the responsibility of the homeowner with no participation by the city.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Sec. 86-120. Petitioned streets.
Any existing street in the city may be considered for improvements by the city council. All currently unimproved streets, which are upgraded to city
standards, are subject to the provisions outlined herein. Streets not currently being considered for improvements by the city council in the capital
improvement plan may be considered for improvements if 65 percent or more of the parcels or lots adjacent to the street, request improvements by
petition. If city council approves construction of the petitioned street, then all adjacent owners are subject to assessments based on the category rates as
outlined above. (See Exhibit A)
The city shall have a one-year period, after validation of petition, to consider design and start construction.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Sec. 86-121. Estimated construction costs and enhancement study.
An assessment roll of all privately owned property adjacent to the proposed street and related improvements will be prepared by the city engineer and
public works department. Assessment values will be computed based on the estimated construction cost of the street facilities times the appropriate
percentage factor.
An enhancement study will be prepared by an independent certified land appraiser to determine the effect of the proposed improvements to the value of the
adjoining properties. Assessments to the adjoining property shall not exceed the enhanced value of the adjacent property after construction of the
improvements in accordance with state law.
Construction items not considered in the assessment calculations include landscape improvements, concrete retaining walls or landscape timbers; crossdrainage
such as box culverts or bridges; off-site storm drainage or concrete channels; and water and sewer adjustments that are not necessary in
conjunction with street improvements. The determination of necessary utility improvements shall be the responsibility of the city engineer and director of
public works.
The percentage figures cited above are general in nature and the city council reserves the right to adjust the actual dollar amounts within the limits allowed
by Texas law from project to project in accordance with the relative value added to the assessed property. In the absence of substantial evidence to the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 242/444
contrary, the primary factor in determining the value added to abutting property would be the cost of the improvements.
The estimated construction costs computed for purposes of assessments shall include an allowance for engineering design, survey work, inspection, testing
and appraisal costs and legal fees. In the absence of actual costs, an allowance of ten percent of total construction costs for engineering, layout, inspection,
and testing will be used. An estimate of two percent of construction costs will be used for the enhancement study unless actual costs are available.
In the event liquidated damages are received, they will be divided in the same manner as the assessment in section 86-117 or section 86-118.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99; Ord. No. 1187,  1, 7-24-2001)
Sec. 86-122. Maximum city participation.
The city will participate in assessments with property owners for a maximum of $200,000.00 per fiscal year as the city's share of the total assessment
program.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Sec. 86-123. Payments for improvements.
The entirety of a parcel of real property is subject to the assessment after the date on which notice has been mailed to property owners. An assessment is
imposed by the City of Rockport ordinance.
The assessment imposed is superior to any other lien or claim except ad valorem taxes.
The following provisions are to be set out on a project by project basis by the city council:
(1) Payment in full of the assessment amount per parcel upon notification by the city that the project is complete; or
(2) The property owner may request a pay-out schedule of principal and interest payable in not less than five equal annual installments and not
greater than seven equal annual installments.
(3) The prescribed rate of interest to be paid on the assessment shall not exceed the greater of eight percent a year or the rate payable by the
municipality on its most recently issued general obligation bonds, determined as of the date of the notice of hearing on assessment.
(4) City council shall at their discretion be allowed to grant monthly installments and shall have the option to extend payment period up to seven
years maximum.
(Ord. No. 1112,  1, 3-9-99)
Secs. 86-12486-139. Reserved.
ARTICLE VII. MANAGEMENT OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Sec. 86-140. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following words shall be defined herein below:
City means the City of Rockport, Texas, or its designated agent of the city.
Construction means any work performed above the surface, on the surface or beneath the surface of a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to,
installing, servicing, repairing, upgrading, or modifying any facility(s) in, above or under the surface of the public right-of-way, and restoring the surface
and subsurface of the public right-of-way. The phrase "construction" does not include the installation of facilities necessary to initiate service to a
customer's property, or the repair or maintenance of existing facilities unless such installation, repair or maintenance requires the breaking of pavement,
excavation or boring.
Construction security means any of the following forms of security provided at the owner's option:
(1) Individual project or performance bond; and/or
(2) Cash deposit; and/or
(3) Security of a form listed or approved under state statutes; and/or
(4) Letter of credit, in a form acceptable by city.
Construction permit means the permit that, pursuant to this article, must be obtained before an owner may construct facilities in a right-of-way. A
construction permit allows the holder to construct facilities in that part of the right-of-way described in such permit.
Department means the public works department of the city.
Director means the director of the public works department of the city or his or her designee.
Emergency means a condition that:
(1) Poses a clear and immediate danger to life or health, or an immediate and significant loss of property; or
(2) Requires immediate repair or replacement of facilities in order to restore service to a customer.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 243/444
Facility or facilities shall include, but not be limited to, any and all cables, pipelines, splice boxes, tracks, tunnels, utilities, vaults, and other appurtenances
or tangible things owned, leased, operated, or licensed by an owner or owners, that are located or are proposed to be located in the public right-of-way.
Municipal authorization means the individual grant to use the public rights-of-way issued by the city and accepted by the individual owners in accordance
with the ordinances of the city, a franchise agreement, a license, or under operation of state law which provides a specific grant of authority to use the
rights-of-way.
Owner means any person who owns any facility or facilities that are or are proposed to be installed or maintained in the public right-of-way. Included
within this definition is the owner's contractor, subcontractor, agent or authorized representative.
Permit or permit to construct means a permit to perform construction in accordance with this article.
Person means any natural or corporate person, business association or other business entity including, but not limited to, a partnership, a sole
proprietorship, a political subdivision, excluding the city, a public or private agency of any kind, a utility, a successor or assign of any of the foregoing, or
any other legal entity.
Public rights-of-way means the area of land within the city that is acquired by, dedicated to, or claimed by the city in fee simple, by easement, or by
prescriptive right and that is expressly or impliedly accepted or used in fact or by operation of law as a public roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or
utility access easement. The term includes the area on, below, and above the surface of the public right-of-way. The term applies regardless of whether the
public right-of-way is paved or unpaved. The term does not include airwaves above the public right-of-way with regard to wireless telecommunications.
Restore or restoration means the process by which a right-of-way is returned to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition that existed before
construction.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-141. Right-of-way occupancy.
(a) Any person prior to constructing facilities in, on or over the public rights-of-way must first obtain separate municipal authorization.
(b) This article does not constitute or create authority to place, reconstruct, or alter facilities in, on or over the rights-of-way nor to engage in
construction, excavation, encroachments, or work activity within or upon any public right-of-way, and said authority must be obtained in accordance with
the terms of this article.
(c) Any person with a current, unexpired franchise, municipal authorization, license or other authorization from the city (grant) or state to use the public
right-of-way that is in effect at the time this article takes effect, shall continue to operate under and comply with that grant, and in the event this article
conflicts with existing authorization, the more restrictive provision shall apply.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-142. Registration.
In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, all owners of facilities in the right-of-way will register with the city. Registration and Permits will
be issued in the name of the person who will own the facilities. Registration must be renewed on or before January 31 of each year. The city shall provide
written notification of this renewal requirement. If a registration is not renewed, and subject to 60 calendar days' notification to the owner, the facilities of
the user will be deemed to have been abandoned. When any information provided for the registration changes, the owner will inform the city of the change
no more than 30 days after the date the change is made. Registration shall include:
(1) The name, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the owner;
(2) The names, address(es) and telephone number(s) of the contact person(s) for the owner;
(3) The name(s), address(es) and telephone number(s) of any contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) who will be working in the right-of-way on behalf
of the owner. If the names of contractors and subcontractors are not available at the time of permit application, they must be submitted to the city
prior to permit issuance;
(4) The name(s) and telephone number(s) of an emergency contact who shall be available 24 hours a day;
(5) The source of the owner's municipal authorization (e.g., franchise, state law, etc.). If the owner is a certificated telecommunications provider,
the certificate number issued by the Texas Public Utility Commission;
(6) The owner shall submit a one-year projection of their plans for the construction of facilities in the city at the time of registration renewal; and
(7) Registration shall be a prerequisite to issuance of a construction permit. Each owner shall update and keep current its registration with the city
at all times.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-143. Construction permits.
(a) No owner shall perform any construction or installation of facilities in the right-of-way without first obtaining a construction permit, except as
provided herein. Permit applications are required for construction of new, replacement or upgrades of the company's facilities in the right-of-way whether
aerial or underground.
(b) Emergency responses related to existing facilities may be undertaken without first obtaining a permit; however, the department shall be notified in
writing the next business day by facsimile transmission (fax) or email of any construction related to an emergency response; including a reasonably
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 244/444
detailed description of the work performed in the right-of-way. An updated map of any facilities that were relocated, if applicable, shall be provided within
90 days.
(c) A permit is not required under subsection (a) if the activity in the public right-of-way consists exclusively of:
(1) A residential service connection on the same side of the public right-of-way, if the connection does not require a pavement cut or bore
beneath the pavement; or
(2) The replacement of a single damaged pole.
(d) Unless approved by the city public works director, the owner or contractor shall not close any traffic lanes or otherwise impede rush hour traffic on
major thoroughfares during the morning or evening rush hours on weekdays during the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. or 3:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m. Any
closure of a traffic lane for more than four hours during any non-peak traffic period shall also require a permit, unless waived by the director.
(e) All construction and installation in the right-of-way shall be in accordance with the permit for the facilities. The director shall be provided access to
the work and to such further information as he or she may reasonably require to ensure compliance with the permit.
(f) A copy of the construction permit and approved plans shall be maintained at the construction site and made available for inspection by the director at
all times when construction work is occurring.
(g) All construction work authorized by permit must be completed in the time specified in the construction permit. If the work cannot be completed in
the specified time periods, the owner may request an extension of the time period from the director. The director will use his/her best efforts to approve or
disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. If the request for the extension is made prior to the expiration of the permit, work may continue while
the request is pending.
(h) Construction, excavation, or work area. No owner or contractor shall perform construction, excavation, or work in an area larger or at a location
different than that specified in the permit or permit application. If, after construction, excavation, or work is commenced under an approved permit, it
becomes necessary to perform construction, excavation, or work in a larger or different area than originally requested under the application, the owner or
contractor shall notify the director immediately and, within 24 hours, shall file a supplementary application for the additional construction, excavation, or
work.
(i) A copy of any permit or approval issued by federal or state authorities for work in federal or state right-of-way located in the city shall be provided, if
requested by the department.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-144. Permit application.
(a) The permit shall state to whom it is issued, location of work, location of facilities, dates and times work is to take place and any other conditions set
out by the director. If the owner fails to act upon any permit within 90 calendar days of issuance, the permit shall become invalid, and the owner will be
required to obtain another permit. No permit shall be transferable.
(b) The permit will be in the name of the person who will own the facilities to be constructed. The permit application must be completed and signed by a
representative of the owner of the facilities to be constructed.
(c) Any person requesting a permit will provide the director with documentation in the format specified by the department, at the time of permit
submittal, describing:
(1) The proposed location and route of all facilities to be constructed or installed and the owner's plan for right-of-way construction;
(2) One set of plans, including plan, which will be on a reasonable scale, acceptable to the department, unless waived by the director. When
required by the Texas Engineering Practice Act, as amended, the plans must be sealed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in the state;
(3) Detail of the location of all right-of-way and utility easements that owner plans to use;
(4) Detail of existing utilities located in the right-of-way, including the city's utilities, in relationship to owner's proposed route;
(5) Detail of what owner proposes to construct including size of facilities, materials used, such as pipe size, number of ducts, valves, etc.;
(6) Detail of plans to remove and replace asphalt or concrete in streets in accordance with Exhibit "A," Standard Specifications and Details for
Restoration within Public Rights-of-Way;
(7) Drawings of any bores, trenches, hand holes, manholes, switch gear, transformers, pedestals, etc. including depth located in public right-ofway;
(8) Typical details of manholes and/or hand holes owner plans to use or access;
(9) Complete legend of drawings submitted by owner, which may be provided by reference to previously submitted documents acceptable to the
city;
(10) The construction methods to be employed for the protection of existing structures, fixtures, and facilities within or adjacent to the right-ofway,
and the dates and times work will occur, all of which (methods, dates, times, etc.) are subject to approval of the director; and
(11) Proof of insurance and bonds as required by section 86-154.
(d) A request for a permit must be submitted at least 15 business days before the proposed commencement of work identified in the request when
serving three or more customers, unless waived by the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 245/444
(e) Requests for permits will be approved or disapproved by the director within a reasonable time of receiving all the necessary information. The
director will use his/her best efforts to approve or disapprove a request for permit as soon as possible. The director will consider all information submitted
by the applicant including a review of the availability of space in the right-of-way based on the applicant's proposed route and location. The director will
provide a written notification of denial for rejected permits.
(f) The department or the owner can request a preconstruction meeting with the construction contractor.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-145. Construction standards.
(a) All construction shall be in conformance with all city codes and applicable local, state and federal laws.
(b) The department must be notified two business days in advance that construction is ready to proceed by either the owner, its contractor or
representative. At the time of notification, the owner will inform the department of the number (or other information) assigned from the appropriate onecall
notification center. "Notification center" means the same as in Texas Civil Statutes, Article 9033, or its successor. The name, address and phone
numbers of the contractor or subcontractor who will perform the actual construction, including the name and telephone number of an individual with the
contractor who will be available at all times during construction. Such information shall be required prior to the commencement of any work.
(c) Public notification of work to be performed.
(1) For any closure of a traffic lane or blocking of a sidewalk or alley lasting six days or less, the permittee or designated contrator(s) shall
conspicuously mark its vehicles with the permittee's or designated contractor(s) name.
(2) For projects scheduled to last seven calendar days or more, at least two three-foot by three-foot informational sign stating the identity of the
person doing the work, a local telephone number and owner's identity shall be placed at the location where construction is to occur 48 hours prior to
the beginning of work in the right-of-way and shall continue to be posted at the location during the entire time the work is occurring. The
informational signs will be posted on public right-of-way 100 feet before the construction location commences, unless other posting arrangements
are approved or required by the director.
(3) When projects last more than seven calendar days, the owner shall also provide written notification to all adjacent property occupants 48
hours prior to the beginning of construction. Informational fliers shall include the person doing the work, a local telephone number, owner's
identity, and proposed schedule.
(d) Erosion control measures (e.g. silt fence) and advance warning signs, markers, cones and barricades must be in place before work begins.
(e) Lane closures on major thoroughfares will be limited to one lane between 9:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. unless the director grants prior approval. Arrow
boards will be required for lane closures on all arterials and collectors, with all barricades, advanced warning signs and 36-inch reflector cones placed
according to the Texas Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(f) Without affecting the legal relationship between the owner and their contractor, owners are responsible for the workmanship of, and any damages by,
their contractors or subcontractors. A responsible representative of the owner will be available to the department at all times during construction.
(g) Owner shall be responsible for stormwater management, erosion control and excavation safety measures that comply with city, state and federal
guidelines. Requirements shall include, but not be limited to, construction fencing around any excavation that will be left overnight, silt fencing in erosion
areas until reasonable vegetation is established, barricade fencing around open holes, and high erosion areas will require wire backed silt fencing. Upon
request owner may be required to furnish documentation submitted or received from federal or state government.
(h) Owner or contractor or subcontractor will notify the department immediately of any damage to other utilities, either city or privately owned.
(i) It is the city's policy not to cut streets or sidewalks; however, except in case of emergency when a street or sidewalk cut is required, prior approval
must be obtained from the department and all requirements of the department shall be followed in all street and sidewalk cuts. Repair of all street and
sidewalk removals must be made promptly to avoid safety hazards to vehicle and pedestrian traffic, and shall be in accordance with Exhibit "A," Standard
Specifications and Details for Restoration within Public Rights-of-Way.
(j) Installation of facilities must not interfere with city utilities, in particular gravity dependent facilities. Facilities shall not be located over, or within
three feet, horizontally or vertically, of any water or sanitary sewer mains, unless approved by the director.
(k) New facilities must be installed to a minimum depth required by state and federal codes and standards.
(l) All directional boring shall have a locator place bore marks and depths while the bore is in progress. Locator shall place a mark at each stem with a
paint dot and depth at least every other stem.
(m) No directional boring zones. In the city, the public infrastructure must be maintained and protected by all owners and contractors. The public health,
safety and welfare are at risk when damages to water and sewer mains occur. To protect the water and sewer system, no person, agency, or contractor will
be allowed to directionally bore longitudinally with water mains that are larger than 12 inches and sewer mains that are 12 inches or larger, unless this
requirement is waived in writing by the director. The installation of facilities in the public rights-of-way or easements will be installed by open excavation
to assure the protection of the city's water and sewer system. The city has available mapping that identifies such mains. The owner is responsible for
obtaining and using this information in the design of new facilities.
(n) The working hours in the rights-of-way are 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, unless otherwise approved by the director. Any work
performed on Saturday must be approved by the utility inspector by 9:00 a.m. on the Thursday prior to the proposed Saturday. No work will be done,
except for emergencies, on Sundays or city holidays.
(o) Persons working in the right-of-way are responsible for obtaining line locates from all affected utilities or others with facilities in the right-of-way
prior to any excavation. Use of a geographic information system or the plans of records does not satisfy this requirement.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 246/444
(p) Owner will be responsible for verifying the location, both horizontal and vertical, of all facilities. When required by the department, owner shall
verify locations by pot holing, hand digging or other method approved by the department prior to any excavation or boring.
(q) Placement of all manholes and/or hand holes must be approved in advance by the department. Hand holes or manholes will not be located in
sidewalks, unless approved by the director.
(r) Locate flags shall not be removed from a location while facilities are being constructed.
(s) When construction requires pumping of water or mud, the water or mud shall be contained in accordance with federal and state law and the directives
of the department.
(t) A person shall perform operations, excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way in accordance with all applicable city requirements,
including the obligation to use trenchless technology whenever commercially economical and practical and consistent with obligations on other similar
users of the public right-of-way. The city shall waive the requirements of trenchless technology if it determines that the field conditions warrant the waiver,
based upon information provided to the city by the person. All excavations and other construction in the public rights-of-way shall be conducted so as to
minimize interference with the use of public and private property. A person shall follow all reasonable construction directions given by the city in order to
minimize any such interference.
(u) All construction shall conform to the city tree ordinance.
(v) Excavation safety. On construction projects in which excavation will exceed a depth of five feet, the agency must have detailed plans and
specifications for excavation safety systems. The term "excavation" includes trenches, structural or any construction that has earthen excavation subject to
collapse. The excavation safety plan shall be designed in conformance with state law and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)
standards and regulations.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-146. Conformance with public improvements.
(a) Whenever by reasons of widening or straightening of streets, side walks, water or sewer line projects, or any other city project, it shall be deemed
necessary by the governing body of the city to remove, alter, change, adapt, or conform an owner's underground or overhead facilities within the right-ofway
to another part of the right-of-way, such alterations shall be made by the owner of the facilities at the owner's expense (unless provided otherwise by
state law, a franchise, a license or a municipal authorization until that grant expires or is otherwise terminated). The owner shall be responsible for
conforming its facilities within mutually agreed upon time limits. If no time limits can be agreed upon, the time limit shall be 90 days from the day the city
secures any additional right-of-way and transmits final plans and notice to make the alterations. The owner of facilities shall be responsible for any direct
costs associated with project delays associated with failure to conform facilities within the mutually agreed upon time limits. Reimbursement for all costs
provided for by this paragraph shall be made within 30 calendar days.
(b) An owner may trim trees in or over the public rights-of-way for the safe and reliable operation, use and maintenance of its facilities. All tree
trimming shall be performed in accordance with standards promulgated by the National Arbor Day Foundation. Should the owner, its contractor or agent,
fail to remove such trimmings within 24 hours unless waived by the director, the city may remove the trimmings or have them removed, and upon receipt
of a bill from the city, the owner shall promptly reimburse the city for all costs incurred within 30 calendar days.
(c) An owner shall temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities to permit the moving of houses or other bulky structures. The owner shall
temporarily remove, raise or lower its aerial facilities within 15 working days of receiving a copy of a permit issued by the city. The expense of these
temporary rearrangements shall be paid by the party or parties requesting and benefiting from the temporary rearrangements. The owner may require
prepayment or prior posting of a bond from the party requesting the temporary move.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-147. Improperly installed facilities.
(a) Any owner doing work in the city right-of-way shall properly install, repair, upgrade and maintain facilities.
(b) Facilities shall be considered to be improperly installed, repaired, upgraded or maintained if:
(1) The installation, repair, upgrade or maintenance endangers people or property;
(2) The facilities do not meet the applicable city codes;
(3) The facilities are not capable of being located using standard practices;
(4) The facilities are not located in the proper place at the time of construction in accordance with the directions provided by the department or
the plans approved by the department.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-148. Location of utility structures.
(a) Utility structures not exceeding 20 cubic feet are preferred in the right-of-way or utility easements, subject to available room and located as approved
by the director. The placement of utility structures larger than 20 cubic feet, but not exceeding 30 cubic feet will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis by
the director. Such structures shall not encroach within a sidewalk area, including a vertical clearance of seven and one-half feet above the sidewalk or
within the sight visibility area.
(b) Utility structures larger than 30 cubic feet shall be located as close as practical to the back of a public or private utility easement and subject to
available room and located as approved by the director.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 247/444
(c) Aboveground facilities such as pedestals, switching boxes and similar Facilities shall be located no less than three feet from the edge of an alley or
the back of street curbs and such that they do not create a physical or visual barrier to vehicles leaving or entering roads, driveway or alleys. They shall
also not be located in front of residential lots creating an unreasonable visual or aesthetic impairment for the property owner.
(d) The owner's identity and telephone number shall be placed on all new/replaced utility structures placed in the rights-of-way after the date of this
article.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-149. Restoration of property.
(a) Owners shall restore property affected by construction of facilities to a condition that is equal to or better than the condition of the property prior to
the performance of the work. Owners shall submit photographs and/or a video of the construction area at the time of the issuance of the permit. Restoration
must be approved by the department.
(b) Restoration must be made within ten working days of completion of trench backfill for a length of 300 feet, or within the limits of one city block,
unless otherwise approved by the director. If restoration is not satisfactory and/or not performed in a timely manner, after written notice, then all work in
progress, except that related to the problem, including all work previously permitted but not complete may be halted and a hold may be placed on any
future permits until all restoration is complete.
(c) Upon failure of an owner to perform such restoration, and five days after written notice has been given to the owner by the city, and in the event
restoration has not been initiated during such five-day period, the city may repair such portion of the public rights-of-way as may have been disturbed by
the owner, its contractors or agents. Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner will reimburse the city for the costs so incurred within 30 calendar
days from the date of the city invoice.
(d) If the city determines that the failure of an owner to properly repair or restore the public rights-of-way constitutes a safety hazard to the public, the
city may undertake emergency repairs and restoration efforts, after emergency notice has been provided, to the extent reasonable under the circumstances.
Upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the owner shall promptly reimburse the city for the costs incurred by the city within 30 calendar days from the
date of the city invoice. If payment is not received within the 30 calendar days, the city shall initiate a claim for compensation with the appropriate
bonding company.
(e) Should the city reasonably determine, within one year from the date of the completion of the repair work, that the surface, base, irrigation system or
landscape treatment requires additional restoration work to meet the standards of subsection (a), an owner shall perform such additional restoration work to
the satisfaction of the city, subject to all city remedies as provided herein.
(f) Restoration must be to the reasonable satisfaction of the department. The restoration shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Replacing all ground cover with the type of ground cover damaged during work to a condition equal to or better either by sodding or seeding,
or as directed by the department;
(2) Adjusting of all manholes and hand holes, as required;
(3) Backfilling all bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other holes shall be completed daily, unless other safety requirements are approved by the
department. Holes with only vertical walls shall be covered and secured to prevent entry. If bore pits, trenches or other holes are left open for the
continuation of work, they shall be fenced and barricaded to secure the work site as approved by the department;
(4) Leveling of all trenches and backhoe lines;
(5) Restoration of excavation site to city specifications;
(6) Restoration of all paving, sidewalks, landscaping, ground cover, trees, shrubs and irrigation systems.
(g) Removal of all locate flags during the clean up process by the owner or his/her contractor at the completion of the work.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-150. Revocation or denial of permit.
If any of the provisions of this article are not followed, a permit may be revoked by the director or designee. If a person has not followed the terms and
conditions of this article in work done pursuant to a prior permit, new permits may be denied or additional terms required. Revocation shall be effective
upon the expiration of 15 days after written notice of the violation(s), unless cured during that period, except for violations that pose a threat to public
safety or health, for which the revocation will be immediate upon delivery of written notice.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-151. Appeals.
(a) Applicability. Appeals may be filed pursuant to this article for decisions of the director related to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit.
However, the appeal process provided by this article shall not be available for criminal violations of this article.
(b) Appeal to city manager. A permittee may appeal decisions referred to in subsection (a) above by filing a written appeal with the city manager within
seven working days of receipt of denial, suspension, or revocation of the permit. An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall specifically state the basis
for the aggrieved party's challenge to the city's authority under this article.
(c) Issuance of decision by city manager. Decisions of the city manager shall be issued within five working days of receipt of the written appeal.
Decisions of the city manager shall be final.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 248/444
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-152. Penalty for violation.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be fined a sum not exceeding $2,000.00 for each violation, and each day that such violation shall continue to exist constitutes a separate
offense.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Section 86-153. Indemnity.
(a) Each owner placing facilities in the public rights-of-way shall promptly defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from and against all damages,
costs, losses or expenses (i) for the repair, replacement, or restoration of city's property, equipment, materials, structures and facilities which are damaged,
destroyed or found to be defective as a result of the owner's acts or omissions, (ii) from and against any and all claims, demands, suits, causes of action,
and judgments for (a) damage to or loss of the property of any Owner (including, but not limited to the owner, its agents, officers, employees and
subcontractors, city's agents, officers and employees, and third parties); and/or (b) death, bodily injury, illness, disease, loss of services, or loss of income
or wages to any owner (including, but not limited to the agents) arising out of, incident to, concerning or resulting from the negligent or willful act or
omissions of the owner, its agents, employees, and/or subcontractors, in the performance of activities pursuant to this article.
(b) This indemnity provision shall not apply to any liability resulting from the negligent or willful acts of the city, its officers, employees, agents,
contractors, or subcontractors.
(c) The provisions of this indemnity are solely for the benefit of the city and is not intended to create or grant any rights, contractual or otherwise, to any
other owner or entity.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Sec. 86-154. Insurance requirements.
(a) General.
(1) An owner must provide acceptable proof of insurance in the total amount required by this section for permits for construction within public
rights-of-way, or make other provisions acceptable to the director.
(2) The coverage must be on an "occurrence" basis and must include coverage for personal injury, contractual liability, premises liability, medical
damages, underground, explosion and collapse hazards.
(3) Each policy must include a cancellation provision in which the insurance company is required to notify the city in writing not fewer than 30
days before canceling, failing to renew, or reducing policy limits.
(4) The owner shall file the required original certificate of insurance prior to the issuance of a permit. The certificate shall state the policy
number; name of the insurance company; name and address of the agent or authorized representative of the insurance company; name, address and
telephone number of insured; policy expiration date; and specific coverage amounts.
(5) Owner shall file an annual surety bond, which will be valid for one full year, from a surety company authorized to do business in the state in
the amount equal to the estimated amount of the cost to restore the right-of-way for the work anticipated to be done in that year, in the event the
owner leaves a job site in the right-of-way unfinished, incomplete or unsafe. Owner may make other provisions, in lieu of a bond, as acceptable to
the director. The director may waive the requirement if the owner submits documentation, in a form acceptable to the city attorney that
demonstrates the owner has unencumbered assets in excess of $10,000,000.00.
(6) Owner shall file a maintenance bond for 25 percent of the cost of restoring the right-of-way for the preceding year. Said bond shall be in force
for two years. Owner may make other provisions, in lieu of a bond, as acceptable to the director. The director may waive the requirement if the
owner submits documentation; in a form acceptable to the city attorney that demonstrates the owner has assets in excess of $10,000,000.00.
(7) The above requirements (1) through (6) may be met by utilities with a current franchise, license or municipal authorization if their current
franchise, license or municipal authorization adequately provides for insurance or bonds or provides an indemnity in favor of the city.
(8) The city will accept certificates of self-insurance issued by the state or letters written by the agency in those instances where the state does not
issue such letters, which provide the same coverage as required herein. However, certificates of self-insurance must be approved in advance by the
risk manager for the city.
(9) An insurer has no right of recovery against the city. The required insurance policies shall protect the agency or public infrastructure contractor
and include the city as an additional insured. The insurance shall be primary coverage for losses covered by the policies.
(10) Each policy must include a provision that requires the insurance company to notify the city in writing at least 30 days before canceling or
failing to renew the policy or before reducing policy limits or coverage.
(b) Insurance requirements.
(1) Owners. Each owner applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of the each of the following types of insurance and
coverage limits:
a. Commercial general liability on an occurrence form with minimum limits of $5,000,000.00 per occurrence and $10,000,000.00 aggregate.
This coverage shall include the following:
1. Products/completed operations to be maintained for one year.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 249/444
2. Personal and advertising injury.
3. Owners and contractors protective liability.
4. Explosion, collapse, or underground (XCU) hazards.
b. Automobile liability coverage with minimum policy limits of $1,000,000.00 combined single limit. This coverage shall include all owned,
hired and non-owned automobiles.
c. Workers compensation and employers liability coverage. Statutory coverage limits for Coverage A and $500,000.00 Coverage B
Employers Liability is required.
(2) Contractors and subcontractors. Each contractor and subcontractor applying for a permit shall obtain, maintain, and provide proof of
insurance for the same types of insurance coverage outlined in subsection (1) above; however, the policy limits under the general liability insurance
shall be $1,000,000.00 per occurrence and $2,000,000.00 aggregate. All other coverage provisions outlined in subsection (1) above shall apply.
(3) An owner or contractor that has registered and filed proof of insurance under this article is not required to furnish separate proof of insurance
under this section when obtaining a permit but must comply with all other requirement of this section.
(Ord. No. 1245,  1, 6-10-03)
Secs. 86-15586-179. Reserved.
ARTICLE VIII. SPEED HUMP INSTALLATION POLICY
Sec. 86-180. In general.
Speed humps are effective and appropriate devices for safety reducing vehicle speeds on certain types of streets (when installed in accordance with the
provisions of this policy). For speed hump installations to be effective, they should be selectively located in accordance with defined transportation
engineering criteria for the purpose of reducing documented speeding problems. This policy provides for reasonable opportunities for residents and
property owners most affected by a proposed speed hump to participate in the process that may lead to speed hump installation. It also allows the city and
requesting property owners to share purchase and installation costs.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 86-181. Definitions.
Low and moderate density residential dwellings means single-family, town houses, condominiums and multi-family dwellings.
Notification area means the area within 500 feet of the petition area. The measurement of 500 feet includes streets and alleys.
Speed hump means a geometric design feature of a street consisting of a raised area in the street pavement surface extending transversely across the
traveled portion of a street for the primary purpose of encouraging reduced speeds of vehicles traveling along that street.
Street/petition area means the minimum length of the street segment for consideration is 1,000 feet (i.e., 500 feet on either side of the proposed speed
hump located on the length of the block) which ever is greater. If the 1,000-foot segment extends into any part of an adjacent block, it shall include the
entire length of the adjacent block, unless separated by an intervening thoroughfare, traffic signal or offset intersection.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 86-182. Eligibility requirements.
(a) Each of the following criteria must be satisfied for a street to be considered eligible for speed hump installation:
(1) Petition. A petition documenting that at least three-fourths of the addressed households in low and moderate density residential dwellings on
the street support the installation and/or potential cost sharing described herein. A single signature for each street address will suffice as
demonstrating sup-port for the proposed speed hump installation.
(2) Location of the street. The land uses on the street where speed hump installation is proposed must consist primarily of low and moderate
density residential dwellings and be in one of the following zoning districts: R-1 1st Single-Family Dwelling District, R-2 2nd Single-Family
Dwelling District, R-2B Zero Lot Line Single-Family Dwelling District, R-2M Manufactured Housing District, R-3 Duplex Dwelling District, R-4
1st Multi-Family Dwelling District and R-5 2nd Multi-Family Dwelling District.
(b) Operational characteristics of the street. Only streets considered as residential collector and residential minor collector are eligible. In addition:
(1) The street must be used to provide access to abutting low and moderate density residential properties (local residential street) and/or to collect
traffic for such streets (residential minor collector).
(2) There must be no more that one traffic lane in each direction and the paved width of the street must not exceed 30 feet.
(3) Speed humps will only be located on a paved residential street (alleys are not eligible).
(4) The existing speed limit must be 30 mph or less.
(5) The 85th percentile speed must be more than five miles per hour above the posted speed limit.
(6) The street should have curb and gutter, but a street with a defined drainage ditch on uncurbed streets may be considered.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 250/444
(7) The street must not have curves that would restrict visibility.
(8) The street straight-a-way length must be at least 1,000 feet.
(9) Traffic volume must be at least 500 vehicles per day.
(10) There cannot be speed humps were written objections have been made by the police, volunteer fire department, emergency medical service
or the Aransas County Independent School District transportation department.
(11) A speed hump will not be located in front of a property if the property owner(s) object nor will any speed hump be located in front of a
driveway or within an intersection.
(12) A speed hump should not be located within 200 feet of a traffic control device or within 50 feet of an intersection.
(13) The street cannot be designated as a truck route.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 86-183. Cost responsibility.
As speed humps are not an ordinary street project and are not permitted on all streets within the city, the properties adjoining the street or within a
subdivision must bear an equitable share of the total project costs. These costs included, but are not limited to, the purchase, delivery, installation of the
speed humps and any required signage. Assessments will be based on the participation percentages as follows: 30 percent by property owners on one side
of the street, 30 percent by property owners on the other side of the street and 40 percent by the city.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 86-184. Speed hump removal or alteration.
The process for speed hump removal or alteration is the same as the process for installation. Cost participation by residents shall be required.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 86-185. Procedures for requesting speed hump installation.
(a) The initial request for the installation of speed humps must originate from one or more residents living on the street proposed for speed hump
installation. A request in writing from a resident or a representative (such as a home owner's association) must be addressed to:
Speed Hump Program
City of Rockport
622 E. Market Street
Rockport, Texas 78382-2530
(b) A preliminary determination of eligibility based on traffic data and criteria listed above in "Operational Characteristics of the Street" will be made.
(c) If the street is determined to be ineligible based on the eligibility requirements specified herein, the applicant(s) will be notified in writing and given
the reason for the determination.
(d) The decision of ineligibility may be appealed to the city manager within 15 days of notification above. The city manager will review the
determination and respond to the applicant(s) within 30 days of the appeal.
(e) If the street is determined to be eligible for consideration, a meeting will be arranged between the applicant(s) and the city to define the petition area
and the approximate speed hump locations. The applicant(s) will then submit a formal petition on forms provided by the city indicating that a minimum of
three-fourths of the low and moderate density dwelling households on the street support the installation and cost sharing of speed humps. Only petition
forms provided by the city or exact duplicates may be used.
(f) After verification of the petition, the public works department will con-duct the necessary transportation engineering studies and solicit comments
and recommendation from other agencies.
(g) If the street is determined to be ineligible for speed hump installation, the applicant(s) will be notified in writing stating the reasons for the
determination. This decision may be appealed in the same manner described herein.
(h) If the street is determined to be eligible, the public works department will make a determination of the total installation cost and the city and
residents' costs.
(i) Once eligible for speed hump installation, property owners within the notification area will be notified of the proposed speed hump installation.
(j) If within 30 days of the above notice being mailed, if signatures representing 20 percent or more of property owners within the notification area state
objection to the proposed speed hump installation, a public hearing will be held by the city council. The applicant(s) and owners of real property within the
notification area will be notified of the public hearing. In addition, a reasonable effort will be made to notify each low and moderate density residential
household along the street plus the homeowner's association, if any, of the public hearing.
(k) If the city council approves the installation after a public hearing, invoices will be sent to the affected property owners for their portion in accordance
with this policy. Upon receipt of property owners' payments, the speed hump(s) will be installed as scheduling permits. If total payment of the residents'
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 251/444
share has not bee received within one year from the date of the city invoice, the speed hump project for that street will be cancelled. In that event, all
monies received from residents, if any, will be returned to the payor.
(Ord. No. 1472,  1, 9-22-09)
Chapters 87-89 RESERVED
Chapter 90
SUBDIVISIONS AND PLATTING*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 90-1. Definitions.
In all cases throughout this chapter certain words, phrases and terms shall be construed as set out in this section or as defined in the city's zoning
ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the past and/or future, words in the singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the
singular. Words used in the masculine include the feminine and words in the feminine include the masculine. The word "shall" or the word "must" is
mandatory and not discretionary.
Words defined:
Alley: (See definition of Street.)
Block: A segment of a city; usually a square area lying between intersecting streets or other physical boundaries; the length of one side of such a square.
Building line: A setback line established to control the location of a building on a lot. (Refer to the city zoning ordinance.)
Chairman: The acting chairperson of the Rockport Planning and Zoning Commission.
City: The City of Rockport, Texas.
City council: The governing body of the City of Rockport, Texas.
City engineer: The engineer for the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city council.
City manager: The chief administrative officer for the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city council.
Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city council.
Comprehensive plan: The planning document or documents adopted by the city which contain statements of official municipal policy pertaining to the
subjects of land use, community facilities, transportation, housing and other topics as may be required by state law.
Cul-de-sac: A street having one end open to traffic and the other end permanently terminated by a vehicular turn-around.
Dead-end street: A street having one end open to traffic and the other end closed.
Developer: A person, persons or corporation undertaking the procedures of subdividing and platting of land for the purpose of development. The term
"developer" may be synonymous with "owner of property" or "property owner" and may be the agent of same.
Director of public works: The public works director for the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city manager.
Easement: An interest in real property that conveys use, but not ownership, of a portion of an owner's property.
Encumbrance: An interest or right in real property that may decrease or increase the value of the fee but does not prevent its conveyance by the owner.
Mortgages, taxes, and judgments are encumbrances called liens; restrictions, easements, and reservations are encumbrances, but not liens.
Extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ): An area of limited authority surrounding the City of Rockport, as allowed by state law, which extends in all directions
from the municipal boundaries of the city. (See chapter 42, Local Government Code, 2000 edition.)
Frontage (real property): All the property abutting upon one side of a street between two intersecting streets measured along the street line, or if the street
is dead-ended, then all of the property abutting on one side between all intersecting streets and the dead end of the street.
Homeowners association: A formal organization operating under recorded instruments through which each property owner or homeowner in a specific
residential area may be subject to abide by and operate under. As part of the organization's interests, deed restrictions would become a part of the
controlling mechanism for the organization's activities and maintenance of common property.
Lot: An undivided tract or parcel of land, which is identified by a number or symbol. (See the zoning ordinance for additional definition.)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 252/444
Manufactured housing subdivision: Any development of land designed, platted and maintained for the purpose of providing permanent or long-term
residential occupancy through manufactured housing. Refer to the Rockport Zoning Ordinance for manufactured housing regulations.
Nonresidential subdivision: The subdivision of land for commercial or industrial purposes.
Planned unit development (PUD): A development where planned concepts and unique design principals may not be compatible with the regulations
contained herein but at the same time such planned concept will promote a unified design for residential or nonresidential development, or a combination
of both.
Plat: A map or drawing detailing the specifics of the division of land for the purposes of development;
(a) Preliminary plat: A map of proposed land development showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed development.
(b) Final plat: A map of proposed land development prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lots and blocks, streets, alleys, public areas and other necessary or required information.
Property line: The boundary between two parcels of land or between a property and a traveled way, e.g., a street or alley.
Rights-of-way: The land opened, reserved, or dedicated as a public way for a street or roadway, sidewalk, drainage area, railroad, or other public purpose.
Street: An improved public thoroughfare, which affords the principal means of access between various land use activities;
(a) Arterial: Streets which are principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended to connect remote parts of the city and
which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic.
(b) Collector: Streets which collect and carry traffic from residential streets to major systems of streets and highways, including the principal entrance
streets of residential or nonresidential development and similar streets for circulation within such a development.
(c) Residential: Streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties and which are intended to serve traffic within a limited district or area.
(d) Marginal access: A street (frontage or service road) that may be parallel to and adjacent to all streets, which provide access to abutting properties
and protection from through traffic.
(e) Alley: A public passage or public right-of-way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property but not intended for through
traffic.
Subdivision: The division, redivision or combination of land(s) into one or more lots or tracts, except as may be excluded herein or by state law.
Waterbodies: Any body of water, such as a sea, ocean, bay, lake, river, stream, creek, cattle tank and/or manmade pond, which separates buildable areas of
land from other areas. A canal, drainage channel or other watercourse may be considered as a waterbody.
Vision triangle: That portion of a corner lot which fronts upon two intersecting streets, formed by a diagonal line intersecting the property lines at a point
20 feet back from the corner lot lines.
Zoning administrator: The zoning administrator or designated city official for the City of Rockport, Texas, as appointed by the city manager.
Zoning ordinance: The ordinance and map dividing the city into zoning districts with regulations, requirements, and procedures for the establishment of
land uses, densities and intensities, within the city.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. II), 10-18-00)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
State law referenceDefinitions pertaining to subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  212.001.
Sec. 90-2. Title and purpose.
(a) Title: This chapter shall be known as the Rockport Platting and Subdivision Regulations, and may be cited and referred to as the "platting
regulations" or "subdivision regulations."
(b) Purpose: The regulations contained herein have been developed in accordance with state law and a comprehensive land use planning program to
establish standards for the platting of land within the corporate limits of the city and in the unincorporated area lying within the extraterritorial jurisdiction
(ETJ) of the city, plus, design standards for both existing and future public facility improvements. This chapter has been enacted to promote the health,
safety and general welfare of the community through orderly development.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, A, B), 10-18-00)
State law referencePurposes of rules governing plats and subdivisions, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  212.002; extension of rules to extraterritorial jurisdiction, V.T.C.A., Local
Government Code  212.003.
Sec. 90-3. Conditions.
(a) The subdivision of land is a process conferred upon the owner of land or a developer of land, as defined herein by the laws of the state and through
these platting regulations. It is the owner or developer who is seeking to acquire the advantages of lot subdivision/platting and upon him/her rests the duty
of compliance with reasonable requirements established by this and other city ordinances for the design, dedication, improvement and restrictive use of the
land.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 253/444
(b) Any owner of land located inside the corporate limits, or within the extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), of the city wishing to subdivide land into lots
of five acres or less shall submit to the city's planning and zoning commission a plan of subdivision which shall conform to the minimum requirements set
forth in both these regulations and the city's comprehensive plan.
(c) Any owner of land subdividing such land into lots greater than five acres each (5.01 acre minimum), where each lot has direct access from an
existing road/street right-of-way (r-o-w) and no new public improvement (e.g., utilities, electricity, rights-of-way, or other public infrastructure) is being
dedicated shall be exempt from these platting requirements, but this does not exempt construction standards as may be required by the city. However, when
such parcel is located within the city's corporate limits, then each lot or tract shall be platted prior to the issuance of a building permit in accordance with
the city's zoning ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, C), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-4. Authority.
Chapter 212 of the Local Government Code, 2000 edition, of the State of Texas, is hereby made a part of these regulations as if copied verbatim herein. In
addition, the following shall apply:
(1) No subdivision plat shall be filed or recorded regarding development inside the corporate limits of the city or within the extraterritorial
jurisdiction (ETJ) of the city until the plat shall have been approved by the planning and zoning commission of the city.
(2) The city shall have the authority to prohibit the installation of public utilities in unapproved subdivisions.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, D), 10-18-00)
State law referenceModel subdivision rules, Texas Administrative Code,  364.11-364.18.
Sec. 90-5. Jurisdiction.
This chapter applies to all land within the regular municipal boundaries of Rockport and within the city's designated extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ) as
allowed under authority of Chapters 42 and 212 of the Local Government Code, 2000 edition, of the State of Texas. The Rockport ETJ extends one mile
from the regular municipal boundaries unless preempted by appropriate jurisdictional control of other municipalities. (Refer to section 90-73(c), regarding
interlocal enforcement.)
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, E), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-6. Annexation.
The land owner(s) of approved subdivision developments within the city's ETJ which are adjacent to the city's corporate limits and connecting onto city
water or sewer systems, shall be required to petition (make agreement) with the city to annex with final acceptance of improvements.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, F), 10-18-00)
State law referenceMunicipal annexation, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  43.001 et seq.
Sec. 90-7. Planned unit developments.
Planned unit developments (PUD) are governed by the general provisions of this ordinance in concert with the city zoning ordinance. The planning and
zoning commission is hereby authorized to accept a PUD concept as a preliminary plat so long as all construction requirements of this platting chapter are
met. A final PUD will be handled, as would any final plat by these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, G), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-8. Fees.
Application and administrative fees for the requirements of these regulations are established in the Rockport Development Fee Schedule.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, H), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-9. Vested rights.
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or modify the rights of any person to complete any recorded subdivision project, prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance No. 1166, under existing subdivision regulations in place at that time. However, plats, which were recorded before the effective date of this
Ordinance No. 1166 and have remained totally undeveloped for a period exceeding five years from the recorded date of said plat, shall be subject to
reevaluation by city staff.
Non-recorded plats shall conform to the regulations contained herein unless such plat was considered to be under review, through a completed application
for preliminary plat approval, (or final plat approval, as the case may be), filed with the city, prior to adoption of this Ordinance No. 1166.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, I), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-10. Impact fees.
In accordance with City of Rockport Ordinance No. 1128, as amended, no application for new development (as defined in said ordinance) shall be
approved within the city or within the city's ETJ without assessment of impact fees pursuant to the aforementioned ordinance, and no water and/or
wastewater tap shall be issued and no building permit shall be issued unless the applicant has paid the impact fees imposed by and calculated by same. The
collection of impact fees shall commence on November 9, 2000.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 254/444
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. I, J), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-11. Compliance with Storm Drainage Master Plan and Storm Drainage Design Manual.
No application for new development shall be approved within the city or within the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction (ETJ), where applicable, without
conforming to the requirements set out in the Storm Drainage Master Plan and Storm Drainage Design Manual (see chapter 50, "Floods"). No water and/or
wastewater tap shall be issued, no plats approved or building permits, plans or other documents issued unless the city is satisfied that the applicant has
followed the design criteria and procedures set out in the Storm Drainage Master Plan and Storm Drainage Design Manual adopted by the city.
(Ord. No. 1224,  1, 8-13-02)
Secs. 90-1290-20. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. PLATS, PLANS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS
Sec. 90-21. Classification of plats.
(a) Plats are hereby classified as follows:
(1) Subdivision plat: A plat for new subdivision development which is not an administrative plat or a replat as defined under paragraphs (2) and
(3) below, and will require the following:
a. Preliminary plat (see section 90-31).
b. Final plat (see section 90-32).
NOTE: City staff shall make determination as to the need of both preliminary and final plats depending on the magnitude of development.
Small developments may only require the final plat.
(2) Administrative plat: A plat in which:
a. Adjustments to platted lots are needed that meet the criteria for amending plats described by sections 212.0065 and 212.016, Local
Government Code (L.G.C.), 2000 edition;
b. A minor plat involving four or fewer lots fronting on an existing street and not requiring the creation of any new street or the extension of
public facilities (section 212.0065, L.G.C., 2000 edition); or
c. A replat under section 212.0145 that does not require the creation of any new street or the extension of municipal facilities.
Administrative plats may be processed administratively "in-house" under procedures as outlined under section 90-33, Administrative
procedure, of this chapter, and only a final plat may be required.
(3) Re-plat: A plat in which changes to existing plats are needed to reconfigure or create lots, including building setback lines, which may or may
not impact public improvements and do not meet the requirements for "Amending Plats" as addressed in section 212.016, L.G.C., 2000 edition.
Public hearings required per section 212.014 and section 212.015, L.G.C., 2000 edition. Only a final plat may be required.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. III, A), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-22. Items to be shown on plats.
(a) Preliminary plat: Preliminary plats shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not less than 100 feet to an inch and shall show the following information
(either on the plat or supporting document) for the area to be platted and all land within 200 feet of the outer boundary of the subdivision:
(1) Proposed name: The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate the name of any plat previously recorded within Aransas County.
(2) Project ownership: Name and address of legal owner(s), lien holder(s), if any, or agents of same, and:
a. Any encumbrances, including but not limited to verification of payment of property taxes and existing covenants on the property, if any;
and
b. Any other contiguous holdings.
(3) Adjacent ownership: Names and current deed recordings for adjacent property owners.
(4) Professional firms: Name, address and telephone number of the professional person(s) responsible for subdivision design, for the design of
public improvements, surveys and any environmental reports.
(5) Title block: Graphic and numerical scale, north arrow and date.
(6) Description: Legal description of the subdivision outer boundary.
(7) Vegetation: Location of any trees larger than six inches in diameter at breast height (DBH) which would be located in proposed rights-of-way.
(8) Topography: The plat map shall show elevations at two-foot intervals unless elevations are relatively level, in which case elevations shall be
shown at intervals consistent with good engineering practice. Should heavy ground cover be a problem, major irregularities such as streams, gullies,
or marshes shall be shown.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 255/444
(9) Utilities-Existing: Location and sizes of existing sewers, water mains, gas pipelines, culverts and other underground structures within the tract
and immediately adjacent thereto; including electrical utilities.
(10) Utilities-Proposed: Proposals for connection with electric, gas and telephone systems, public water and sewage systems, or alternative
means of providing sanitary sewage disposal if the city grants a waiver under state law. Appropriate covenants, easements and other restrictions
shall be shown.
(11) Stormwater management plan: Preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging surface water drainage. (Refer to the city's master
drainage plan.)
(12) Flood zone: The location of any flood zones as depicted on the FEMA Flood Hazard Map.
(13) Lots: Location, dimensions and areas of all proposed lots.
(14) Building line: All front and side street building setback lines based upon current zoning applications. (A typical lot plan is acceptable.)
(15) Recreational and public uses: The approximate location, dimensions and area of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for private or
public recreation use (park) or other public use. Land to be dedicated to the city shall be so indicated. (Refer to section 90-58 for parkland
dedication procedures.)
(16) Common areas: Any proposed open spaces intended as common areas, but not public spaces under public ownership. Maintenance of these
areas shall be the responsibility of a homeowners association.
(17) Phasing: If the plat is to be developed in phases, such phasing shall be shown.
(18) Vicinity map: General location map showing the proposed platted area relative to the community.
(19) Land use: Indication of the proposed use of any lot other than a single-family detached lot, e.g. multifamily, commercial, office, etc.
(20) Block and lot numbers: Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or lettered in order. All lots in each block shall be consecutively numbered.
(b) Final plat: The final subdivision plat shall be presented on a reproducible medium consistent with the preliminary plat (including any conditions of
approval), with the following:
(1) The project name;
(2) Lots and blocks numbered as approved in the preliminary plat;
(3) Streets named as approved in the preliminary plat;
(4) All monuments erected, corner, and other points established in the field in accordance with chapter 970, VTCA;
(5) Notation of any covenants and self-imposed restrictions, and locations of any building setback lines proposed to be established in this
manner, if required by the city in accordance with these regulations;
(6) Project ownership and required signatures of approval:
a. Name, verification and signature of legal owner(s);
b. Name, verification and signature of lien holder(s), if any;
c. Name, verification and signature of land surveyor who prepared said plat (land surveyor licensed by the State of Texas);
d. Name, verification and signature of approving agency(s), i.e.: planning commission, city, county or other;
e. Name, verification and signature of city engineer responsible for approving and accepting final plat and construction documents as needed
(engineer licensed by the State of Texas); and
f. Name, verification and signature of the clerk for Aransas County;
(NOTE: See example of signatures under section 90-91)
(7) Graphic and numerical scale, north arrow and date;
(8) General location or vicinity map;
(9) Legal description of the subdivision outer boundary;
(10) Location of property lines (both new and existing), easements, all rights-of-way and watercourses;
(11) Location and width of all streets or other public rights-of-way within or immediately adjacent to the development;
(12) Location of any flood hazard areas as described on the preliminary plat;
(13) Locations, dimensions and areas of all lots, including any set back lines consistent with the city's zoning ordinance, if applicable;
(14) Location of all lands set aside as common areas, public use areas or for park land dedication; and
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 256/444
(15) Land use designations as to zoning or mixed zoning districts.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV, A, B), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1265,  1, 9-23-03)
Sec. 90-23. Construction plans.
Construction plans shall be prepared for all required improvements. Said plans shall be reviewed by the city engineer through the public works department.
In addition to the design requirements of sections 90-46 through 90-61, the following shall be shown:
(1) Streets: Plans showing existing and proposed elevations along the centerline of all roads. Where a proposed road intersects an existing road or
roads, the elevation along the centerline of the existing road or roads within 100 feet of the intersection shall be shown. Radii of all curves, lengths
of tangents, and central angles on all streets shall be shown. Plans showing the locations and typical cross section of street pavements, including
curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements, servitudes, rights-of-way, manholes, and catch basins. Unless otherwise allowed, all street
sections shall be level and symmetrical.
(2) Other public improvements: The locations of bicycle paths, street lighting and street signs; the location, size and inverse elevations of existing
and proposed sanitary sewers, storm water drains, swales, catch basins, and fire hydrants showing connections to any existing or proposed utility
system; and location and size of all water, gas or other underground utilities or structures.
(3) Other governmental permits: If the public improvement plans require permits from county, state or federal agencies, the applicant shall obtain
such permits prior to city approval of the construction plans.
(4) Grading plan: Specifications and references required by the City of Rockport Design Specifications relative to the site grading plan for the
subdivision shall be shown or be specified as meeting said requirements.
(5) Engineer: Title, name, address, seal, and signature of the Texas registered professional engineer responsible for the above.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV, C), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-24. Nonresidential subdivision.
Nonresidential subdivisions are governed by the standards of this chapter in concert with applicable provisions of the city zoning ordinance. In addition to
those provisions the following shall apply:
(1) Driveways and other points of access to and from arterial and collectors shall meet city design standards or as approved by the director of
public works in accordance with sound planning and engineering principles.
(2) Pedestrian ways and/or sidewalks shall be included improvements for public safety.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV, D), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-25. Manufactured housing subdivision.
All the above [sections 90-22 and 90-23], except section 90-24, shall apply to subdivision developments which are designed for manufactured housing.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. IV, E), 10-18-00)
Secs. 90-2690-30. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. PROCEDURES
Sec. 90-31. Preliminary plat, major subdivision.
(a) Application procedure and requirements: An application shall be submitted to the city, on forms provided for that purpose, along with two copies of
the preliminary plat and ten reduced copies, (no smaller than 11 inches by 17 inches), and the fee as specified in section 90-8.
(b) Preliminary plat review: After receipt of the application, the city staff shall review the preliminary plat and render a recommendation to the
commission at their next available meeting. Copies of the application and preliminary plat shall be sent to other associated parties for review and
recommendation. Such parties shall include, but not limited to, the city engineer, department of public works, parks and recreation and etc.
(c) Commission: Within 30 days after the date the plat is filed, the planning and zoning commission will review the preliminary plat along with all
recommendations from associated parties. The commission may approve, table, or reject the preliminary plat. Approval shall constitute authorization for
the applicant to prepare and submit a final plat to the commission. In order to table the final plat, which would extend beyond the "30-day" time limit as
required by state statutes, the developer must submit a letter waiving the 30-day limit prior to such action. Without this waiver, the preliminary plat shall be
either approved or disapproved.
NOTE: The 30-day clock for filing plats officially starts ten working days after receipt of a plat application along with payment of the appropriate fees.
Upon verification of a complete application with all required documentation, said application shall be endorsed and dated by staff and a dated cash receipt
shall be issued the applicant.
(d) Effective period of preliminary plat approval: An approved preliminary plat shall be effective for a period of 12 months, at the end of such time final
approval on the subdivision must be obtained from the commission. A one-time extension of six months may be requested, in writing, prior to the
expiration of the first 12 months. Any plat not receiving final approval within the period of time set forth herein shall be null and void, and the developer
shall be required to resubmit a new plat for preliminary approval, subject to any new subdivision and/or zoning code regulations. This shall also apply to
the first phase of a sectionalized subdivision. (See section 90-35 of this chapter.)
(e) Plat amendment: A preliminary plat shall be amended by the same procedure outlined in subsections (a) through (d) of this section.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 257/444
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, A), 10-18-00)
State law referenceApproval procedure, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  212.009.
Sec. 90-32. Final plat, major subdivision.
(a) Application procedures. Following the approval of the preliminary plat, but not later than the time limits stated in section 90-31(d), the applicant
shall submit a final plat in accordance with this section. It shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as specified in section 90-8, and shall include:
(1) A copy of the approved preliminary plat. (Not required for administrative plats or replats.)
(2) The final plat-original "Vellum" and three full-size copies, plus one 11-inch by 17-inch reduced copy.
(3) Dedications: Be accompanied by all formal offers of dedication to the public of all streets, local government uses, utilities, parks and
easements in a form accepted by the city.
(b) Final plat review. The city staff shall review the final plat against the preliminary plat and render a recommendation to the commission at their next
available meeting. Copies of the final plat documents shall be sent to other associated parties for review and recommendation. Such parties shall include,
but not be limited to, the city engineer, department of public works, parks and recreation and etc. Copies of the plats and construction plans (if any) will be
on display at city offices.
(c) Commission. Within 30 days after the date the plat is filed, the planning and zoning commission will review the final plat along with all
recommendations from associated parties. If the final plat and plat documents meet all applicable requirements of this chapter, the commission shall grant
approval of the final plat. Approval of the final plat shall initiate written authorization from the city as to the approval and to require that construction plans
be submitted to the city for review by city staff and the city engineer. All public improvements shall be installed by the developer, dedicated to and
accepted by the city prior to recording of the final plat by the city. Should the commission find reason to table the final plat, which would extend beyond
the "30-day" time limit as required by state statutes, the developer must submit a letter waiving the 30-day limit prior to such action. Without this waiver,
the preliminary plat shall be either approved or disapproved.
NOTE: The 30-day clock for filing plats officially starts ten working days after receipt of a plat application along with payment of the appropriate fees.
Upon verification of a complete application with all required documentation, said application shall be endorsed and dated by staff and a dated cash receipt
shall be issued the applicant.
(d) Holding of final plat. After approval of the final plat by the commission, the plat map shall be held by the city until signed in accordance with
section 90-34 below.
(e) Effective period of final plat approval. An approved final plat shall be kept on file with the city for a period not to exceed 18 months; after which,
said plat shall be considered null and void. A one-time extension of six months may be granted by the commission upon written request prior to its
expiration.
(f) Code amendments. Every plat shall conform to the subdivision and zoning code regulations applicable at the time of final approval, except that any
final plat that has received preliminary approval shall be exempt from any subsequent amendments to the code rendering the plat nonconforming,
provided, that final approval is obtained within the provisions outlined in paragraph (d) (above) of this section. (Refer to section 90-9, Vested rights.)
(g) Bond. Should the developer request that the final plat be released for recording prior to installation of all improvements, said developer shall submit
to the city an acceptable surety bond, cashier's check or letter of credit in the amount to cover 100 percent of the costs of improvements or remaining
improvements for the subdivision.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, B), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-33. Administrative procedure.
Administrative plats, as described in section 90-21(a)(2), shall be handled administratively and be in conformity with chapter 212 of the Local Government
Code. The administrative authority responsible for review and approval of administrative plats shall consist of the city building official/zoning
administrator and both the chairman and secretary of the planning and zoning commission. In the absence of one of these parties, the city manager shall
designate a responsible person from each area to substitute.
(1) Applications for administrative plats shall be filled out on forms provided by the city for that purpose and shall be accompanied by the
appropriate fee as prescribed in section 90-8, of this chapter, and shall include the following:
a. One reduced copy (11-inch by 17-inch preferred) and one original Vellum of the plat.
b. The subject plat shall show all new and/or adjusted property lines along with boundaries of all affected lots, and shall show any items as
listed under section 90-22(b), if applicable.
(2) Within 30 days after the date the application is filed, the application shall be reviewed by the administrative authority as to compliance with
all applicable city codes and ordinances. If in compliance and unanimously accepted, the plat shall be signed by, in addition to the affected property
owner(s) and the surveyor of record, the chairman and secretary of the planning and zoning commission (refer to section 90-91 for example of
signatures.)
NOTE: The 30-day clock for filing plats officially starts ten working days after receipt of a plat application along with payment of the appropriate fees.
Upon verification of a complete application with all required documentation, said application shall be endorsed and dated by staff and a dated cash receipt
shall be issued the applicant.
(3) In order to approve said plat, which may extend beyond the "30-day" time limit as required by state statutes, the developer must submit a
letter waiving the 30-day limit prior to such approval. Without this waiver, the preliminary plat shall be either approved or disapproved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 258/444
(4) Recording of the final plat with the county clerk shall be as outlined in section 90-34(b) of this chapter.
(5) Should the administrative authority have un-resolvable questions or the decision to accept is not unanimous, the plat documents shall be
disapproved. The applicant may then apply, at no extra cost, for a review by the full commission.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, C), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1606,  1, 6-25-13)
Sec. 90-34. Signing and recording of plats.
(a) Signing:
(1) When the installation of improvements is required, the chairman and secretary of the commission shall endorse the final plat only after all
conditions of the approval have been satisfied and all improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall be written evidence provided by the
developer's engineer, accepted and approved in writing by the city through the city's engineer, that the required public facilities have been installed
in accordance with approved construction plans.
(2) In addition to the above endorsements, other required plat signatures will include; the land surveyor (Texas licensed) of record; the property
owner(s) and/or any lien holder(s), properly executed and notarized; and the County Clerk of Aransas County. (See section 90-91 for endorsement
examples.)
(b) Recording:
(1) The city shall require the surveyor of record to record the signed plat with the county clerk.
(2) After recording, the city shall be furnished three blue line copies.
(3) Building permits shall not be issued until the above requirements are satisfied.
EXCEPTION: Refer to section 90-72, for exceptions to building permits.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, D), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1606,  1, 6-25-13)
Sec. 90-35. Sectionalizing or phasing.
Prior to granting approval of a subdivision plat, the commission may permit the plat to be divided into two or more sections to assure the orderly
development of the plat. In the event of approval of sectionalizing, the entire subdivision preliminary plat, including all sections, shall be filed with the
commission for preliminary plat approval. The final plat may contain one or more of the approved sections for the commission's consideration. After
approval of the final plat for the first phase, there shall be no more than 12 months between the filing of subsequent final plats between phases. Additional
extensions up to six months may be requested in writing by the developer. Approval may be granted by the commission.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, E), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-36. Amendments/changes.
(See section 90-75.)
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, F), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-37. Warranty guarantee.
Before final acceptance by the city, the project contractor shall provide a one-year warranty on all improvements required by the final plat and construction
drawings. This one-year period shall begin upon final acceptance of the improvements by the city. Any defects in materials or workmanship shall be
corrected to satisfy the city during this period.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. V, G), 10-18-00)
Secs. 90-3890-45. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS
Sec. 90-46. General.
The arrangement of streets, lots and infrastructure shall give due regard to the topography and other physical features of the property, shall be prepared in
accordance with accepted engineering principles, and shall meet standards as prescribed within the City of Rockport Design Specifications. In addition to
the above, specific standards shall be applied as hereinafter set out.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-47. Lot standards:
(a) Lot dimensions. Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the City of Rockport Zoning Ordinance for the district being platted.
Standard lot widths around a cul-de-sac shall be measured at the minimum front setback line. In general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street lines
or radii to curving street lines. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum setback from
both streets, i.e. wider by the footage differential between side yard setbacks for corner lots versus interior lots. Depth and width of nonresidential lots shall
be adequate to provide for loading areas and off-street parking facilities, and any other site plan requirements.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 259/444
(b) Double frontage lots. Double frontage lots shall be avoided except in cases where necessary to overcome specific topographical constraints or where
the design specifies rear yards to back up to existing or proposed adjacent street frontage.
(c) Access. All lots shall front directly upon a dedicated city street right-of-way or a private street easement as addressed in section 90-49 below. Singlefamily,
and duplex residential lots shall not have driveway cuts directly onto a collector or arterial street. Where driveway access from a collector or
arterial street may be necessary for several adjoining residential lots, the city may require that such lots be served by a combined access drive (marginal
access drive) in order to limit possible traffic hazard. Vehicular access restrictions may be specified on the construction plans.
(d) Drainage. Lots shall be laid out so as to provide positive drainage away from all buildings, and individual lot drainage shall be coordinated with the
general storm drainage requirements in the City of Rockport Design Specifications.
(e) Waterbodies. If a tract being subdivided contains a waterbody, or portion thereof, lot lines shall be so drawn as to distribute the entire ownership of
the waterbody among the fees of adjacent lots unless a homeowners association is to be responsible. In the latter case, the mean high water line shall be the
property line. The city may, in special cases, accept dedication of the waterbody. In no case shall the waterbody be included in meeting the minimum lot
size or in calculating maximum density.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, A), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-48. Block standards.
(a) Two tiers. Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide for two tiers of lots of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this prescribed block width shall be
permitted in blocks adjacent to streets, railroads, waterways, or the exterior boundary line of the subdivision.
(b) Length. The length of blocks shall be no longer than 1,200 feet as measured from both ends of the block at r-o-w lines.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, B), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-49. Street standards.
(a) Off-site streets. No subdivision plat shall be approved unless the area to be platted shall have frontage on and access from an existing off-site city
maintained street or an existing state or county right-of-way with an approved driving surface.
(b) Grading and improvement plan. All streets within the proposed subdivision shall be graded, paved, and improved to conform to the City of Rockport
Design Specifications, or to the satisfaction of the city. In cases involving county roads, such improvements shall be in collaboration with the county's road
design specifications.
(c) Private streets. Private streets not included in a planned unit development (PUD) shall be allowed in a subdivision subject to meeting all subdivision
and City of Rockport Design Specifications and other conditions set forth below:
Private streets shall not be designed as arterial or collector streets nor shall said streets be "through streets" which connect to existing or proposed
arterial/collector streets.
(1) Private streets are not dedicated to the public and are not publicly maintained. The term "private street" shall include both the pavement and
easement areas of streets, alleys, or service roads within such development.
(2) A private street shall be labeled on the plat as an access easement and be assigned a lot and a block number from its subdivision.
(3) Private streets will be reserved for use by owners and residents, served by such private streets and all governmental entities, providing
services and regulatory enforcement, as well as private service entities.
(4) Minimum width of paved surface shall be no less than 20 feet to allow access by emergency entities (police, fire or EMS vehicles).
(5) Where gated entrances are to be installed, the gate shall be of a break-away model which will not damage emergency vehicles responding to a
call. In addition, a key or entry code to these locked gates; including each time a key or entry code is changed, shall be provided to all emergency
entities (police, fire or EMS vehicles).
(6) Private streets shall be named so as not to conflict with other street names, whether public or private.
(7) All private street access easements shall be treated as public street rights-of-way for purposes of determining building setback requirements
and lot frontages.
(8) All entries to private streets from public streets shall be clearly signed by the owners of their association as a "Private Street."
(d) Topography and arrangement.
(1) Streets shall be designed such that the top of any curb shall not be more than two inches below the drainage master plan hydraulic gradient
for the site. Streets shall be arranged so as to obtain building sites, which are at or above the grade of the streets, if at all possible.
(2) Residential streets shall be laid out to discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient drainage and utility systems, and to yield the
minimum number of streets necessary to provide convenient and safe access to property.
(e) Street classification. Classification of streets are addressed in the City of Rockport Design Specifications and are based on accepted engineering
practice for the types of traffic generated from residential and nonresidential development.
(f) Street names. Names shall be sufficiently different in sound and in spelling from other street names in the city and within Aransas County so as not to
cause confusion. A street that is planned as a continuation of an existing street shall bear the same name.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 260/444
(g) Street signs, markers and traffic control devices. The developer shall furnish and install street signs and traffic control devices as required by the city
at all street intersections. All street signs shall be installed prior to acceptance of the streets. All regulatory signs are to be placed at all intersections within
or abutting the subdivision, the type and location of which shall be approved by the city.
(h) Street arrangement. The arrangement of streets shall provide for the continuation of principal streets between adjacent properties, unless otherwise
set out in the city's comprehensive plan. If the adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way shall
be extended to the property line. A temporary circular improved surface area shall be provided on all temporary dead-end streets within the end of the r-ow
area.
(i) Dead-end streets. Where a street does not extend to the boundary of the subdivision and its continuation is not required by the city for access to
adjoining property, its terminus shall not be nearer to such boundary than 60 feet. Dead end streets shall be provided with either a cul-de-sac or a
hammerhead type of turnaround configuration meeting the requirements addressed in Appendix D of the International Fire Code, 2006 edition (see Exhibit
A attached). In no case however, shall dead-end streets be longer than 1,200 feet as measured from the centerline of the intersecting street that forms a
continuous avenue of travel.
(j) Turn lanes. The city may require intersection turn lanes (right and/or left) and acceleration/deceleration lanes should traffic projections dictate. Such
lane widths shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the city engineer.
(k) Surface improvements. After utilities have been installed, the developer shall construct curbs and gutters and shall surface roadways to the standards
as prescribed in the City of Rockport Design Specifications.
(l) Alleys. Alleys are not required. However, when provided, their rights-of-way must not be less than 20 feet in width for residential neighborhoods and
not less than 30 feet wide in nonresidential neighborhoods.
(m) Angles. Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection of two new streets at an angle of less
than 80 degrees shall not be acceptable. An oblique street should be curved approaching an intersection and should be approximately at right angles for at
least 100 feet therefrom. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point.
(n) Intersections. Offset intersections (street jogs) with centerline off-sets of less than 200 feet shall not be permitted. New intersections shall, wherever
practicable, coincide with any existing intersections on the opposite side of such street.
(o) Sight distance. Where any street intersection will involve earth work or vegetation inside any lot corner that would create a traffic hazard by limiting
visibility, the developer shall limit such ground work/vegetation (excluding singular trees) to no higher than three feet above ground level or average street
level in accordance with the requirements of the "vision triangle" as defined herein, (see Definitions).
(p) Widening and realignment of existing streets. Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow or substandard street or when the comprehensive plan
recommends realignment or widening of streets, the city and the developer shall enter into a shared cost contract agreement for widening or realignment of
such streets.
(q) New collectors or arterial streets. Where the city's comprehensive plan addresses the need for new collector or arterial streets to be developed in an
area where property is proposed to be subdivided/developed, the developer shall dedicate the required right-of-way in conformance with the
comprehensive plan. The city may waive the requirement for the paving of said street if there is not a demonstrable impact on the street by the subdivision
being developed.
FIGURE D103.1
DEAD-END FIRE APPARATUS ACCESS ROAD TURNAROUND
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 261/444
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, C), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1273,  1, 12-9-03; Ord. No. 1380,  1, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-50. Sidewalks and bike paths.
(a) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required as determined on a case-by-case basis or in accordance with subsection (c) below; within dedicated public
rights-of-way or within dedicated easements, including easements for private streets; and shall be constructed in conformance with the City of Rockport
Design Specifications, including handicap ramps.
(b) Bicycle paths/additional sidewalks. The city may require additional easements for sidewalks or bike paths outside of street rights-of-ways in order to
facilitate pedestrian access to schools, parks or other public facilities when such facilities are adjacent to a subject development. Such easements shall be
no less than ten feet wide. The paved surface shall be at least eight feet in width, unless otherwise approved. Such easements shall be indicated on the plat.
(c) Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required in a subdivision development when such development is adjacent to developed areas which have existing
sidewalk systems, or adjacent to public schools, libraries, parks or other public facilities.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, D), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-51. Drainage.
(a) Drainage plan review: A drainage plan shall be submitted to the city along with the regular construction plans. Such drainage plan shall be in
accordance with the city's master drainage plan.. Development within the city's ETJ shall be in accordance with these provisions or as determined by the
county floodplain administrator.
(b) Storm drains:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 262/444
(1) Location: The applicant may be required to carry away storm water run off, either by pipe or open ditch, to an acceptable drainage area. Such
drainage facilities may be located in the road rights-of-way or in perpetual unobstructed easements of appropriate width, and shall be constructed in
accordance with the city's drainage design specifications.
(2) Downstream drainage: The applicant shall indicate the subdivision runoff impact on existing downstream drainage facilities outside the area
of the subdivision. Where it is anticipated that the additional runoff incident to the development of the subdivision will overload an existing
downstream drainage facility, the city may withhold approval of the subdivision until provision has been made for the improvement of said
potential condition as the city shall determine. No subdivision shall be approved unless adequate drainage will be provided to an adequate drainage
watercourse or facility.
(3) Drainage easements: When a proposed drainage system will carry water across private land outside the subdivision, appropriate drainage
easements must be secured and indicated on the plat or by separate instrument.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, E), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1265,  2, 9-23-03)
Sec. 90-52. Flood-prone areas.
Whenever a plat is submitted for an area which is in an area of special flood hazard but not in a floodway, the city may approve such subdivision,
provided, that the developer indicates on the final plat such area of special flood hazard. It will be further indicated on the final plat that the finished first
floor elevations of buildings are to be at or above the base flood elevation (BFE) as indicated on the latest Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) insurance rate map.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, F), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1273,  2, 12-9-03)
Sec. 90-53. Potable water facilities.
(a) Public system. All new development shall connect to an approved public water system where such water supply is within 1,000 feet of subject
development.
(b) Standards: The developer shall install adequate water appurtenances (including fire hydrants), in accordance with the City of Rockport Design
Specifications.
(c) Plat requirements. The location of all fire hydrants and all water supply improvements shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
(d) Reserved. (Water extension policy).
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, G), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-54. Fire protection.
(a) Standards. Fire hydrants, water mains and fire protection related equipment shall be installed in accordance with specifications from the state fire
marshal's office.
(b) Accessibility. All hydrants shall be installed in such a manner as to be unobstructed and easily accessed by the fire department at all times.
(c) Hydrant protection. Fire hydrants in commercial and industrial areas, or any other area where a hydrant may be endangered by vehicles, shall have
guard posts. Posts shall be no less than three-inch diameter metal pipe, concrete filled and painted red. Posts will not be placed in such a manner to be
directly in front of a port or obstruct fire department use or be closer than three feet to the hydrant.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, H), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-55. Sewage facilities.
(a) Public system. All subdivision development shall be connected to a public sanitary sewer system where such system is within 300 feet of subject
development. Where a public sanitary sewage system is not, in the judgment of the city, accessible, the applicant shall comply with all state and county
laws regarding private or packaged sewage facilities.
(b) Standards. The applicant shall install public sanitary sewer facilities in a manner prescribed by the City of Rockport Design Specifications.
(c) Reserved. (Sewer extension policy.)
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, I), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  2, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-56. Street light standards.
The subdivision developer shall install street lights at all intersections; at curves where the delta angle is greater than 45 degrees or a centerline radius of
less than 1,000 feet; and at the turn-around end of dead-end streets in excess of 250 feet in length. Lighting poles shall be constructed of materials resistant
to Texas Gulf Coast environmental conditions and as approved by the city. In the interest of public safety, street lighting shall be located at or directly
across from fire hydrants. The city may, at its discretion, waive certain location requirements where a conflict in distance within these parameters occurs.
EXCEPTION: The installation and operational costs for streetlights in approved subdivisions within the city's ETJ shall not be a requirement of these
regulations.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, J), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  3, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-57. Utilities generally.
Location. All utility facilities, including, but not limited to, gas, electric, telephone and cable TV, shall be located underground throughout the subdivision.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 263/444
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, K), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-58. Park site dedication.
(a) For one- and two-family residential subdivisions 20 acres and greater, a dedication of park land shall be required to meet the recreational needs of the
community by either a percentage of land or a cash payment to the city in an amount equal to the fair market value of the required percentage of park area.
The park site size shall be at least five percent of the gross area of the subject subdivision, but in no case less than one acre, unless so accepted by the city.
Park land or money in lieu of park land shall be determined on a needs basis and shall be negotiated between the developer and the city. Subdivisions less
than 20 acres in size that will not dedicate at least one acre of park land, shall be required to make a cash payment equal to the fair market value of five
percent of the total land area of the subdivision in lieu of dedication of park land.
(b) Such park site or alternate cash payment shall be accepted by the city at time of final plat approval following a recommendation from the city parks
and leisure services advisory board. The basis for determining park sites or park improvement needs are addressed in the city's comprehensive plan/park
and open space master plan, and as determined by the city parks and leisure services advisory board. This requirement shall apply to planned unit
developments (PUD's) as well.
(c) When a subdivision is to be developed in stages or by units so that the actual platting of the park area to be dedicated in connection with said
subdivision will be deferred until a later phase or unit, the developer shall complete and deliver to the city, with the final plat of the subject unit of said
subdivision, an appropriate deed or cash payment acceptable to the city. Installments of cash payments may be accepted by the city with final payment
being made at completion and acceptance of improvements for the final plat of the final unit.
(d) Any monies received in lieu of land for park site dedication shall be used for improvements to the nearest park to subject subdivision, or, if not
needed, then to other park sites as recommended by the city parks and leisure service board and approved by the city council.
(e) Any land used for bike paths and pedestrian ways shall be credited toward the required five percent for parks.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, L), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  4, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-59. Landscaping.
The Rockport Tree and Landscape Regulations (Chapter 106 "Vegetation") shall be a part of this document as if copied verbatim herein, and shall govern
where and when applicable.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, M), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  5, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-60. Commercial and industrial subdivisions.
If a proposed subdivision includes land that is zoned for or shall be zoned for commercial or industrial purposes, the layout of the subdivision street, parcel
and block patterns shall be specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and take into account other uses in the vicinity. The following principles and
standards shall be observed:
(1) Streets. Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be adequate to accommodate the type and volume of traffic anticipated to be generated
thereupon.
(2) Special requirements. The city may require special street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, water, sewer and storm water drainage design and
construction.
(3) Buffers. Every effort shall be made to protect any adjacent residential areas from potential nuisance from a proposed commercial or industrial
subdivision, including the provision of extra parcel depth as determined by the city. (See fence requirements in the zoning ordinance.)
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, N), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-61. Easements.
When necessary to install easements along side or rear lot lines, such easements shall be no less than ten feet wide.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VI, O), 10-18-00)
Secs. 90-6290-70. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT, VIOLATION AND PENALTY
Sec. 90-71. Administration.
In accordance with the Home Rule Charter of the City of Rockport, Texas, and Section 212, Local Government Code, the planning and zoning commission
is responsible for the administration of this chapter.
(1) Variations and exceptions. Whenever the land to be platted or subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or it can be determined that the
strict enforcement of the regulations contained herein would entail practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships, the commission, after report by
staff, shall submit such findings to the city council for further consideration. The city council may vary or modify the proposed subdivision in such
a way that the developer is allowed to develop their property in a reasonable manner, but at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the
City of Rockport are protected and the general intent and spirit of the regulations preserved.
(2) Transfer or sale of land. No person owning land composing a subdivision, nor his or her agent, shall transfer or sell any lot or parcel of land
located within such subdivision by reference to, or exhibition of, or by any other use of a plat of such subdivision, before such final plat has been
filed and recorded as provided in this chapter. The description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in any contract or instrument of transfer or
other documents used in the process of selling or transferring same shall not exempt such owner or agent from the penalties provided herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 264/444
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, A), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  6, 4-24-07)
Sec. 90-72. Permits.
(a) Construction permits. Prior to the installation of any improvements, the developer shall obtain written approval from the city. This approval shall
authorize the construction of only those improvements contained within the subdivision construction plans. Upon completion of the installation of any or
all improvements, the city shall file notification that it has inspected the installation(s) and that said improvements are in compliance with the approved
plans, as far as it is able to determine. This shall not relieve the developer of his responsibility in cases of improper or faulty construction, substitution of
inferior materials, or unapproved deviations from the improvement plans as approved by the city.
(b) Building permits. No building or occupancy permit shall be issued for any lot hereafter platted unless such plat has been filed and recorded in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, except for the following:
(1) Model homes. In a subdivision where completion of improvements is required, the city may permit construction of model homes in a portion
of the subdivision involving up to ten percent of the total lots within each subdivision or phase. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued until
final plat recording.
(2) Access. Adequate access into the development for the model home(s), including police and fire equipment, shall be completed prior to the
issuance of any building permit.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, B), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-73. Enforcement.
(a) In accordance with state law, no deed or other instrument of transfer of real property in the planning area shall be accepted by the county clerk for
record unless said deed or instrument of transfer is for a lot or other platted area recorded or accompanied by a plat approved by the city.
(b) The inspection of subdivision development within Rockport's jurisdiction will be jointly facilitated through the efforts of the public works
department and the designated city engineer. Any questions regarding the scope of responsibility in inspection of subdivision development will be resolved
by the city manager.
(c) The enforcement of this chapter within the city's ETJ shall be in concert with applicable Aransas County regulations. Where the provisions of this
chapter are more restrictive or impose higher standards than those of the county, then the requirements of this chapter shall govern.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, C), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-74. Appeals.
Any person contesting any decision or the interpretation or application of any rule, standard, regulation, determination, requirement or necessity set forth
in this chapter directly or by delegation of authority shall have the right, after filing a written request with the city within 15 days of such decision,
interpretation and/or application, to have a hearing before the appropriate authority as stipulated below:
(1) To appeal a decision of the city staff, appeal shall be made before the planning and zoning commission.
(2) To appeal a decision of the planning and zoning commission, appeal shall be made before the city council.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, D), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-75. Amendments/changes.
The city or any interested party may from time to time request to amend or make changes to this document in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the City Charter and state statutes. Such request shall be made in writing and submitted to the planning and zoning commission for consideration.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, E), 10-18-00)
Sec. 90-76. Violation and penalty.
Any person violating this chapter or portion thereof within the city limits shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be fined in an
amount not to exceed the maximum as allowed by law.
(1) Violation of this chapter or any provision thereof outside the corporate limits of the city, but within the city's area of ETJ, shall not constitute
a misdemeanor under this chapter, nor shall any fine provided for in this chapter be applicable to a violation within such area of ETJ.
(2) In the event any provision of this chapter is violated within the area of ETJ of the city, and outside its corporate limits, the city may institute
any appropriate action or proceedings in the district court to enjoin the violation of such chapter.
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VII, F), 10-18-00)
Secs. 90-7790-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. APPENDIX
Sec. 90-91. Examples of plat endorsements.
SURVEYOR
State of Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 265/444
County of Aransas
I, (land surveyor) a registered professional land surveyor in the State of Texas do hereby certify that the foregoing (plat, re-plat, amending plat) was
prepared from surveys made on the ground under my direction and supervision and is true and correct, and that I have been engaged to set all lot
and block corners and reference points and complete such operations without delay. This the ____________ day of ____________ A.D.,
20____________.
(Professional seal here)
(surveyor of record & signature)
OWNER/LIEN HOLDER
State of Texas
County of Aransas
I, (land owner or lien holder), do hereby certify that I am the (owner, lien holder) of the lands embraced within the boundaries of the foregoing plat
and that I have had said lands surveyed and platted as shown hereon and I do accept and approve said plat for all purposes and considerations.
This the ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20____________.
(landowner, lien holder)
NOTARY PUBLIC
State of Texas
County of ____________
Before me, the undersigned authority, on this day appeared ____________, known to me to be the person whose name is subscribed to the
foregoing instrument of writing and acknowledged to me that he executed the same for the purposes and considerations therein expressed, and in
the capacity therein stated.
Given under my hand and seal of office, this the ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20____________.
(seal)
Notary Public, State of Texas
Printed Name: _____________________
Expiration Date:____________________
P & Z COMMISSION
State of Texas
County of Aransas
This final plat of the herein described property is approved for filing of record in Aransas County, Texas, by the Planning & Zoning Commission of
the City of Rockport, Texas.
This the ____________ day of ____________ A.D., 20____________.
Chairman, City Planning & Zoning
Commission
Secretary, City Planning & Zoning
Commission
CITY ENGINEER
State of Texas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 266/444
County of Aransas
This final plat of the herein described property approved by the City Engineer for the City of Rockport, Texas.
This the ____________ day of ____________, A.D., 20____________.
(Professional seal here)
City Engineer
City of Rockport, Texas
COUNTY CLERK
State of Texas
County of Aransas
I, (court clerk), clerk of the county court in and for Aransas County, do hereby certify that the foregoing instrument dated the ____________ day of
____________, A.D., 20____________, with its certificates of authentication, was filed for record in my office the ____________ day of
____________, A.D., 20____________, at ____________ o'clock ____________M., and duly recorded the ____________ day of ____________,
A.D. 20____________, at ____________ o'clock ____________M., in the map records of Aransas County, Texas, in volume ____________, page
____________.
Witness my hand and seal of the county court, in and for Aransas County, at office in Rockport, Aransas County, Texas, the day and year last
written above.
File No.
________________________________
County Clerk, Aransas County, Texas
(Ord. No. 1166,  2(Exh. A, Art. VIII), 10-18-00; Ord. No. 1380,  7, 4-24-07)
Chapters 91-93 RESERVED
Chapter 94
TAXATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 94-1. Taxes declared lien against real or personal property.
(a) The taxes levied by the City of Rockport, Texas, are hereby declared to be first lien, charge and encumbrance upon property upon which the tax is
due, not only as against residents of this state, but entitled to enforce and foreclose in any court having jurisdiction of same, and the lien, charge and
encumbrance on the property in favor of the City of Rockport, for the amount of taxes due on said property is such as to give the state courts jurisdiction to
enforce said lien due on said property on which the tax is due not only any resident of the state, but against persons who are not residents of the state, or
whose residence is unknown and against the unknown heirs of any person who owns property on which the tax is due.
(b) All taxes levied by the City of Rockport, Texas, against personal property are hereby declared to be a lien upon such property and upon any other
property, except homesteads, that may be owned by the person against whom such assessments are made, and the City of Rockport may at its discretion, in
addition to the rights already assured to it by the laws of the State of Texas and ordinances duly enacted pursuant thereto, file suit for collection against the
owner of such personal property in any court of competent jurisdiction and to foreclose any lien against any or all property subject to said lien for personal
property taxes.
(Ord. No. 1040,  2, 3, 9-10-96)
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1040,  2, 3, adopted Sept. 10, 1996, did not specifically amend the Code; hence, inclusion as  94-1 has been at the discretion of
the editor.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 267/444
Secs. 94-294-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SALES AND USE TAX*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 94-26. Gas and electricity.
The city shall continue the taxes authorized by the Municipal Sales and Use Tax Act (V.T.C.A., Tax Code ch. 321) on the receipts from the sale,
production, distribution, lease, or rental of, and the use, storage or other consumption of gas and electricity for residential use, as authorized by V.T.C.A.,
Tax Code  151.317.
(Ord. No. 468,  1, 9-25-78)
Secs. 94-2794-35. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
Sec. 94-36. Tax authorized; exemption.
(a) A tax is hereby authorized on all telecommunications services sold within the city. For purposes of this section, the sale of telecommunications
services is consummated at the location of the telephone or other telecommunications device from which the call or other communication originates. If the
point of origin cannot be determined, the sale is consummated at the address to which the call or other communication is billed.
(b) The application of the exemption provided for in V.T.C.A., Tax Code  321.210(a) is hereby repealed by the city as authorized by V.T.C.A., Tax
Code  321.210(b).
(c) The rate of tax imposed by this section shall be the same as the rate imposed by the city, for all other local sales and use taxes as authorized by the
legislature of the state.
(Ord. No. 769,  1, 4-28-87)
Sec. 94-37. Provisions deemed cumulative; effect on other obligations.
This division shall be and is hereby declared to be cumulative of all other ordinances of the city, and this division shall not operate to repeal or affect any
of such other ordinances. The tax provided for under this division shall not serve as an offset to, be in lieu of or in any way reduce any amount payable to
the city pursuant to any franchise, street use ordinance, Charter provision, statute or, without limitation by the foregoing enumeration, other payable by any
provider of telecommunications services; it being the express intent of this division that all such obligations, impositions and agreements of every kind and
nature shall remain in full force and effect without reduction or limitation hereby.
(Ord. No. 769,  2, 4-28-87)
Secs. 94-3894-60. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. AD VALOREM TAXES*
Sec. 94-61. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1344,  3, adopted Jan. 10, 2006, repealed  94-61, which pertained to discounts and derived from Ord. No. 955,  2, adopted Aug.
7, 1993; Ord. No. 983,  1, 3, adopted Sept. 13, 1994; Ord. No. 1008,  1, adopted Sept. 12, 1995; Ord. No. 1041,  1, 2, adopted Sept. 10, 1996; Ord.
No. 1065,  1, adopted Sept. 23, 1997.
Sec. 94-62. Homestead exemption for elderly.
(a) Seven thousand five hundred dollars of the assessed value of residence homesteads of persons who have attained the age of 65 years or older on or
before January 1 of the year for which the exemption is claimed, shall be exempt from city ad valorem taxes levied by the city; provided, however, that
where the ad valorem tax has heretofore been pledged for the payment of any debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy
and collect the tax against the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would
impair the obligation of the contract by which the debt was created.
(b) In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January 1 and May 1 file with the Aransas County Chief Appraiser
sufficient proof, as determined by said appraiser that such property was owned on January 1 for which the exemption is claimed, and shall also furnish
proof of age, which proof shall be determined to the satisfaction of said chief appraiser.
(c) All other provisions of Section 11.13 of the Tax Code, specifically relating to the over 65 residence homestead exemption, now in effect or as may be
amended, shall apply to an individual claiming such exemption, unless expressly otherwise stated in this section.
(Code 1972,  21-3; Ord. No. 1344,  4, 1-10-06)
State constitution referenceAuthority for above section, art. VIII,  1-b(b).
Sec. 94-63. Residence homestead exemption.
(a) There is exempted from ad valorem taxation one percent of the assessed value of residence homesteads of married or unmarried adults, including
those living alone, levied by the city; however, the amount of an exemption may not be less than $5,000.00; provided, however, that where the ad valorem
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 268/444
tax has previously been pledged for the payment of debt, the taxing officers of the city shall have authority to continue to levy and collect the tax against
the homestead property at the same rate as the tax so pledged until the debt is discharged, if the cessation of the levy would impair the obligation of the
contract by which the debt was created.
(b) In order to secure the benefit of the exemption, the owner shall, between January 1 and May 1 of each year, file with the county appraisal district, on
a form furnished by the county appraisal district, a sworn inventory of such property owned on January 1 of each year for which the exemption is claimed.
(Ord. No. 560,  1, 2, 3-22-82; Ord. No. 565,  1, 5-10-82)
State constitution reference-Authority for above section, art. VIII,  1-b(e).
Sec. 94-64. Time and manner of payment.
(a) The ad valorem taxes hereafter levied by the city council each year shall become due on October 1 of the year for which the levy is made and may be
paid up to and including the following January 31 without penalty; but if not so paid, such taxes shall become delinquent on the following day; namely,
February 1, and the following interest and penalty shall be payable thereon:
Penalty (percent) Interest (percent) Total (percent)
February 6 1 7
March 7 2 9
April 8 3 11
May 9 4 13
June 10 5 15
July 12 6 18
Each month thereafter * +1 +1
(b) Unpaid taxes for the assessment year 1997 and all prior years shall be considered delinquent as of February 1 of the year next succeeding the year for
which such taxes were levied or assessed and shall be subject to penalty and interest rate outlined in the schedule listed in subsection (a) above.
(Ord. No. 1009,  1, 2, 9-12-95; Ord. No. 1042,  1, 2, 9-10-96; Ord. No. 1066,  1, 9-23-97)
Sec. 94-65. Residence homestead tax limitation for elderly or disabled individuals.
(a) There is hereby created and established a limitation on the amount of property taxes imposed by the City of Rockport on the residence homesteads of
disabled individuals or individuals age 65 or older.
(b) The tax officials shall appraise the property to which the limitation applies and calculate taxes as on other property, but if the tax so calculated
exceeds the limitation provided by Section 11.261 of the Tax Code, the tax imposed shall be the amount of the tax as limited by Section 11.261 of the Tax
Code, except as otherwise may be provided by and subject to other provisions of said Section 11.261 of the Tax Code currently in effect or as may be
amended.
(c) The tax limitations as set forth herein shall remain in effect from the year 2006 and for each successive tax year.
(Ord. No. 1344,  1, 1-10-06)
Sec. 94-66. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply for purposes of this article:
Disabled has the same meaning as set forth in Section 11.13(m) (1), as it currently exists or may be amended, of the Tax Code.
Residence homestead has the same meaning as set forth in Section 11.13(j) (1), as it currently exists or may be amended, of the Tax Code.
Tax Code means the Texas Tax Code, as it currently exists or may be amended.
(Ord. No. 1344,  1, 1-10-06)
Secs. 94-6794-85. Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 269/444
ARTICLE IV. HOTEL OCCUPANCY TAX*
Sec. 94-86. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Consideration means the cost of the room in a hotel only if the room is ordinarily used for sleeping, and not including the cost of any food served or
personal services rendered to the occupant of such room not related to the cleaning and readying of such room for occupancy.
Hotel means a building in which members of the public obtain sleeping accommodations for consideration. The term includes a hotel, motel, tourist home,
tourist house, tourist court, lodginghouse, inn, or roominghouse, but does not include a hospital, sanitarium or nursing home.
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms in a hotel if the room is one which is ordinarily used
for sleeping and if the occupant is other than a permanent resident as defined in this section.
Occupant means anyone who, for a consideration, uses, possesses or has a right to use or possess any room, or sleeping space or facility in a hotel under
any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license, contract or agreement, other than on a permanent basis.
Person means any individual, company, corporation or association owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel.
Permanent resident means any occupant who has or shall have the right to occupancy of any room or sleeping space or facility in a hotel for at least 30
consecutive days during the current calendar year or preceding year, so long as there is no interruption of payment for the period.
Quarterly period means the regular quarters of the fiscal year beginning October 1 and ending September 30; each first quarter ending December 31; each
second quarter ending March 31; each third quarter ending June 30; and each fourth quarter ending September 30.
(Ord. No. 923,  1(b)-(e), (g), (h), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1496,  2, 5-11-10)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
State law referenceDefinitions pertaining to hotel occupancy taxes, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  156.001.
Sec. 94-87. Tax levied; amount.
Except as provided in this article, there is hereby levied a tax of seven percent of the price paid for a room in a hotel on every person who, under a lease,
concession, permit, right of access, license, contract, or agreement, pays for the use or possession or for the right to the use or possession of a room that is
in a hotel, costs $2.00 or more each day, and is ordinarily used for sleeping. The price of a room in a hotel does not include the cost of food served by the
hotel and the cost of personal services performed by the hotel for the person except those services related to the cleaning and readying of the room for
possession.
(Ord. No. 923,  2(a), 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1087,  1, 7-28-98)
State law referenceTax authorized, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.002; tax rates, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.003.
Sec. 94-88. Exemptions.
(a) No tax shall be imposed under this article upon a permanent resident.
(b) No tax shall be imposed for diplomatic personnel who present a tax exemption card issued by the United States Department of State.
(c) No tax shall be imposed for federal or state military personnel traveling on official military business. This exemption does not cover military staff on
leave or between stations.
(d) This article does not impose a tax on the United States, this state, or an agency, institution, board or commission of this state other than an institution
of higher education.
(e) This article does not impose a tax on an officer or employee of a governmental entity described by subsection (d) of this section when traveling on or
otherwise engaged in the course of official duties for the governmental entity.
(f) In this section, the term "institution of higher education" has the meaning assigned by V.T.C.A., Education Code,  61.003.
(Ord. No. 923,  2(b)-(e), 8-11-92)
State law referenceExemption, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.006.
Sec. 94-89. Collection of tax.
(a) Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any hotel shall collect the tax levied by this article for the city.
(b) The hotel operator shall be entitled to one percent of the hotel occupancy tax revenues collected as reimbursement for the operator's administrative
costs for collecting the tax. However, as provided in this article, this reimbursement shall be forfeited if the hotel operator fails to timely pay over the tax
or timely file a report as required by the city or files a false report with the city.
(Ord. No. 923,  3, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1496,  3, 5-11-10)
State law referenceReimbursement for tax collection expenses, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.005.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 270/444
Sec. 94-90. Quarterly reports to city secretary.
On the last day of the month following each quarterly period, every person required to collect the tax imposed by this article shall file a report with the city
secretary of taxes showing the price paid for all room occupancies in the preceding quarter, the amount of the tax collected on such occupancies, and any
other information the city secretary may reasonably require. Such person shall pay the tax due on such occupancies at the time of filing such report. The
report shall be in a form prescribed by the city secretary. The city secretary is hereby authorized and directed to do all such things necessary or convenient
to carry out the terms of this article. The city secretary shall have the authority to request and receive within a reasonable time documentation for
information contained in the report to the city by the hotel. In addition to the report required to be filed with the city secretary, every person required to
collect the tax imposed by this article shall also file a copy of the hotel occupancy tax report also due to the Texas State Comptroller for the current period,
when submitting the city tax report.
(Ord. No. 923,  4, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1069,  1, 10-28-97)
Sec. 94-91. Access to books and records.
The city secretary shall have the power to make such rules and regulations as are reasonable and necessary to effectively collect the tax levied by this
article, and shall upon reasonable notice have access to books and records necessary to enable him to determine the correctness of any report filed as
required by this article, and the amount of taxes due under the provisions of this article.
(Ord. No. 923,  5, 8-11-92)
Sec. 94-92. Penalties.
(a) If any person shall fail to file a report as required in this article or shall file a false report or shall fail to pay to the city secretary the tax as imposed in
this article when the report or payment is due, he shall pay, in addition to the tax owed under this article, 15 percent of the amount due as penalty.
However, such penalty shall never be less than $1.00. Delinquent taxes shall draw interest at the rate of ten percent per annum beginning 60 days from the
due date.
(b) Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, including hotel operators who fail to collect the tax, fail to file a return, file a false return,
or who are delinquent in their tax payment, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 923,  6, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1069,  2, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 1496,  4, 5-11-10)
Sec. 94-93. Additional remedial action.
The city is hereby authorized to take the following actions against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and pay the collection over
to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due:
(1) Require the forfeiture of any revenue the city allowed the hotel operator to retain for its cost of collecting the tax;
(2) Bring suit against the hotel for noncompliance; and/or
(3) Bring suit against the hotel seeking any other remedies provided under state law.
(Ord. No. 923,  7, 8-11-92)
Sec. 94-94. Additional authorization to bring suit; installment agreement; delinquent payments received.
(a) The city attorney is hereby authorized to bring suit against any person required to collect the tax imposed by this article and required to pay the
collections over to the city and who has failed to file a report, or filed a false report, or failed to pay the tax when due. Such suit may seek to collect such
tax not paid or to enjoin such person from operating a hotel in the city until the tax is paid or the report is filed or both, as applicable and as provided in the
injunction. The city shall be entitled to recover its reasonable attorneys fees incurred against a person not in compliance with this article.
(b) The city may enter into an agreement with a person delinquent in the payment of the hotel tax, penalties, and interest in installments.
(1) Under the following terms and conditions, the agreement must be in writing and may not be extended for a period of more than 60 days,
whether or not suit against such person has been brought when the entire amount of delinquent hotel tax, penalties, and interest shall be due in full.
Interest at the rate as provided in this article, shall accrue on the unpaid balance of hotel taxes owed during the period of the agreement. The
execution, by a person liable to pay the hotel tax under this article, of an installment agreement under this section is an irrevocable admission of
liability for all hotel taxes, penalties, and interest that are subject to the agreement.
(2) A suit may not be filed to collect delinquent hotel taxes subject to an installment agreement unless the person:
a. Fails to make a payment as required by the agreement;
b. Fails to report and/or pay other hotel taxes due to the city when due; or
c. Breaches any other condition of the agreement.
(3) Delinquent payments received, whether or not an installment agreement has been made by a person liable to pay the hotel tax under this
article, shall be applied first to payment of any penalties owed; then to the payment of current interest; then to the payment of accrued interest,
before applying the rest of the payment, if any, to the payment of the delinquent hotel taxes.
(Ord. No. 923,  8, 8-11-92; Ord. No.  3, 10-28-97; Ord. No. 1496,  5, 5-11-10)
State law referenceTax collection, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.004.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 271/444
Sec. 94-95. Use of revenue.
(a) Revenue from the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this article may be used only to promote tourism and the convention and hotel industry, and that
use is limited to the following:
(1) The acquisition of sites for and the construction, improvement, enlarging, equipping, repairing, operation and maintenance of convention
center facilities or visitor information centers, or both.
(2) The furnishing of facilities, personnel, and materials for the registration of convention delegates or registrants.
(3) Advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to attract tourists and convention delegates or registrants to the city or its
vicinity.
(4) The encouragement, promotion, improvement, and application of the arts, including instrumental and vocal music, dance, drama, folk art,
creative writing, architecture, design and allied fields, painting, sculpture, photography, graphic and craft arts, motion pictures, radio, television,
tape and sound recording, and other arts related to the presentation, performance, execution, and exhibition of these major art forms.
(5) Historical restoration and preservation projects or activities or advertising and conducting solicitations and promotional programs to
encourage tourists and convention delegates to visit preserved historic sites or museums:
a. At or in the immediate vicinity of convention center facilities or visitor information centers; or
b. Located elsewhere in the city or its vicinity that would be frequented by tourists and convention delegates.
(b) Revenue derived from the tax authorized by this article shall be expended in a manner directly enhancing and promoting tourism and the convention
and hotel industry as permitted by subsection (a). That revenue may not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of
the city.
(c) Installation agreement; delinquent payments received.
(1) Under state law revenue from the hotel occupancy tax imposed by this article may only be used to promote tourism and the convention and
hotel industry, subject to the limitations set forth in the Texas Tax Code, Section 351.101(a) now in effect or as maybe thereafter amended, which
apply to a municipality the size of the City of Rockport, or to a county the size of Aransas County.
(2) The revenue may not be used for the general revenue purposes or general governmental operations of the city.
(3) Revenue from the hotel occupancy tax approved by this article must be allocated for those specific uses found in the Texas Tax Code,
Sections 351.101 and 351.014, now in effect or as may be thereafter amended, which apply to a municipality the size of the City of Rockport.
(Ord. No. 923,  9, 8-11-92; Ord. No. 1496,  6, 5-11-10)
State law referenceSimilar provisions, V.T.C.A., Tax Code  351.101.
Sec. 94-96. Accounting; keeping of records.
(a) The city council may, by contract, delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or a private organization, the management or
supervision of programs and activities funded with revenue from the hotel occupancy tax. The city council shall approve in writing in advance the annual
budget of the entity to which it delegates those functions, and shall require the entity to make periodic reports to the city council at least annually listing
the expenditures made by the entity of revenue from the tax provided by the city.
(b) The entity must maintain the revenue provided by the city from the tax in a separate account established for that purpose and may not commingle
that revenue with any other money or maintain it in any other account.
(c) The city may not delegate to any person or entity the management or supervision of its convention and visitors programs and activities funded with
revenue from the hotel occupancy tax other than by contract as provided in this article.
(d) The approval by the city council of the annual budget of the entity to which these functions are delegated creates a fiduciary duty in the person or
entity with respect to the revenue provided by the city to the person or entity under the contract.
(e) A person or entity with whom the city contracts to conduct authorized activities shall maintain complete and accurate financial records of each
expenditure of hotel occupancy tax revenue made by the person or entity and, on request of the city council or other person, shall make the records
available for inspection and review.
(f) Hotel occupancy tax revenue may be spent for day-to-day operations, supplies, salaries, office rental, travel expenses, and other administrative costs
only if those administrative costs are incurred directly in the promotion and servicing of expenditures hereinbefore authorized. The portion of the total
administrative costs for activities for which hotel occupancy tax revenue may be used may not exceed administrative costs actually incurred in conducting
the authorized activities.
(Ord. No. 923,  10, 8-11-92)
Sec. 94-97. Collection procedures on purchase of hotel.
(a) If a person who is liable for the payment of a tax under this article is the owner of a hotel and sells the hotel, the successor to the seller or the seller's
assignee shall withhold an amount of the purchase price sufficient to pay the amount due until the seller provides a receipt by the city secretary showing
that all current and/or past due hotel taxes have been paid or a certificate showing that no tax is due.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 272/444
(b) The purchaser of a hotel who fails to withhold an amount of the purchase price as required by this section is liable for the amount required to be
withheld to the extent of the value of the purchase price.
(c) The purchaser of a hotel may request that the city secretary issue a certificate stating that no tax is due or issue a statement of the amount required to
be paid before a certificate may be issued. The city secretary shall issue the certificate or statement not later than the 60th day after the request is received.
(d) If the city secretary fails to issue the certificate or statement within the period provided by subsection (c) of this section, the purchaser is released
from the obligation to withhold the purchase price or pay the amount due.
(Ord. No. 1069, 4, 10-28-97)
Sec. 94-98. Request for hotel tax funds.
The governing body of the City of Rockport, by contract, may from time to time delegate to a person, including another governmental entity or private
organization, the management or supervision of programs and activities, to which the use of hotel taxes is authorized. Application from such person,
governmental entity or organization for request of hotel funds for such uses must be made in writing to the city secretary, on a form as may be provided by
the city.
(Ord. No. 1496,  6, 5-11-10)
Secs. 94-9994-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. TAXATION OF TANGIBLE PERSONAL PROPERTY IN TRANSIT
Sec. 94-110. Definitions.
The following terms have the same meaning as defined in section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Bailee and Warehouse have the meanings assigned by Section 7.102, Business & Commerce Code.
Dealer's heavy equipment inventory has the meaning assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Dealer's motor vehicle inventory has the meaning assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Retail manufactured housing inventory has the meaning assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory has the meaning assigned by Subchapter B, Chapter 23 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
Goods-in-transit is defined to mean tangible personal property that:
(1) Is acquired in or imported into this state to be forwarded to another location in this state or outside this state;
(2) Is stored under a contract of bailment by a public warehouse operator at one or more public warehouse facilities in this state that are not in
any way owned or controlled by the owner of the personal property for the account of the person who acquired or imported the property;
(3) Is transported to another location in this state or outside this state not later than 175 days after the date the person acquired the property in or
imported the property into this state; and
(4) Does not include oil, natural gas, petroleum products, aircraft, dealer's motor vehicle inventory, dealer's vessel and outboard motor inventory,
dealer's heavy equipment inventory, or retail manufactured housing inventory.
Location means a physical address.
Petroleum product means a liquid or gaseous material that is an immediate derivative of the refining of oil or natural gas.
Public warehouse operator means a person that:
(1) Is both a bailee and a warehouse; and
(2) Stores under a contract of bailment, at one or more public warehouse facilities, tangible personal property that is owned by other persons
solely for the account of those persons and not for the operator's account.
(Ord. No. 1408,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1553,  1, 10-25-11)
Sec. 94-111. Subject to ad valorem taxation.
A person is not entitled to an exemption from taxation of the appraised value of that portion of the person's property that consists of goods-in-transit. A
person's property consisting of goods-in-transit is hereby subject to ad valorem taxation pursuant to Section 11.253 of the Texas Tax Code, as amended.
(Ord. No. 1408,  1, 12-11-07)
Chapters 95-97 RESERVED
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 273/444
Chapter 98
TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 98-1. Penalty for violation.
(a) If a person commits a violation of article II, or article III of this chapter, it shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine only, as provided in section 1-
7(a).
(b) If a person commits a violation of article IV or article VI of this chapter, it shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by fine only, up to $200.00.
(Ord. No. 935,  3, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1045,  3, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 1639,  1, 10-28-14)
Sec. 98-2. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this chapter, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
ADA means the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Chief of police means the (police chief, chief) the top official in the chain of command of the city police department.
Commercial motor vehicle (CMV) means a motor vehicle or combination of motor vehicles used in commerce to transport passengers or property if the
motor vehicle which:
(1) Has a gross combination weight rating of 11,794 kilograms or more (26,001 pounds or more) inclusive of a towed unit(s) with a gross vehicle
weight ratng of more than 4,536 kilograms (10,000 pounds); or
(2) Has a gross vehicle weight rate of 11,794 or more kilograms (26,001 pounds or more); or
(3) Is designed to transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver; or
(4) Is of any size and is used in the transportation of hazardous materials.
Golf cart means a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. [Texas Transportation Code Sec.
502.001]
Hazardous materials means any substance which has been determined to be either a health hazard or a physical hazard.
Loading zone means an area of a street or a parking lot indicating that spot is only to be used for the immediate loading or unloading of passengers,
baggage or freight, or short term parking (ten minutes or less) is permitted for that purpose.
Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) means a vehicle that can attain a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour on a paved level surface and otherwise
complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 500: Low-Speed Vehicles (Effective 6/17/98). This standard specifies requirements for low-speed
vehicles. A low-speed vehicle is a 4-wheeled motor vehicle, other than a truck, whose attainable speed is more than 32 km/h (20 mph) and not more than
40 km/h (25 mph). The standard requires ten specific items of safety equipment. [Texas Transportation Code Sec. 551.301(1)].
No parking zones means an area where vehicles are not allowed to park.
Parking is the act of stopping a vehicle and leaving it unoccupied for more than a brief time.
Vehicle means any automobile, motor vehicle, motor home, recreational vehicle, machinery, trailer, boat trailer, implement or apparatus of any kind or
character.
(Ord. No. 1589,  1, 9-25-12)
Secs. 98-398-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TRAFFIC CONTROL
Sec. 98-26. Stop signs, yield signs, one-way streets; generally.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the requirements placed upon that person by their operation of a motor vehicle upon the streets, alleys and
highways within the city, in compliance with the stop, yield and one-way street signs as set forth in this chapter, or as set forth in the Uniform Act
Regulating Traffic on Highways (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d).
(Ord. No. 935,  2(a), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1217,  1, 2, 8-13-02)
Editor's noteFormerly set out as  98-26(a)-(d), the provisions which pertained to stop signs, yield signs, and one-way signs have been redesignated as 
98-26-98-26.3 in order to facilitate indexing and reference.
Sec. 98-26.1. Stop signs.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 274/444
Appendix T-41(b) following this section gives the location of stop signs within the city limits, and the direction of traffic to which each stop sign faces. An
operator of a motor vehicle approaching any stop sign must come to a complete stop at, or before, reaching the sign before proceeding past the sign.
APPENDIX T-41(b)
STOP SIGNS
1 Airport Road
Farm-to-Market 1781 W
2 Albatross Lane
Albatross Lane E
3 Albatross Lane
Bayshore Drive S
4 Allen Street
Alamito Street N/S
5 Allen Street
Cedar Street E/W
6 Allen Street
Nopal Street S
7 Allen Street
Orleans Street E/W
8 Allen Street
Sabinal Street E/W
9 Aloha Lane
Whooping Crane Lane E
10 Ann Street
North Street N/S
11 Ann Street-North
Concho Street N/S
12 Ann Street-North
Laurel Street E/W
13 Ann Street-North
Mimosa Street N/S
14 Ann Street-North
Orleans Street W
15 Ann Street-North
Sabinal Street N
16 Ann Street-South
Bay Street E
17 Ann Street-South
Eloise Drive E
18 Ann Street-South
Fifth (5th) Street S
19 Ann Street-South
First (1st) Street N/S
20 Ann Street-South
Hackberry Street N/S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 275/444
21 Ann Street-South King Street S/E/W
22 Ann Street-South
Market Street N/S
23 Ann Street-South
Mockingbird Lane E
24 Ann Street-South
Morgan Street E
25 Ann Street-South
Murray Street W
26 Augusta Drive
Bent Tree Street N
27 Augusta Drive
Buena Vista Drive S/E/W
28 Augusta Drive
Dunes Street N/S/W
29 Augusta Drive
Lakewood Street N
30 Augusta Drive
Silverado Street S
31 Augusta Drive
Spyglass Street S
32 Augusta Drive
Waterwood Street N/E/W
33 Augusta Drive
Woodland Drive E
34 Austin Street
Business 35 N/S
35 Austin Street
North Street E/W
36 Austin Street-North
Alamito Street W
37 Austin Street-North
Cedar Street E/W
38 Austin Street-North
Cornwall Street E
39 Austin Street-North
Laurel Street E/W
40 Austin Street-North
Navigation Circle W
41 Austin Street-North
Nopal Street E/W
42 Austin Street-North
Orleans Street E/W
43 Austin Street-South
Bay Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 276/444
44 Austin Street-South
Hackberry Street E
45 Austin Street-South
James Street E
46 Austin Street-South
Main Street E/W
47 Austin Street-South
Morgan Street W
48 Austin Street-South
Murray Street W
49 Austin Street-South
Peter Street E
50 Austin Street-South
St. Mary's Street E
51 Austin Street-South
Wharf Street E/W
52 Bahama Drive
Curlew Drive S
53 Bay
Fuqua Street E/W
54 Bay Avenue
Cochran Lane E/W
55 Bay Avenue
Picton Lane E/W
56 Bay Shores Drive
Glass Avenue S
57 Bay Shores Drive
Picton Lane N
58 Bayshore Drive
Fulton Beach Road W
59 Bimini Drive
Bahama Drive E
60 Blue Heron Circle
Blue Heron Drive N/S
61 Blue Heron Drive
Bayshore Drive E
62 Bluebird Lane
Enterprise Boulevard N
63 Breezy Street
Chaparral Street S
64 Breezy Street
Mesquite N
65 Broadway Street
Maple Street W
66 Bronte Street
Eleventh (11th) Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 277/444
67 Bronte Street
Tenth (10th) Street N/S
68 Cannie Street
Ruby Avenue N
69 Captains Bay Drive
Chaparral S
70 Captains Bay Drive
Mesquite N
71 Catalina Drive
Bahama Drive E
72 Champions Drive
Augusta Drive N/E/W
73 Champions Drive
Bay Hills E
74 Champions Drive
Doral Lane S
75 Champions Drive
Fairwood Oaks N
76 Champions Drive
Forest Hills N
77 Champions Drive
Oak Bay S
78 Champions Drive
Royal Oaks Drive E
79 Champions Drive
St. Andrews Street N/E/W
80 Cherry Hills
Oaktree Street W
81 Church Street
Loop 70 N
82 Church Street
North Street E/W
83 Church Street-North
Alamito Street N
84 Church Street-North
Cedar Street W
85 Church Street-North
Concho Street N/S
86 Church Street-North
Laurel Street N
87 Church Street-North
Mimosa Street E/W
88 Church Street-North
Orleans Street S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 278/444
89 Church Street-North Sabinal Street E
90 Church Street-South
Bay Street E/W
91 Church Street-South
Corpus Christi Street W
92 Church Street-South
First (1st) Street E/W
93 Church Street-South
Hackberry Street E/W
94 Church Street-South
James Street E/W
95 Church Street-South
King Street E/W
96 Church Street-South
Lamar Street W
97 Church Street-South
Main Street E/W
98 Church Street-South
Market Street N/S
99 Church Street-South
Morgan Street W
100 Church Street-South
Murray Street E/W
101 Church Street-South
Rowan Street E
102 Church Street-South
Second (2nd) Street W
103 Church Street-South
Shell Ridge Road N
104 Church Street-South
St. Mary's Street W
105 Church Street-South
Third (3rd) Street E/W
106 Church Street-South
Wharf Street W
107 Corpus Christi Street
Highway 35 Relief Route E/W
108 Corpus Christi Street
Sunset Street S
109 Crescent Drive
Crescent Court W
110 Crescent Drive
Crescent Loop W
111 Crescent Drive
Lakeview Drive N
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 279/444
112 Crescent Drive
Traylor Avenue N
113 Curlew Drive
Bayshore Drive E
114 Dana Drive
Enterprise Boulevard N
115 Edgewater Lane
Bahama Drive E
116 Eighteenth Street
Highway 35-South W
117 Encina Drive
Baywood Drive N
118 Encina Drive
Canoe Drive W
119 Encina Drive
Encina Circle W
120 Encina Drive
Encina Drive W
121 Encina Drive
Harbor Drive N/S
122 Encina Drive
Tule Park Drive S
123 Encina Drive
Turkey Neck Circle S
124 Farm-to-Market 1781
Ceilo Vista Drive E
125 Farm-to-Market 1781
Copano Drive E/W
126 Farm-to-Market 1781
Copano Ridge Road N/E
127 Farm-to-Market 1781
Lago Vista W
128 Farm-to-Market 1781
Spanish Wood Drive N
129 Farm-to-Market 3036
Farm-to-Market 1781 W
130 Farm-to-Market 3036
Ninth (9th) Street N
131 Farm-to-Market 3036
Spanish Wood Drive S
132 Farm-to-Market 3036
St. Peter N
133 Farm-to-Market 3036
Twelfth (12th) Street N
134 First Street
Bay Street E
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 280/444
135 First Street
Fuqua Street S
136 First Street
Verne Street W
137 Flamingo Road
Bayshore Drive E
Fort Worth Street
Sixteenth Street S
138 Fulton Avenue
Fifth (5th) Street N/S
139 Fulton Avenue
Fourth (4th) Street N/S
140 Fulton Avenue
Fulton Beach Rd. E
141 Fulton Avenue
Second (2nd) Street S
142 Fulton Avenue
Seventh (7th) Street N/S
143 Fulton Avenue
Sixth (6th) Street N/S
144 Fulton Avenue
Third (3rd) Street W
145 Fuqua Street
Corpus Christi Street S/N
146 Fuqua Street
First (1st) Street N/S
147 Fuqua Street
Lamar Street S/N
148 Fuqua Street
Morgan Street S/N
149 Fuqua Street
Tenth (10th) Street N
150 Fuqua Street
Fifth (5th) Street N/S
151 Fuqua Street
Fourth (4th) Street E/W
152 Fuqua Street
Sixth (6th) Street N/S
153 Fuqua Street
Third (3rd) Street N/S
154 Fuqua Street-North
Cornwall Street W
155 Fuqua Street-North
Hunter Court W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 281/444
156 Fuqua Street-North Laurel Street N
157 Fuqua Street-North
Liberty Street N/S
158 Fuqua Street-South
Bay Street E/W
159 Fuqua Street-South
Corpus Christi Street N/S
160 Fuqua Street-South
First (1st) Street N/S
161 Fuqua Street-South
Hackberry Street W
162 Fuqua Street-South
James Street N/S
163 Fuqua Street-South
King Street W
164 Fuqua Street-South
Lamar Street N/S
165 Fuqua Street-South
Market Street N
166 Fuqua Street-South
Morgan Street N/S
167 Fuqua Street-South
Second (2nd) Street N/S
168 Fuqua Street-South
Third (3rd) Street S
169 Gagon Street
Concho Street N/S
170 Gagon Street
Cornwall St N/S
171 Gagon Street
Highway 35 N/S
172 Gagon Street
Laurel Street N
173 Gagon Street
Liberty Street E
174 Gagon Street
Mimosa Street N/S
175 Gagon Street
Nopal Street S
176 Gagon Street
North Street N/S
177 Gagon Street
Sabinal Street N
178 Harbor Drive
Baywood Circle S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 282/444
179 Harbor Drive
Edgewater Court S
180 Harbor Drive
Harbor Circle N
181 Harbor Drive
Highway 35-North W
182 Harbor Drive
Lakeside Court S
183 Harbor Drive
Shorewind S
184 Henderson Street
Cedar Ridge E
185 Henderson Street
Cherry Hills Drive E
186 Henderson Street
Cherry Hills Drive W
187 Henderson Street
Fifth (5th) Street S
188 Henderson Street
Fourth (4th) Street S
189 Henderson Street
Fulton Beach Road E
190 Henderson Street
Marion Drive S
191 Henderson Street
Nancy Ann Street S
192 Henderson Street
Oaktree Street E
193 Henderson Street
Peach Tree Drive E
194 Henderson Street
Scott Street N
195 Henderson Street
Seventh (7th) Street N/S
196 Henderson Street
Sixth (6th) Street S
197 Henderson Street
Timothy Street S
198 Heron Oaks
Georgian Oaks E
199 Heron Oaks
Plantation Drive E
200 Heron Oaks
Sandhill Woods S
201 Heron Oaks
Whistlers Bend E
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 283/444
202 Highway 35
Cedar Street E
203 Highway 35
North Street W
204 Highway 35
Sixth (6th) Street E/W
205 Highway 35-North
Buc Drive E
206 Highway 35-North
Cannie Street E
207 Highway 35-North
Cherry Street E
208 Highway 35-North
Church Street N/S
209 Highway 35-North
Fulton Avenue W
210 Highway 35-North
Harbor Drive W
211 Highway 35-North
Lady Claire Street S
212 Highway 35-North
Laurel Street W
213 Highway 35-North
Magnolia Street N/S
214 Highway 35-North
Nopal Street E
215 Highway 35-North
Orleans Street E
216 Highway 35-North
Palmetto Street E/W
217 Highway 35-North
Royal Avenue E
218 Highway 35-North
Sabinal Street E
219 Highway 35-North
Tule Park Drive W
220 Highway 35-North
Victoria Avenue E
221 Highway 35-
North/South
Ann Street N/S
222 Highway 35-South
Balderree Lane E
223 Highway 35-South
Bay Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 284/444
224 Highway 35-South Concho Street W
225 Highway 35-South
Cornwall Street E/W
226 Highway 35-South
Corpus Christi Street E/W
227 Highway 35-South
Fifth (5th) Street E/W
228 Highway 35-South
First (1st) Street E/W
229 Highway 35-South
Fourth (4th) Street W
230 Highway 35-South
Freeze Lane E
231 Highway 35-South
Gagon Street N/S
232 Highway 35-South
Hackberry Street E
233 Highway 35-South
Hunter Court E
234 Highway 35-South
James Street E
235 Highway 35-South
Lamar Street E
236 Highway 35-South
Litron Street S
237 Highway 35-South
Mimosa Street W
238 Highway 35-South
Morgan Street E
239 Highway 35-South
Second (2nd) Street E/W
240 Highway 35-South
Smokehouse Road E
241 Highway 35-South
Third (3rd) Street W
242 Hillcrest Drive
Picton Lane S
243 Jamaica Drive
Bayshore Drive E
244 Jenkins Street
Buc Drive N
245 Jenkins Street
Cherry Street S
246 Jenkins Street
Colorado Street S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 285/444
247 Jenkins Street
Enterprise Boulevard N/S
248 Jenkins Street
Maple Street N
249 John D. Wendell Road
Hwy 35 Business E
250 Johnson Avenue
Cochran Lane E
251 King Street
Fuqua Street E
252 Kingfisher Lane
Blue Heron Drive S
253 Lady Claire Street
Alamito Street E/W
254 Lady Claire Street
Broadway Street S
255 Lady Claire Street
Cedar Street E/W
256 Lady Claire Street
Colorado Street S
257 Lady Claire Street
Royal Avenue E/W
258 Laguna Lane
Albatross Lane E
259 Lakeview Drive
Broadway Street E
260 Lakeview Drive
Cape Ann Street E
261 Lakeview Drive
Cape Charles Street E
262 Lakeview Drive
Cape McCann Street E
263 Lakeview Drive
Fulton Beach Road E
264 Lakeview Drive
Fulton Beach Road E
265 Lakeview Drive
Lakeview Drive N
266 Lauderdale Drive
Mazatlan Drive S
267 Lauderdale Drive
Nassau Drive N
268 Lazy Lane
Mallard Street N/S
269 Lazy Lane
Market Street N
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 286/444
270 Litron Street
Laurel Street S
271 Litron Street
Liberty Street E
272 Litron Street
Nopal Street N/S
273 Live Oak Street
North Street E/W
274 Live Oak Street-North
Alamito Street E
275 Live Oak Street-North
Cedar Street E/W
276 Live Oak Street-North
Cherry Street W
277 Live Oak Street-North
Concho Street E/W
278 Live Oak Street-North
Cornwall Street E/W
279 Live Oak Street-North
Enterprise Boulevard N/S
280 Live Oak Street-North
Laurel Street W/E
281 Live Oak Street-North
Maple Street W
282 Live Oak Street-North
Mimosa Street E/W
283 Live Oak Street-North
Nopal Street W
284 Live Oak Street-South
Bay Street N/S
285 Live Oak Street-South
Corpus Christi Street N/S
286 Live Oak Street-South
First (1st) Street N/S
287 Live Oak Street-South
Hackberry Street N/S
288 Live Oak Street-South
James Street E/W
289 Live Oak Street-South
King Street N/S
290 Live Oak Street-South
Lamar Street E
291 Live Oak Street-South
Main Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 287/444
292 Live Oak Street-South Market Street N/S
293 Live Oak Street-South
Morgan Street E
294 Live Oak Street-South
Murray Street E
295 Live Oak Street-South
Second (2nd) Street S
296 Live Oak Street-South
St. Mary's Street E/W
297 Live Oak Street-South
Wharf Street E/W
298 Loop 70
Hwy 35-South W
299 Loop 70
Sixth (6th) Street W
300 Loop 70
Young Street E
301 Luau Lane
Bayshore Drive E
302 Magnolia Street
North Street E/W
303 Magnolia Street-North
Cedar Street E/W
304 Magnolia Street-North
Cherry Street W
305 Magnolia Street-North
Concho Street E/W
306 Magnolia Street-North
Cornwall Street E/W
307 Magnolia Street-North
Highway 35 N/S
308 Magnolia Street-North
Laurel Street N/W
309 Magnolia Street-North
Linden Street N
310 Magnolia Street-North
Maple Street W
311 Magnolia Street-North
Mimosa Street E/W
312 Magnolia Street-North
Nopal Street E/W
313 Magnolia Street-North
Orleans Street E/W
314 Magnolia Street-South
First (1st) Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 288/444
315 Magnolia Street-South
James Street E/W
316 Magnolia Street-South
King Street E/W
317 Magnolia Street-South
Main Street E/W
318 Magnolia Street-South
Market Street E/W
319 Magnolia Street-South
Peter Street E
320 Magnolia Street-South
Second (2nd) Street S
321 Magnolia Street-South
St. Mary's Street E/W
322 Magnolia Street-South
Wharf Street E/W
323 Malibu Lane
Bayshore Drive E
324 Mallard Street
Egret Lane N
325 Mallard Street
Highway 35 Relief Route E/W
326 Mallard Street
Plover Street N
327 Mallard Street
Raven Street N/S
328 Mallard Street
Warbler Street N/S
329 Mallard Street
West Terrace Boulevard S
330 Mathis Street
Bay Street E/W
331 Mathis Street
Fifth (5th) Street N/W
332 Mathis Street
First (1st) Street N/S
333 Mathis Street
Hackberry Street S
334 Mathis Street
Hwy 35 Business N
335 Mathis Street
Market Street N/S
336 Mathis Street
Morgan Street W
337 Mathis Street
Second (2nd) Street N/S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 289/444
338 Mazatlan Drive
Bayshore Drive E
339 Moline Street
Laurel Street S
340 Moline Street
Nopal Street W
341 Nassau Drive
Mazatlan Drive S
342 Olympic Drive
Colonial Drive N/S
343 Olympic Drive
Oakmont Drive S
344 Omohundro Street
Cherry Street E/W
345 Omohundro Street
Dana Drive E
346 Omohundro Street
Enterprise Boulevard N/S
347 Omohundro Street
Hermitage Drive E
348 Omohundro Street
Linden Street S
349 Omohundro Street
Maple Street W
350 Omohundro Street
Shadyside Drive E
351 Paisano Street
Bayshore Drive E
352 Paisano Street-East
Enterprise Boulevard N
353 Paisano Street-East
Tern Lane-East E
354 Paisano Street-West
Enterprise Boulevard N
355 Paisano Street-West
Tern Lane-West W
356 Palmetto Drive
Fifth (5th) Street N
357 Palmetto Drive
Fourth (4th) Street N
358 Palmetto Drive
Fulton Beach Road E
359 Palmetto Drive
Highway 35-North E
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 290/444
360 Palmetto Drive Ninth (9th) Street E/W
361 Palmetto Drive
Second (2nd) Street N
362 Palmetto Drive
Seventh (7th) Street N
363 Palmetto Drive
Sixth (6th) Street N
364 Palmetto Drive
Third (3rd) Street N
365 Palmetto Drive
Twelfth (12th) Street S
366 Patton Street
Alamito Street E/W
367 Patton Street
Cedar Street E/W
368 Patton Street
Colorado Street S
369 Patton Street
Linden Street N
370 Patton Street
Orleans Street S
371 Patton Street
Sabinal Street E/W
372 Pearl Street
King Street S
373 Pearl Street
North Street S
374 Pearl Street-North
Concho Street N/S
375 Pearl Street-North
Cornwall Street N/S
376 Pearl Street-North
Laurel Street E/W
377 Pearl Street-North
Mimosa Street E/W
378 Pearl Street-North
Nopal Street E
379 Pearl Street-North
Orleans Street E/W
380 Pearl Street-North
Sabinal Street E/W
381 Pearl Street-North
Woodland Drive W
382 Pearl Street-South
Bay Street E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 291/444
383 Pearl Street-South
Fifth (5th) Street S
384 Pearl Street-South
First (1st) Street N
385 Pearl Street-South
Hackberry Street N
386 Pearl Street-South
Hooper Street E
387 Pearl Street-South
James Street W
388 Pearl Street-South
Main Street W
389 Pearl Street-South
Market Street N/S
390 Pearl Street-South
Murray Street E/W
391 Pecan Harbor Street
Chaparral Street S
392 Pecan Harbor Street
Mesquite N
393 Pelican Drive
Sandpiper Lane E
394 Percival Avenue
Bay Avenue W
395 Percival Avenue
Cochran Lane W
396 Percival Avenue
Colorado Street N/S
397 Percival Avenue
Glass Avenue E/W
398 Percival Avenue
Johnson Avenue W
399 Percival Avenue
Picton Lane W
400 Percival Avenue
Tule Park Lane N
401 Plantation Drive
Whistlers Cove Road W
402 Portia Avenue
Freeze Lane W/N
403 Racine Street
Laurel Street S
404 Racine Street
Liberty Street N/S
405 Redbird Street
Raven Street N
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 292/444
406 Redbird Street
Warbler Street N
407 Redbird Street
West Terrace Boulevard W
408 Riviera Drive
Bayshore Drive E
409 Royal Avenue
Broadway Street E
410 Royal Avenue
Lady Claire Street W
411 Royal Avenue
Ruby Avenue E/W
412 Sandollar
Mazatlan Drive S
413 Sandpiper Drive
Luau Lane S
414 Scott Street
Timber Lane Loop E
415 Scott Street
Timber Lane Loop E
416 Second Street
Verne Street W
417 Shell Ridge
Loop 70 E
418 Shores Lane
Bay Avenue S
419 Shores Lane
Johnson Avenue N
420 Sixteenth Street
Highway 35-South E/W
421 Smokehouse Road
Steward Lane S
422 Sonny Watkins
Stadium Drive W
423 Sorenson Drive
Bay Avenue E
424 Sorenson Drive
Glass Avenue S/E
425 Sorenson Drive
Picton Lane N
426 Spanish Woods Drive
Barcelona Street W
427 Spanish Woods Drive
EI Cid Street W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 293/444
428 Spanish Woods Drive North Santa Clara W
429 Spanish Woods Drive
North Sierra Woods W
430 Spanish Woods Drive
Palo Pinto Street W
431 Spanish Woods Drive
Paso Madera Drive W
432 Spanish Woods Drive
Poquito Street W
433 Spanish Woods Drive
Sanleanna Street W
434 Spanish Woods Drive
South Santa Clara W
435 Spanish Woods Drive
South Sierra Woods W
436 Spoonbill Lane
Blue Heron Drive S
437 Spring Lane
Portia Avenue E/S
438 St. Andrews
Cascades Drive S
439 St. Andrews
Champions Drive N
440 St. Andrews
Cypress Point E
441 St. Andrews
Highlands Street E
442 St. Andrews
Inverrary Drive W
443 Steward Lane
Eighteenth Street N
444 Sun Harbor
Chaparral Street S
445 Sun Harbor
Mesquite N
446 Sunset Street
Mallard Street W
447 Sunset Street
Market Street N
448 Sunset Street
Oak Street E
449 Teal Street
Egret Lane S
450 Teal Street
Plover Street S
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 294/444
451 Teal Street
Warbler Street S
452 Tenth (10th) Street
Fuqua Street N
453 Tenth (10th) Street
Highway 35 W
454 Timber Lane Loop
Seventh (7th) Street W
455 Traylor Boulevard
Cherry Hills N/S
456 Traylor Boulevard
Crescent Drive N
457 Traylor Boulevard
Fulton Beach Road E
458 Traylor Boulevard
Fulton Beach Road E
459 Traylor Boulevard
Peach Tree Drive S
460 Traylor Boulevard
Scott Street S
461 Treasure Street
Chaparral Street S
462 Treasure Street
Mesquite N
463 Twelfth Street
Highway 35-South W
464 Verne Street
Bay Street N
465 Verne Street
Corpus Christi Street N
466 Verne Street
Fifth (5th) Street N
467 Verne Street
First (1st) Street W
468 Verne Street
Fourth (4th) Street N/W
469 Verne Street
James Street N
470 Verne Street
King Street N
471 Verne Street
Lamar Street N
472 Verne Street
Market Street N
473 Verne Street
Morgan Street N
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 295/444
474 Verne Street
Second (2nd) Street W
475 Verne Street
Sixth (6th) Street N
476 Verne Street
Third (3rd) Street S
477 Victoria Avenue
Broadway E
478 Victoria Avenue
Lady Claire Street E/W
479 Victoria Avenue
Ruby Avenue E/W
480 Warbler Street
Market Street N
481 Water Street
North Street E
482 Water Street-South
Bay Street E
483 Water Street-South
Corpus Christi Street E
484 Water Street-South
First (1st) Street E
485 Water Street-South
King Street E
486 Water Street-South
Main Street E
487 Water Street-South
Market Street N/S/W
488 Water Street-South
Morgan Street E
489 Water Street-South
Murray Street E
490 Water Street-South
Second (2nd) Street E
491 Water Street-South
Wharf Street E
492 West Terrace Blvd.
Warbler Street S
493 Whistlers Cove Road
Enterprise Boulevard S
494 Whistlers Cove Road
Georgian Oaks W
495 Whistlers Cove Road
Heron Oaks W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 296/444
496 Whistlers Cove Road Heron Oaks W
497 Whistlers Cove Road
Sandhill Woods S
498 Whistlers Cove Road
Whistlers Bend W
499 Whooping Crane Lane
Curlew Drive S
500 Wood Street
Alamito Street N/S
501 Wood Street
Cedar Street E/W
502 Wood Street
Laurel Street S
503 Wood Street
Nepal Street E/W
504 Wood Street
Orleans Street N/S
505 Wood Street
Sabinal Street W
506 Young Street
Bay Street E/W
507 Young Street
Eloise Drive W
508 Young Street
First (1st) Street N/S
509 Young Street
Hackberry Street W
510 Young Street
King Street S
511 Young Street
Loop 70 W
512 Young Street
Market Street N/S
513 Young Street
Mockingbird Lane W
514 Young Street
Second (2nd) Street S
(Ord. No. 935,  2(b), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1217,  1, 2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1235,  1(b), 1-14-03; Ord. No. 1364,  1, 1-9-07; Ord. No. 1424,  1, 2-26-08;
Ord. No. 1426,  1, 4-8-08; Ord. No. 1439,  1, 8-26-08; Ord. No. 1451,  1, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 1539,  1, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 1552,  1, 10-25-11; Ord. No.
1567,  1, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 1680,  1, 5-23-17)
Sec. 98-26.2. Yield signs.
Appendix T-41(c) following this section gives the location of yield signs within the city limits, and the direction of traffic to which each yield sign faces.
An operator of a motor vehicle approaching any yield sign must slow their motor vehicle and stop their vehicle, if necessary, to give way to all other traffic
with the right-of-way, before proceeding past the sign.
(Ord. No. 935,  2(c), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1217,  1, 2, 8-13-02)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 297/444
APPENDIX T-41(c)
YIELD SIGNS
# Street at Street Facing N/S/E/W
Bound Traffic
1 Bayshore
Broadway N
2 Champions Drive
Traylor Boulevard N
3 Gary Barnum
Friends Street S
4 Highway 35-North
Laurel Street E
5 Highway 35-North
Nopal Street E/W
6 Highway 35-North
Orleans Street E/W
7 Highway 35-North
Sabinal Street E/W
8 Olympic Drive
Champions Drive E
9 Traylor Boulevard
Champions W
(Ord. No. 1217,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1427,  1, 3-25-08; Ord. No. 1451,  2, 1-27-09; Ord. No. 1550,  1, 9-27-11)
Sec. 98-26.3. One-way signs.
Appendix T-41 (d) below gives the location of one-way signs within the city limits, and the direction of traffic regulated thereby.
APPENDIX T-41 (d)
ONE-WAY STREETS
# Street From To Direction
1 Laurel Street Hwy. 35 Southbound Hwy. 35 Northbound East
2 Water Street Market Street Third Street South
3 Third Street Water Street Church West
(Ord. No. 935,  2(d), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1217,  1, 2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1247,  1, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 1567,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 98-27. Traffic control devices.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the requirements placed upon that person by their operation of a motor vehicle upon the streets, alleys
and highways within the city, in compliance with the electronic traffic control lights, as set forth in this chapter, or as set forth in the Uniform Act
Regulating Traffic on Highways (Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d).
(b) Table T-42 identifies the location of traffic control devices. An operator of a motor vehicle approaching any traffic control device may:
(1) If the light is green, proceed into the intersection.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 298/444
(2) If the light is yellow, prepare to stop, and shall stop in a reasonable prudent manner before entering into the intersection.
(3) If the light is red, stop before entering into the intersection.
(4) If the light is blinking yellow, proceed into the intersection with caution.
(5) If the light is blinking red, come to a complete stop at, or before, reaching the intersection before proceeding through the traffic control
device.
# Street at Street Facing N/S/E/W
Bound Traffic
1 Hwy. 35  South
Market Street N/S/E/W
2 Hwy. 35  North
Pearl Street N/S/E/W
3 Hwy. 35  North
Live Oak Street N/S/E/W
4 Hwy. 35  North
Broadway N/S/E/W
5 Hwy. 35  North
Maple Street N/S/E/W
6 Hwy. 35  North
Glass Avenue N/S/E/W
7 Hwy. 35  North
Traylor Boulevard N/S/E/W
8 Hwy. 35  North
Henderson Street N/S/E/W
9 Hwy. 35  North
Colorado Boulevard N/S/E/W
10 Stadium Drive
Enterprise Boulevard N/S/E
(Ord. No. 935,  2, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1247,  2, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 1435,  1, 8-12-08)
State law referenceTraffic control signal legend, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  33.
Sec. 98-28. Presumption of lawful traffic sign or device.
(a) Any traffic control sign or other device placed on any public street or alleyway, at the direction of the chief of police, and erected and maintained at
the direction of the director of public works shall be an official traffic control device of the city and subject to enforcement by the police department.
(b) Any traffic control sign or other device erected by the state department of transportation on any highway or road under its jurisdiction within the
corporate city limits of the city shall be an official traffic control device of the city and subject to enforcement by the police department.
(c) Where there is within the city an existing traffic control device, it shall be presumed to have been legally and lawfully located by an official act of the
city, and the provisions of this article apply thereto. A defendant charged with a violation of this article has the burden of showing that the sign or traffic
control device was unlawfully placed.
(Ord. No. 935,  2, 11-24-92; Ord. No. 947, 5-25-93)
Sec. 98-29. Riding bicycles on sidewalks.
Bicycles are allowed on sidewalks and designated hike and bike trails and paths, but must yield the right-of-way to pedestrians.
(Code 1972,  20-3; Ord. No. 1247,  3, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 1535,  1, 4-12-11)
State law referenceOperation of bicycles, Vernon's Ann. Civ. St. art. 6701d,  178 et seq.
Sec. 98-30. Truck routes; trucks prohibited.
(a) The following described streets or highways shall be designated as truck routes:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 299/444
(1) Farm-to-Market 3036 within the city limits;
(2) State Highway 35 within the city limits.
(b) It shall be unlawful for anyone to operate a commercial motor vehicle, including a truck, tractor, truck-tractor, truck-trailer or semi-trailer or any
combination thereof, on any public streets of the city with a registered gross weight rating exceeding 20,000 pounds, except upon designated truck routes
carried on any one axle; or with a tandem axle weight in excess of 34,000 pounds.
(c) Exceptions.
(1) It is an exception to prosecution if the operator of such vehicle has a point of origin, destination or intermediate stop for commercial or public
purposes within the city, provided such vehicle proceeds by the shortest route to and from such point of origin, destination or intermediate stop.
(2) It is an exception to prosecution if the operator has obtained and there is currently in effect, a permit issued by the state, county or local
governmental authority authorizing the use of the vehicle upon the roadways within the city.
(d) All trucks, described in subsection (b) above, shall be prohibited on the following residential streets, and the exception in subsection (c)(1) above
shall not apply, unless permitted under subsection (c)(2):
(1) Omohundro Street;
(2) Maple Street, from Business 35 to Omohundro Street.
(e) In accordance with Texas Law relating to operating motor vehicles (VTCS 6701d-11, section 5-a), all commercial motor vehicles shall be required to
carry a copy of the registration license receipt when operating on public roadways. The copy of the registration license receipt shall be admissible in
evidence in any cause in which the gross registered weight of a vehicle is an issue, and shall be prima facie evidence of the gross registered weight for
which such vehicle is registered. Such copy of the registration license receipt shall be displayed to any officer authorized to enforce this section, upon
request of such officer. Failure to display such copy of the registration license receipt shall constitute an offense under this section.
(f) Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the terms of provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall
be fined in accordance with the general fine provisions of the City Code.
(Ord. No. 994,  1, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 1225,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1247,  4, 5, 6-24-03)
Sec. 98-31. All-way stop signs.
APPENDIX T-50
ALL-WAY STOP SIGNS
1 Ann Street-North
Nopal Street N/S/E/W
2 Austin Street-North
Concho Street N/S/E/W
3 Austin Street-South
Market Street N/S/E/W
4 Champions Drive
Colonial Drive N/S/E/W
5 Champions Drive
Royal Oaks Drive N/S/E/W
6 Church Street-North
Cornwall Street N/S/E/W
7 Lady Claire Street
Linden Street N/S/E/W
8 Live Oak Street-North
Linden Street N/S/E/W
9 Live Oak Street-North
Orleans Street N/S/E/W
10 Magnolia Street-South
Bay Street N/W/E/W
11 Magnolia Street-South
Corpus Christi Street N/S/E/W
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 300/444
12 Magnolia Street-South
Hackberry Street N/S/E/W
13 Sixteenth Street
Monkey Road N/S/E/W
14 Traylor Boulevard
Henderson Street N/S/E/W
15 Twelfth Street
Monkey Road N/S/E/W
(Ord. No. 1226,  1, 9-10-02; Ord. No. 1247,  5, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 1539,  2, 7-12-11; Ord. No. 1552,  2, 10-24-11)
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1547,  1, adopted Sept. 27, 2011, amended  98-31, which pertained to guidelines all-way stop signs; installation criteria; removal
criteria. At the city's instruction this section was renamed all-way stop signs.
Secs. 98-3298-50. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. SPEED*
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 98-51. Speed limits generally.
(a) It shall be unlawful to operate a motor vehicle upon the streets, alleys, and other public ways in the city in excess of the following speeds:
(1) Fifteen miles per hour in all alleys.
(2) Thirty miles per hour within the city limits except when a lower rate of speed is required or when a greater speed is permitted as set out and
prescribed by this article.
(b) For the purposes of this article, an alley shall be defined as the entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly maintained when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel, having no legal or official name and 20 feet or less in width.
(Code 1972,  22-13, 22-14; Ord. No. 651,  2, 3, 9-25-84)
Secs. 98-5298-60. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. SPECIFIC STREETS AND HIGHWAYS
Sec. 98-61. Fifty-five miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 55 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city as noted in Appendix T-25 below.
APPENDIX T-25
# Location
1 On Farm-to-Market 1781 From Spanish Wood Drive to 3833 Farm-to-Market 1781.
2 On Farm-to-Market 2165 From Farm-to-Market 1781 to the 1700 Block of Farm-to-
Market 2165 at the north end of Memorial Park.
3 On Farm-to-Market 1781 from Copano Ridge Road to Farm-to-Market 2165.
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-25), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1268,  1, 10-28-03)
Sec. 98-62. Fifty miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 50 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city: See Appendix T-26 below.
Appendix T-26
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 301/444
# Location
1 From the 1700 Blk. of FM 2165 at the north end of Memorial Park Southbound to the 1200
Blk. of N. Pearl Street at the South end of the Water Treatment Plant.
2 From the north curbline of 6th Street at Highway 35-South Northbound to the north
curbline of 3rd Street at Highway 35-South.
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-26), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1542,  1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 1565,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 98-63. Forty-five miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 45 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city: See Appendix T-27 following this section.
Appendix T-27
# Location
1 From the 1200 block of N. Pearl Street at the south end of water treatment plant to the
south curbline of Linden Street at N. Pearl Street.
2 From the north curbline of Third Street at Highway 35 South northbound to the north
curbline of Morgan Street at Highway 35 South.
3 From the south curbline of Colorado Street at Highway 35 North northbound to the north
curbline of FM 3036 at Highway 35 North.
4 From a point 0.509 miles north of the intersection of FM 2165 and Business 35, to a point
0.779 miles north to the intersection of FM 2165 and FM 1781.
5 All of FM 1069, known as Market Street, within the city limits as annexed and set forth in
Ordinance No. 1171, and more particularly described as beginning at 1405 West Market
Street (approximately 800 feet east of State Highway 35 Bypass) and proceeding along
said Market Street, in a westerly direction, through and including 1909 West Market Street
(approximately 600 feet west of State Highway 35 Bypass).
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-27), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1258,  1, 8-26-03)
Sec. 98-64. Forty miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 40 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city: See Appendix T-28 following this section.
Appendix T-28
# Location
1 From the south curbline of Linden Street at North Pearl Street Southbound to the north
curbline of Sabinal Street at N. Pearl Street.
2 From the north curbline of N. Austin Street at Highway 35-North Northbound to the south
curbline of Colorado Street at Highway 35-North.
3 From the north curbline of Broadway at Highway 35-North Northbound to the south
curbline of Picton Lane at Broadway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 302/444
4 From the north curbline of 6th Street at Business Highway 35-South Northbound to the
north curbline of 5th Street at Business Highway 35-South.
5 From the north curbline of 5th Street at Business Highway 35-south Northbound to the
west curbline of Church Street at 5th Street.
6 From the north curbline of 5th Street at Church Street Northbound to the south curbline of
Bay Street at Church Street.
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-28), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1542,  1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 1565,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 98-65. Thirty-five miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 35 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city: See Appendix T-29 following this section.
Appendix T-29
# Location
1 From the north curbline of Sabinal Street at North Pearl Street Southbound to the north
curbline of Highway 35-North at North Pearl Street.
2 From the north curbline of Morgan Street at Highway 35-South Northbound to the north
curbline of North Austin Street at Highway 35-North.
3 From the west curbline of Highway 35-South at Market Street Westbound to the west
curbline of Fuqua Street at Market Street.
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-29), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1542,  1, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 1565,  1, 3-27-12)
Sec. 98-66. Twenty-five miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 25 miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city as noted in Appendix T-33 below.
Appendix T-33
# Location
1 From the south curbline of Austin Street at Market Street nouthbound to the north curbline
of Concho Street.
2. From the south curbline of Broadway Street at the intersection of Concho and Austin
Streets northbound to the south curbline of State Highway 35 (Business)-North.
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-30), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 957, 9-28-93; Ord. No. 964, 1-11-94; Ord. No. 1450,  1, 12-9-08)
Sec. 98-67. School zones; twenty miles per hour.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of 20 miles per hour on the following streets or highways
within the city as noted in Appendix T-31 below.
(b) It is the intent of this section that the school zone lights flash or the times for other school zones apply only on school days of the county independent
school district, and that on all other days and/or times the speed limits set out elsewhere in this chapter shall control.
Appendix T-31
#
Street From To
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 303/444
1 School Zone Pearl Street Sabinal Street SH 35 North
2 School Zone Orleans Street Live Oak Street Pearl Street
3 School Zone Buc Drive Jenkins Street SH 35
4 School Zone Stadium Drive Enterprise Boulevard Colorado Street
5 School Zone Enterprise Boulevard Piasano Street SH 35
6 School Zone N. Church Street Concho Street Wharf Street
7 School Zone North Street Live Oak Street Ann Street
8 School Zone Cornwall Street Ann Street Live Oak Street
9 School Zone Pearl Street Concho Street North Street
10 School Zone Percival Street Colorado Street Glass Avenue
11 School Zone Colorado Street SH 35 Stadium Drive
12
Bayshore Drive Fulton Beach Road Riviera Drive
13
St. Peter Street FM 3036 End of Peter Street
14 Hike & Bike Trail Water Street Market Street Third Street
15 School Zone N. Church Street Wharf Street Market Street
16 School Zone N. Live Oak Street Main Street Market Street
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-31), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1247,  6, 6-24-03; Ord. No. 1450,  1, 12-9-08; Ord. No. 1565,  1, 3-27-12; Ord. No. 1640,  1, 10-14-
14)
Sec. 98-68. Ten miles per hour.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of ten miles per hour on the following streets or highways within
the city: See Appendix T-32 following this section.
Appendix T-32
# Location
1 From the east curbline of Concho Street at Broadway Eastbound to the north curbline of
Chamber Drive at Concho Street or Navigation Circle.
2 All of Navigation Circle from the east curbline of N. Austin Street at Navigation Circle
Eastbound encompassing the Rockport Harbor Turning Basin.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 304/444
(Ord. No. 935,  1(22-32), 11-24-92; Ord. No. 1542,  1, 7-26-11)
Sec. 98-69. State Highway 35 relief route speed limit.
State Highway 35 relief route speeds are as follows:
(1) From FM 1069 (Market Street) overpass to FM 2165 (Pearl Street) overpass from 55 mph to 70 mph;
(2) From FM 2165 (Pearl Street) to FM 3036 from 55 mph to 60 mph.
(Ord. No. 1342,  1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1565,  1, 3-27-12)
Secs. 98-7098-90. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. PARKING
Sec. 98-91. Designation of no parking areas.
The chief of police from time to time may designate no parking areas.
Sec. 98-92. Handicap parking zones/spaces.
(a) Reserved Handicap Parking spaces are mandated by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines.
(b) Special buses or ambulances that carry handicapped persons may also get accommodation in loading zones or no parking zones, where they would
otherwise not be able to stop. If a bus is unloading disabled persons who need a specialized lift or ramp, these vehicles are allowed to temporarily park in
these zones.
(Ord. No. 521, 10-13-80; Ord. No. 1589,  2, 9-25-12)
Sec. 98-93. Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts.
It is an offense to stop, park or stand a commercial vehicle upon a public street, alley, parkway, boulevard or public place in an area zoned as a residential
district.
(Ord. No. 1589,  2, 9-25-12)
Sec. 98-94. Presumption that owner of vehicle illegally parked it.
In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or ordinance governing the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described
in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or ordinance, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of
parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the
person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, the violation occurred.
(Code 1972,  22-2)
Sec. 98-95. Illegally parked or stored vehicles; removal.
(a) It shall be unlawful for any person having charge, custody, or control of any vehicle to place, leave, stop or park the same or cause the same to be
placed, left, stopped or parked upon any part of the traveled portion, whether paved or not, of a public street, highway, alley, parkway, boulevard, or public
place:
(1) So as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, or to the performance of the city's maintenance of its streets or utilities, or constitute a definite
hazard; or
(2) For the purpose of storing, displaying, repairing, or waiting for repairs to be done thereon or in connection therewith, in or upon any street,
highway or alley in the city.
(b) For the purpose of this section, in the event any vehicle shall remain at the same location on and upon any public street, highway or alley for a period
of more than 24 hours, it shall be presumed:
(1) That such vehicle was placed, left stopped, or parked there for the purpose of storage, display, repair, or to wait for repairs to be done thereon
or in connection therewith; and
(2) That the owner of an unattended or unoccupied vehicle is the person who unlawfully placed, left, stopped, or parked the same in violation of
this section.
(c) Members of the police department are hereby authorized to remove a vehicle from a street or highway within the city to the nearest garage or other
place of safety, or to a garage or parking lot designated or maintained by the police department or otherwise maintained by the city, under the following
circumstances:
(1) When an attended vehicle upon a street is obstructing traffic or is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic, and the owner or person
in charge of the vehicle is, however, by reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its removal;
(2) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal
movement of traffic;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 305/444
(3) When any vehicle is left unattended upon a street and is so parked illegally as to constitute a definite obstruction to employees or contractors
of the city engaged in its, or its agents, maintenance of its streets or utilities to an area of the street upon which the vehicle is illegally parked;
(4) When any such officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for any alleged offense and in the opinion of such officer that no
other occupant, if any, is capable of safely removing the vehicle from the public street, highway or alley, where it would be illegally parked if left
unattended after such arrest;
(5) When, in the opinion of such officer, the vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by
reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstances the safety of the vehicle is imperiled;
(6) If a vehicle is found illegally parked or stored upon a street, highway or alley, and is registered to an owner who has failed, on more than one
occasion, to comply with a citation previously attached to any illegally parked vehicle registered to such owner under this section, and a warrant, or
warrants, have been issued for the owner's arrest due to repeated failures to comply with said citations.
(7) If a vehicle is found illegally parked or stored upon a street, highway or alley, and is registered to an owner who has failed to remove said
illegally parked or stored vehicle, after receiving a violation, and the said vehicle has remained in the same location for more than seven days.
(d) Whenever an officer removes a vehicle from a street, highway or alley, as authorized in this section:
(1) and the officers knows, or is able to ascertain from the registration records in the vehicle, the name and address of the owner thereof, such
officer shall immediately give or cause to be given notice in writing, by certified mail, return receipt requested, to such owner of the fact of such
removal and the reason therefor and of the place to which such vehicle has been removed. In the event any such vehicle is stored in a public garage,
a copy of such notice shall be given to the proprietor of such garage.
(2) and the officer does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the
owner, as hereinbefore provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner within a period of seven days, the officer shall
immediately send or cause to be sent a written report of such removal by mail to the state department of transportation, by certified mail, return
receipt requested. Such notice shall include a complete description of the vehicle, the date, time and place from which removed, the reasons for
such removal, and the name of the garage or place where the vehicle is stored.
(e) If a vehicle is removed from a street under this section, the owner of the vehicle shall pay, in addition to the fine, if any, assessed against him,
reasonable costs incurred in removing the vehicle from the street, and reasonable storage for the time it is stored in a garage or parking lot.
(Ord. No. 1045,  2, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 1589,  2, 9-25-12)
Sec. 98-96. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to:
(1) Street construction, maintenance, repair equipment, tractor equipment, trailers, and vehicles used by public service utility companies engaged
in repairing or extending public service utilities; or
(2) Motor buses when taking or discharging passengers at a customary bus stop; other vehicles when actually parked at a designated loading
zone; or
(3) Where it is lawful to park commercial motor vehicles for the purpose of accepting or delivering transportable goods; or
(4) School buses parked on the side of a residential public street that is immediately adjacent to school property, during school hours, or the side
of a residential public street that is immediately adjacent to a city park or recreation area if during the park hours and if in connection with an
official school-related activity; or
(5) Church buses parked on the side of a residential public street that is immediately adjacent to a city park or recreation area if during park hours
and if in connection with a church-related activity.
(Ord. No. 1589,  2, 9-25-12)
Secs. 98-9798-109. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. MOTOR ASSISTED SCOOTER
Sec. 98-110. Definitions.
Motor assisted scooter means a self-propelled device with:
(1) At least two wheels in contact with the ground during operation;
(2) A braking system capable of stopping the device under typical operating conditions;
(3) A gas or electric motor not exceeding 40 cubic centimeters;
(4) A deck designed to allow a person to stand or sit while operating the device; and
(5) The ability to be propelled by human power.
(Ord. No. 1335,  2, 9-27-05)
Sec. 98-111. Prohibition.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 306/444
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor assisted scooter on any public street, alley or other roadway within the Rockport corporate city
limits.
(Ord. No. 1335,  2, 9-27-05)
Secs. 98-11298-129. Reserved.
ARTICLE VI. GOLF CARTS AND NEIGHBORHOOD ELECTRIC VEHICLES
Sec. 98-130. Definitions.
Golf cart means a motor vehicle designed by the manufacturer primarily for transporting persons on a golf course. [Texas Transportation Code Sec.
502.001]
Neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) means a vehicle that can attain a maximum speed of 35 miles per hour on a paved level surface and otherwise
complies with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 500: Low-Speed Vehicles (Effective 6-17-98) This standard specifies requirements for low-speed
vehicles. A low-speed vehicle is a 4-wheeled motor vehicle, other than a truck, whose attainable speed is more than 32 km/h (20 mph) and not more than
40 km/h (25 mph). The standard requires ten specific items of safety equipment. [not listed]. [Texas Transportation Code Sec. 551.301(1)]
(Ord. No. 1528,  1, 1-25-11)
Sec. 98-131. Operation in master planned community, public/private beach, public highway
(a) An operator may operate a golf cart or NEV in compliance with Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.403 as amended:
(1) In a master planned community;
a. That has in place a uniform set of restrictive covenants; and
b. For which a county or municipality has approved a plat;
(2) On a public or private beach; or
(3) On a public highway for which the posted speed limit is not more than 35 miles per hour, if the golf cart is operated:
a. During the daytime; and
b. Not more than two miles from the location where the golf cart is usually parked and for transportation to or from a golf course.
(b) Nothing in this article shall supersede the Texas Transportation Code, Section 551.403 as amended.
(Ord. No. 1528,  1, 1-25-11)
Sec. 98-132. Requirements for operation in corporate city limits.
The operation of golf carts and NEVs within the corporate limits of the City of Rockport upon its public streets and public rights-of-way are hereby
authorized when all of the following requirements are met:
(a) A golf cart or NEV operated under this subsection are only authorized upon a public street or public right-of-way with a speed limit of 35
mph or less during daylight hours only with the required headlights and tail lights on;
(b) A golf cart or NEV operated under this subsection must have the following equipment the city is adding additional requirements; state law
can be referenced above [sic].
(1) Headlamps;
(2) Tail lamps;
(3) Reflectors;
(4) Parking brake;
(5) Mirrors;
(6) Turn signals;
(7) A "slow moving vehicle" reflective triangle affixed to the rear;
(8) Seat belts; and
(9) A flag on a six-foot pole affixed to rear of golf cart or NEV.
(c) A golf cart or NEV operated under this subsection must have the required equipment verified and inspected by the Rockport Police
Department.
(d) An annual fee of $10.00 shall be charged for inspection and registration. The registration decal must be affixed to the slow-moving vehicle
sign on the rear of golf cart or NEV when it is in motion. The registration decal is valid for 12 months and will need to be renewed on an annual
basis. Registration will occur during the month that the golf cart was originally registered.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 307/444
(e) An operator of a properly equipped, inspected and registered golf cart or NEV must possess a valid driver license and obey all Texas laws and
traffic regulations.
(f) The properly equipped, inspected and registered golf cart or NEV must be covered by insurance equal to the current Texas requirement for a
licensed motor vehicle. This coverage may be by a separate policy or covered by the owner's homeowners insurance policy.
(Ord. No. 1528,  1, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 1639,  1, 10-28-14)
Sec. 98-133. Prohibitions.
(a) Golf carts and NEVs are prohibited on any roadway in the State Highway System including Farm to Market Roads located within the corporate
boundaries of the city regardless of the speed limit on that portion of the State Highway or Farm to Market Road.
(b) Golf carts and NEVs are prohibited on any sidewalk or hike and bike trail within the corporate boundaries of the city.
(Ord. No. 1528,  1, 1-25-11; Ord. No. 1564,  1, 3-27-12)
Chapters 99-101 RESERVED
Chapter 102
UTILITIES*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL*
Sec. 102-1. Deposit to ensure payment, refund.
(a) Deposits. A city utility service customer shall, upon request by the city deposit with the city, as security for the payment of utility bills owing and to
become owing, and as security also for the performance of all other obligations of the customer, a sum of money equal to two average monthly bills for
service furnished, or to be furnished, as estimated by the city. In case the customer's bills for any two consecutive monthly billing periods of normal
operation actually prove to exceed appreciably the amount of the deposit, the city may, at its option, require the customer to deposit an additional amount
of money sufficient to make the total amount on deposit with the city equal to the amount of bills for the two consecutive months. The amounts of the
deposits shall be as established from time to time by the utility office.
(b) Refund. Refunds of deposits made for utility service shall be made upon the termination of such utility service only after payment of all indebtedness
to the city for such utility service. Application of the deposit may be made in partial or total settlement of accounts when the supply is cut off for
nonpayment of the bill, or for any infraction or violation of any ordinance, rule or regulation of the city relative to utility services offered by the city.
(Code 1972,  24-25; Ord. No. 1218,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1430,  1, 5-13-08)
Sec. 102-2. Billing for utility service; when and where payable.
Utility service charges shall be billed jointly and shall be due and payable, by the 15th day of each month for service rendered for previous month; such
accounts shall be paid at the city hall.
(Code 1972,  24-26; Ord. No. 1218,  1, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-3. Disconnection of service for nonpayment, reconnect fees.
If any person shall fail to pay such utility charge when due, a past due notice will be sent to the customer, and such default shall continue for a period of
ten days or more, the city shall have the right to disconnect all municipal utility service, from the building whose owner or occupant has so defaulted; and
if such service is so disconnected for nonpayment of the utility charge when due, the city shall charge and collect, before any reconnection of any
municipal utility service is made, or service resumed, the cash sum of $25.00 reconnection fee, in addition to all sums in arrears. The reconnect fee is
$37.50 after regular working hours. The reconnect fee includes costs of processing the delinquent account and consequently water, sewer and natural gas
services subject to disconnection shall be charged the reconnect fee regardless of whether or not the services are physically disconnected.
(Code 1972,  24-27; Ord. No. 509,  1(5), 6-23-80; Ord. No. 1218,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  1, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1430,  1, 5-13-08; Ord. No.
1473,  3, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1586,  1, 9-11-12)
Sec. 102-4. Payment of wastewater charges after completion of construction.
(a) Upon completion of new construction or completion of additions to premises where a city wastewater tap is provided, the city shall bill the utility
customer for payment of monthly wastewater charges after notification from the office of the building official that connection to a city wastewater tap is
completed. The term "utility customer" may be synonymous with contractor or homeowner when such person undertakes the job of constructing, and said
person's name is on the building permit as the contractor of record.
(b) When the utility billing office does not receive notice of completion of construction within 120 days after water meter installment, monthly charges
for wastewater service shall be automatically billed the utility customer for payment. Should construction still be in progress after the first 120 days, the
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 308/444
contractor may contact the utility billing office to request an extension of time. The contractor's state of construction shall be verified in writing through
the office of the building official. The contractor may be given an extension of time that is deemed reasonable under the building permit.
(Ord. No. 1138,  2, 12-22-99; Ord. No. 1218,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1430,  1, 5-13-08)
Sec. 102-5. Nonresidential/non-single-family utility deposit substitution.
All nonresidential/non-single-family utility accounts with deposits of $1,000.00 or greater may, at the discretion of the account holder substitute for the
utility deposit, in a form acceptable to the city, an irrevocable letter of credit, surety bond and/or certificate of deposit with the city named as owner,
assignee or beneficiary to secure any balance owed on the account. If at the time of the closing of the account a balance is due or whenever the account
becomes delinquent due to nonpayment for more than 45 days the city shall be authorized to exercise its right, without notice, to seize the respective credit
instrument and apply the full amount to the balance of the utility account. Any credit balance resulting from said action shall be refunded to account
holder.
(Ord. No. 1146,  1, 3-28-00; Ord. No. 1218,  1, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-6. Late payment.
All monthly utility charges provided for in this chapter which remain unpaid after the due date stated on the utility bill shall incur a late payment fee,
which shall be ten percent of the current charges due.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-7. Non-sufficient fund (NSF) fee.
All items returned to the city unpaid will be assessed an NSF fee of $25.00. If services are disconnected to insure collection of unpaid items, a
reconnection fee will also be added.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-8. Compliance; no free service.
No free municipal utility service shall be rendered to any person. No utility connection shall be maintained or serviced except upon the payment of the rate
or charges for such maintenance or service as herein set forth, or as otherwise established by ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1430,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1473,  3, 9-22-09)
Sec. 102-9. Requested turn-on or turn-off; service charge.
(a) A service charge of $25.00 will be made each time a customer requests a turn-on of a municipal utility service. The requested turn-on will be made
only during regular business hours.
(b) No service charge shall apply to a turn-of of municipal utility service made during regular business hours.
(c) This section shall not apply when a customer or anyone acting on their behalf performs an unauthorized turn-on or turn-off of a municipal utility
service.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  2, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1473,  3, 9-22-09)
Sec. 102-10. Utilities extensions or adjustment estimates.
Utility job estimate charges will apply when a property owner, or their agent, requests the city to provide a cost estimate for main line extension of any
municipal utility service to their property. It may also be used for adjustment of utilities, in conflict with new development. If the property owner or agent
pursues the extension, or adjustment, the $50.00 fee will be credited to the project cost.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1430,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1473,  3, 9-22-09)
Sec. 102-11. Related fees.
Tap fees, connection fees, deposits, monthly billing charges or any other fee adopted by the city council shall remain in effect, notwithstanding any
provision or requirement stipulated in this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-12. Annual review.
The city council shall review on an annual basis the adequacy of all fees and charges established in this chapter and may, after a public hearing, make
adjustments and adopt a new schedule of fees and charges.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-13. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Alley means a narrow street or footway at the rear of or between rows of buildings or lots.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 309/444
Collection line means a sanitary sewer line no larger than 12 inches inside diameter, but not less than six inches, that conveys wastewater by gravity.
Developer means any person, partnership, firm, association, corporation and/or any officer, agent, employee and trustee thereof, who does, or participates
in the doing of, any act causing improvement to a lot, tract, plat, subdivision or any other parcel of land.
Distribution mains means mains, which are less than 12 inches inside diameter that provide fire protection and domestic service.
Easement means a right held by a person, corporation, public utility, or municipality to make use of the land of another for a limited purpose, as right of
passage. Example: Ten-foot utility easement on a single-family lot for municipal water, wastewater or natural gas lines.
Extension fee means a fee required to be paid by a developer to reimburse the city for extending services beyond that which is provided as part of the tap
fee.
Municipal utility service means any of the City of Rockport utilities i.e. water, wastewater and/or natural gas from facilities that it owns and/or operates.
Street means public thoroughfare, usually paved, in a village, town, or city, including the curb, gutter, shoulders, sidewalks and any additional right-of-way
for future expansion.
Tap fee means the fee to be paid that provides a utility tap or service connection for city owned utilities.
Transmission mains means mains of 12 inches inside diameter or larger used to transport water from treatment facilities to distribution areas.
(Ord. No. 1218,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1430,  3, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1473,  3, 9-22-09)
Sec. 102-14. Developer participation agreement for extension of water and wastewater mains.
(a) A developer shall make application for proposed water or wastewater line extension to the public works director and shall supply all necessary
information (maps, diagrams, engineering reports, etc.) concerning the line extension, as may be required. Utility job estimate charges shall apply as per
this article.
(b) Upon compiling all necessary and required information, the public works director shall prepare a cost estimate.
(c) A proposal for water or wastewater main extension shall be made subject to all city conditions, which may include but not be limited to the
following:
(1) All necessary mains, line, fire hydrants, gate valves and other fittings shall be furnished and installed at the cost of the developer by a
qualified utility contract. All work shall be under the director of the city engineer and the public works director, or as otherwise agreed;
(2) The pipe diameter of any main to be extended shall be determined by the city engineer and the director of utilities;
(3) No extension of any main or service line shall be laid except in a dedicated street, public road or approved easement;
(4) Such mains, lines, fire hydrants and gate valves and other fittings, upon completion of testing and acceptance by the city, shall become the
property of the city and the city shall have full control, management and jurisdiction of such lines, mains, fire hydrants and gate valves; and
(5) The city shall receive all revenues for water or wastewater service provided through such mains or lines.
(d) The developer making such extension may be entitled to reimbursement not to exceed the costs of materials and installation of such extension main,
for the length of the main extension, minus the developer's pro rata share. Any reimbursement shall be paid only out of funds received for such
reimbursement as herein provided.
(1) Developer shall make written request for a pro rata agreement to the public works director, no later than 30 days after the completion of the
line extension. The developer shall furnish to the public works director satisfactory evidence as to the actual cost of such extension, as well as an
administrative fee of $500.00 The amount of such costs as finally determined by the public works director shall be conclusive for the purpose of
reimbursement under this section. The costs may include engineering directly associated with the developer's application.
(2) Before any reimbursement is made, there shall be a written contract between the city and developer pursuant to and in accordance with this
section.
(e) Within 30 days upon final determination of costs by the public works director, the city council will consider an ordinance that allows a pro rata
reimbursement with a developer who has paid for installation of either a water or wastewater extension, pursuant to this section.
(f) Any ordinance approving a developer's agreement that allows a pro rata reimbursement provision with a developer who has paid for installation of
either a water or wastewater main extension, pursuant to this section, shall set forth the legal property description of each lot or tract affected by such
agreement and the amount of costs to be reimbursed upon connection to the line by each property owner affected, and shall be recorded in the Official
Public Records of Aransas County, Texas. The ordinance shall, by its own terms, expire and be of no further effect upon the expiration of the seven-year
contractual reimbursement period.
Not less than 15 days before first reading of a proposed ordinance adopting a developer's pro rata reimbursement contract, written notice of such ordinance
and the anticipated pro rata costs attributed to each property shall be given to each such affected property owner.
(g) This section shall not prohibit the city council from assessing benefiting property owners a portion of the cost of any water or wastewater extension
pursuant to state law or ordinance passed pursuant to the power granted to a home rule city, in lieu of a developer's agreement.
(h) Unless determined to be inequitable, all prorata costs shall be developed and administered on a linear foot basis. The calculation of the pro-rata cost
for a particular lot is as follows:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 310/444
(1) The total cost of the line extension divided by total front footage of all lots to which service is made available, times the front footage of the
lot; and
(2) Lots with non-typical footage will be on a case-by-case basis. At a minimum it would be the average front footage of the lots within the
project.
(i) Associated fees:
(1) For each service connection made to any such extension, during the reimbursement period, by a water or wastewater user, the user so
connecting shall, upon application and in addition to all usual service connection charges, pay to the city the sum prescribed by the proposed
ordinance.
(2) When any such taps are made during the reimbursement period, the payments therein provided for (exclusive of the regular serviceconnection
charges) shall be refunded to the developer making such extension as a partial reimbursement of such party's costs as set out in this
section. Such reimbursement shall be made within 90 days of collection and shall be limited to payments received by the city within seven years
from the date of such main extension is completed (reimbursement period). The completion date shall be determined by the public works director,
which date as so established shall be conclusive.
(Ord. No. 1260,  1, 8-26-03; Ord. No. 1271,  1, 3-23-04; Ord. No. 1430,  4, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1437,  1, 9-9-08; Ord. No. 1587,  1, 9-11-12)
Secs. 102-15102-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. WATER SERVICE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 102-26. Only authorized personnel to turn on water service.
No water from the city owned or operated water supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the director of public works or
some person authorized by him to perform such service.
(Code 1972,  24-1; Ord. No. 1221,  1, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-27. Stop and waste valve required in water lines; valve for water heaters.
All water service to a private home or business shall have a stop and waste valve (shutoff) installed in the water lines. All water heaters shall have a valve
on the cold water inlet line.
(Code 1972,  24-3; Ord. No. 1221,  1, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-28. Tampering with or injuring waterworks property; tampering fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with or alter any part of the waterworks or supply system or any meter. Any person
found tampering with waterworks property is subject to a $50.00 tampering fee in addition to any state law that may apply.
(Code 1972,  24-4; Ord. No. 662,  1, 11-13-84; Ord. No. 1221,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  3, 12-13-05)
Secs. 102-29102-40. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONNECTIONS
Sec. 102-41. Rates for water taps and meter installation.
(a) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, there shall be charged and collected by the city, a fee for each water tap made or meter installation, based
upon it size, as follows:
(1) Tap fees:
Line Size (in inches) Fee
3/4" $950.00
1" 1,040.00
1-1/2" and larger Based on current labor and material
(2) Meter installation fees: The meter set fee is for installation of the meter itself, when a new connection has been made, and the actual tap, and
meter box, has been provided by the owner or agent.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 311/444
Line Size (in inches) Fee
3/4" $125.00
1" 200.00
1-1/2" and larger Based on current labor and material
(b) Subject to subsection (d) of this section, the fee for any water tap or meter installation made greater than two inches will be made on a per-job basis,
taking related costs and expenses incurred into consideration, or as otherwise determined by the city's utility director or his representative.
(c) The fee for any water tap made requiring casing under a state highway will be made on a per-job basis, taking related costs and expenses incurred
into consideration, or as otherwise determined by the utilities director or his representative.
(d) The water tap fees in this section are subject to a maximum of 60 feet in length, and additional lengths shall be priced on a per-foot basis, depending
on the size of the pipe and total length, as determined by the director of public works. As part of the tap fee charge, the city will furnish up to 60 feet of
line and all necessary appurtenances needed to make the installation. Any expenses incurred for boring or cutting a street or curb and for installation of
over 60 feet of line shall be borne by the user through payment of the extension fee. The user shall pay, prior to installation, the estimated cost of materials,
labor and overhead as determined by the director of public works. All tap and extension fees will be paid prior to the issuance of a plumbing permit, which
is prior to commencing installation. A plumbing permit will have to be taken out by a master plumber and all connections to be made by a licensed
plumber.
(Ord. No. 867,  2, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 1221,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  4, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1404,  1, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 1471,  1, 9-22-09)
Sec. 102-42. Disposition, use of fees.
The tap fees collected under this division will be deposited into the annual operating revenues of the water storage and distribution account of the city. The
extension fees collected under this division will be deposited into the revenues account compatible with the budget under which the labor and material
expenses were incurred.
(Ord. No. 867,  3, 9-25-90; Ord. No. 968,  1, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 1221,  2, 8-13-02)
Sec. 102-43. Payment agreement; term; minimum payment.
(a) The city may enter into an agreement with the owner of a tract of land for which a plat has been recorded providing for payment of water tap fees.
(b) Agreement may not exceed six months, and shall accrue interest of six percent APR.
(c) Minimum monthly payments shall not be less than $150.00.
(d) This provision shall be rreviewed and re-authorized by city council.
(Ord. No. 1531,  1, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1556,  1, 1-10-12)
Secs. 102-44102-55. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SERVICE CHARGES
Sec. 102-56. Water rates inside city limits.
(a) There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential customers of water supplied by the city inside its city limits, as now or hereafter
established, the amount of money based upon the size of the customer's tap and the customer's usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following
schedule of rates and charges:
(1) For the first 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle:
Tap Size (In Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $20.54
1 $24.83
1-1/2 $46.13
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 312/444
2 $71.72
3 $139.96
4 $216.73
6 $216.73
(2) If applicable, for all additional gallons used over 1,501 to 10,000, the sum of $5.44 per month for each 1,000 gallons, or fractional part
thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(3) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 10,001 to 15,000, the sum of $6.39 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part
thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(4) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 15,001 and up, the sum of $7.27 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(b) There shall be charged and collected by the city from all commercial customers of water supplied by the city inside its city limits, as now or hereafter
established, the amount of money based upon the size of the customer's tap and the customer's usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following
schedule of rates and charges, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle.
(1) For the first 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle:
Tap Size (In Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $20.54
1 $24.83
1-1/2 $46.13
2 $71.72
3 $139.96
4 $216.73
6 $216.73
(2) If applicable, for all additional gallons used over 1,501 to 10,000, the sum of $5.44 per month for each 1,000 gallons, or fractional part
thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(3) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 10,001 to 15,000, the sum of $6.39 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part
thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(4) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 15,001 and up, the sum of $7.27 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(Ord. No. 940,  1, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 1048,  1, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 1081,  1, 5-12-98; Ord. No. 1101,  1, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1105,  1, 12-8-98; Ord. No.
1129,  1, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1207,  1, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 1232,  1, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 1277,  1, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 1315,  1, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 1411, 
1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1442,  1, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 1468,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1516,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1555,  1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1579,  1, 8-
28-12; Ord. No. 1595,  1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1608,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1620,  1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 1632  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1642,  1, 12-9-14;
Ord. No. 1652,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1666,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1674,  1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 1701,  1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 1731,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-57. Wholesale water rates.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 313/444
There shall be charged and collected by the city from all contracted resale customers, the sum of $5.88 per month for each 1,000 gallons, or fractional part
thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(Ord. No. 940,  2, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 992,  2, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 1026,  2, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1048,  2, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 1081,  2, 5-12-98; Ord. No.
1101,  2, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1105,  2, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1129,  2, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1237,  1, 1-28-03; Ord. No. 1277,  2, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 1315, 
2, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 1411,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1442,  1, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 1516,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1555,  1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1579,  1, 8-28-
12; Ord. No. 1595,  1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1608,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1620,  1, 1-14-14; Ord. No. 1632  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1642,  1, 12-9-14; Ord.
No. 1652,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1666,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1674,  1, 12-13-16; Ord. No. 1701,  1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 1703,  1, 1-9-18; Ord. No.
1731,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-58. Water rates outside city limits.
(a) There shall be charged and collected by the city from all customers of water supplied by the city outside its city limits, including customers residing
within the Town of Fulton city limits, the amount of money based upon the size of the customer's tap and the customer's usage (in gallons of water), as set
forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
(1) For the first 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle:
Tap Size (In Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $28.34
1 $34.30
1-1/2 $63.92
2 $99.48
3 $194.35
4 $301.05
6 $301.05
(2) If applicable, for all additional gallons used over 1,501 to 10,000 gallons, the sum of $7.65 per month for each 1,000 gallons, or fractional
part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(3) Conservation billing. If applicable, for all gallons used over 10,001 to 15,000 the sum of $9.02 per 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(4) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 15,001 and up, the sum of $10.26 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(b) There shall be charged and collected by the city, for all commercial customers of water supplied by the city outside its city limits, as now or hereafter
established, the amount of money based upon the size of the customer's tap and the customer's usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following
schedule of rates and charges, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle:
(1) For the first 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle by any one user, the following sum per cycle:
Tap Size (In Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $28.34
1 $34.30
1-1/2 $63.92
2 $99.48
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 314/444
3 $194.35
4 $301.05
6 $301.05
(2) If applicable, for all additional gallons used over 1,501 to 10,000 gallons, the sum of $7.65 per month for each 1,000 gallons, or fractional
part thereof, used in any one regular billing cycle.
(3) Conservation billing. If applicable, for all gallons used over 10,001 to 15,000 the sum of $9.02 per 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(4) Conservation billing. If applicable for all gallons used over 15,001 and up, the sum of $10.26 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof,
used in any one regular billing cycle.
(Ord. No. 940,  3, 3-9-93; Ord. No. 992,  3, 3-14-95; Ord. No. 1026,  3, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1048,  3, 3-11-97; Ord. No. 1081,  3, 5-12-98; Ord. No.
1101,  3, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 1105,  3, 12-8-98; Ord. No. 1129,  3, 9-7-99; Ord. No. 1207,  2, 2-26-02; Ord. No. 1232,  2, 12-10-02; Ord. No. 1277, 
3, 1-13-04; Ord. No. 1315,  3, 1-11-05; Ord. No. 1411,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1442,  1, 9-23-08; Ord. No. 1468,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1516,  1, 9-28-
10; Ord. No. 1555,  1, 1-10-12; Ord. No. 1579,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1595,  1, 1-8-13; Ord. No. 1608,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1620,  1, 1-14-14; Ord.
No. 1632  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1642,  1, 12-9-14; Ord. No. 1652,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1666,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1674,  1, 12-13-16; Ord. No.
1701,  1, 12-12-17; Ord. No. 1731,  1, 8-28-18)
Secs. 102-59102-70. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. DROUGHT CONTINGENCY AND EMERGENCY PLAN
Sec. 102-71. Adoption.
It is hereby declared that the city's drought contingency and emergency plan, in the form attached to Ordinance 1619 available in the office of the city
secretary, entitled "Drought Contingency Plan 2013" and as it may be modified in the future by resolution or minute order, is adopted as the city's drought
contingency and emergency plan.
(Ord. No. 640,  14, 6-26-84; Ord. No. 1022, 2-27-96; Ord. No. 1034,  14, 5-28-96; Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1211,  1, 4-23-02; Ord.
No. 1330,  14, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 1459,  1, 8-11-09; Ord. No. 1485,  12, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 1491,  13, 2-23-10; Ord. No. 1619,  1, 12-10-13)
Secs. 102-72102-90. Reserved.
DIVISION 5. WATER CONSERVATION
Sec. 102-91. Purpose.
For conservation and efficient use of existing resources to continue meeting current and future needs, the city has implemented programs to minimize
water loss and waste. Educational outreach programs are also in place in which the City of Rockport completes the Texas Water Development Board Water
Conservation Utility Profile, WRD-264 on an annual basis; sets five- and ten-year goals for per capita water use; and adopts an ordinance approving the
plan. The conservation plan includes all elements required by Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ). Copy of 2008 Water Utility Profile is
included as a part of this division and available in the office of the city secretary.
(Ord. No. 1491,  4, 2-23-10)
Sec. 102-92. Specification of water conservation goals.
(a) As required by TCEQ, the city has adopted specific water conservation goals for the water conservation plan and developed five- and ten-year goals
for reduction in per capita municipal use, including the following:
(1) Maintain unaccounted water in the system below 12 percent annually in 2009 and subsequent years;
(2) Continue to maintain a meter replacement program;
(3) Review and modify the current public awareness program and encourage water conservation and more efficient use of water by making
information available to the public; and
(4) Review and modify system specific strategy to conserve water to reduce usage during peak periods.
(b) Five- and ten-year goals in gallons per capita per day (gpcd) are noted as follows:
Current 5-Year Average Municipal per capita use 2004-
2008
124.18
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 315/444
5-year Goal (gpcd) 124.18
10-year Goal (gpcd) 124.18
(Ord. No. 1491,  4, 2-23-10)
Sec. 102-93. Metering, usage records, water loss and leak detection and repair.
One of the main factors in water conservation is precise tracking of water use and control of loss through leaks and illegal connections. Careful leak
detection and repair and continuous monitoring of unaccounted water are imperative to control loss.
(1) Accurate metering of treated water deliveries. The city meters all treated water deliveries from San Patricio Municipal Water District, through
one ten-inch meter at the Aransas County line. This meter is read daily and tested annually.
(2) Metering of customer and public uses and meter testing, repair and replacement. The city meters all water usage, including residential,
commercial, industrial and governmental. A water audit was conducted in 2001 and a meter replacement program was implemented to reduce water
loss. The program targets ten percent of the older meters within the system, annually. Additionally, the City of Rockport owns a meter tests bench
and performs sample testing of meters on a regular basis.
(3) Record keeping. The city records water delivered and water sold; estimates water losses and separates water sales and uses into residential,
commercial, and industrial categories as required by TAC Title 30, Part 1, Chapter 288, Subchapter A, Rule 288.2(a)(2)(B).
(4) Measures and control of unaccounted water. Unaccounted water is the difference between treated water deliveries from San Patricio
Municipal Water District and the metered deliveries to customers. Authorized but unmetered uses by fire fighting and line flushing are included in
the calculation. Other unaccounted water includes:
a. Losses due to water main breaks and leaks in the water distribution system;
b. Losses due to illegal connections;
c. Losses due to fire fighting and fire line flushing;
d. Line flushing due to construction, maintenance, repair and water quality needs; and
e. Inaccuracy in customer meters.
In an effort to control unaccounted water, the utilities department personnel manually read every meter in the system on a monthly basis
and check all non-active connections. Field personnel walk all main distribution lines monthly and visually inspect all service lines for
leaks. Meter readers and other field personnel also watch for and report signs of illegal connections.
(5) Leak detection and repair. The city's SCADA system monitors activities and tank levels within the system. Activity is reviewed daily and
high/low level alarms are programmed to automatically notify personnel when reached. Additionally, meter readers and field personnel watch for
and report signs of leaks and illegal connections. Leaks are repaired quickly and illegal connections are terminated immediately.
(6) Monitoring effectiveness and efficiency. The city compiles data annually and submits a water utility profile to the Texas Water Development
Board. Water use by category for the current year is compared to historical values. Annual water audits are performed by utilities department
personnel. In addition, in depth water audits were conducted by JBS and Associates in 2001 and 2005. In 2009, the city contracted with SAMCO
Leak Detection to conduct a leak survey on a part of the system representing approximately ten percent overall. The leaks identified were repaired
within two weeks. Future leak surveys shall be conducted periodically.
(Ord. No. 1491,  4, 2-23-10)
Sec. 102-94. Water conservation program.
The City of Rockport mails Consumer Confidence Reports (CCR) to all customers annually. Additional copies of the CCR and water conservation
literature are also placed in public areas of city buildings. Education outreach programs are currently being developed for use in the school district and
community.
(Ord. No. 1491,  4, 2-23-10)
Secs. 102-95102-100. Reserved.
DIVISION 6. BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM
Sec. 102-101. Authority.
(a) The Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and the statutes of the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission, Chapters 290.44(h),
mandate that the water purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the
public potable water system.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 316/444
(b) Rules and Regulations for Public Water Systems; Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC) No. RG-195 adopted.
(c) References:
(1) Recommended Practice for Backflow Prevention and Cross-Connection Control; published by the American Water Works Association,
AWWA-M14, Second Edition.
(2) Cross-Connection Control Manual; published by United States Environmental Protection Agency, EPA 570/9-89-007, June 1989.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-102. Responsibility.
The department of public works, as directed by the director, shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water distribution system from
contamination or pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgement
of the department of public works, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the city's water service connection to any customer's premises,
new or existing, the department, or its delegated agent shall give notice in writing to said customer to install an approved backflow prevention device at
each service connection to his premises. The customer shall, within 90 days, install such approved device, or devices, at his own expense, and failure or
refusal to do so, or inability on the part of the customer to install said device or devices within 90 days, shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water
service to the premises until such device or devices have been properly installed.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-103. Definitions.
[For the purposes of this division, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:]
Approved: Accepted by the department of public works as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the
proposed use.
Auxiliary water supply: Any water supply, on or available, to the premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.
Backflow: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances, under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
from any source other than its intended source.
Backflow preventers: Devices or means designed to prevent backflow or back-siphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure
principle device, double check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bib vacuum breaker, residential dual check,
double check with intermediate atmospheric vent, and barometric loop. The following shall constitute, but not limited to, examples of backflow preventers:
(1) Air gap: A physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any
other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch.
(2) Atmospheric vacuum breaker: A device that prevents back-siphonage by creating an atmospheric vent when there is either a negative pressure
or sub-atmospheric pressure in a water system.
(3) Barometric loop: A fabricated piping arrangement rising at least 35 feet at its topmost point above the highest fixture it supplies. It is utilized
in water supply systems to protect against back-siphonage.
(4) Double check valve assembly: An assembly of two independently operating spring loaded check valves with tightly closing shut off valves on
each side of the check valves, plus properly located test cocks for the testing of each check valve.
(5) Double check valve with intermediate atmospheric vent: A device having two spring loaded check valves separated by an atmospheric vent
chamber.
(6) Hose bib vacuum breaker: A device which is permanently attached to a hose bib and which acts as an atmospheric vacuum breaker.
(7) Pressure vacuum breaker: A device containing one or two independently operated spring loaded check valves and an independently operated
spring loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the check or checks. Device includes tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the
check valves and properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valve(s).
(8) Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer: An assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an
automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly closing shut-off valves on each side of the check
valves plus properly located test cocks for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve.
(9) Residential dual check: An assembly of two spring loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves and
test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device.
Back pressure: A condition in which the owner's system pressure is greater than the supplier's system pressure.
Back-siphonage: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source
other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
Building department: City of Rockport Building and Development Department.
Commission: The Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC).
Containment: A method of backflow prevention that requires a backflow prevention device at the water service entrance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 317/444
Contaminant: A substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public leading to poisoning or
the spread of disease.
Cross-connection: Any actual or potential connection between the public water supply and a source of contamination or pollution.
Department: City of Rockport Public Works Department.
Director of public works: The director, or his delegated representative in charge of the department of public works.
Fixture isolation: A method of backflow prevention in which a backflow preventer is located to correct a cross connection at an in-plant location rather
than at a water service entrance.
Owner: Any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or habitat in, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon
which a cross-connection is present.
Person: Any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the State of Texas, agency or
instrumentality or the United States or any other legal entity.
Permit: A document issued by the department, which allows the use of a backflow prevention device.
Pollutant: A foreign substance, that if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard, or impair
the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably
effect such water for domestic use.
Water service entrance: A point in the owners water system beyond the sanitary control of the department; generally considered to be the outlet end of the
water meter and always before any unprotected branch.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-104. Administration.
(a) The department will operate a cross-connection control program, to include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the requirements of the
commission's cross-connection regulations and so approved by the commission.
(b) The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible cross-connections and shall follow the provisions of the department's program and
the commission's regulations if a cross-connection is permitted.
(c) If the department requires that the public supply be protected by containment, the owner shall be responsible for water quality beyond the outlet end
of the containment device and should utilize fixture outlet protection for that purpose. He may utilize public health officials, or personnel from the
department, or their delegated representatives, to assist him in the survey of his facilities and to assist him in the selection of proper fixture outlet devices,
and the proper installation of these devices.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-105. Requirements.
(a) Department.
(1) On new installations, the department will provide on-site evaluation and/or inspection of plans through the cooperative efforts of the building
department in order to determine the type of backflow prevention device, if any, that will be required, will issue permits, and witness testing and
inspections.
(2) For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the department will perform evaluations and inspections, of plans and/or premises and
inform the owner by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the
correction to be made. Ordinarily, 90 days will be allowed, however, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard
involved and the history of the device(s) in question.
(3) The department will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless an approved backflow prevention device for which a permit has been
issued and which will be regularly tested to insure satisfactory operation protects it.
(4) The department shall inform the owner by letter, of any failure to comply, by the time of the first re-inspection. The department will allow an
additional 15 days to complete the correction. In the event the owner fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection,
the department will inform the owner by letter, that the water service to the owner's premises will be terminated within a period not to
exceed five days. In the event that the owner informs the department of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a
time extension may be granted by the department but in no case will exceed an additional 30 days.
(5) If the department determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately.
(6) The department shall have on file, a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers. The owner of the building or
property will pay all charges for these tests.
(7) The department will begin initial premise inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this
program by the city council, during the calendar year 1999. Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises.
(8) The building department as to the degree of hazard and type of backflow prevention device required will evaluate one- and two-family
dwellings. The building department will issue permits for backflow prevention devices with copies being submitted to the department. The building
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 318/444
department will witness installation and testing of devices as necessary for final approval. Any corrections needed will follow steps (2) through (6)
above.
(b) Owner.
(1) The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises.
(2) The owner, after having been informed by a letter from the department, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test, or have tested, any and
all backflow prevention devices on his premises.
(3) The owner shall correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention device which is revealed by periodic testing.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-106. Degree of hazard.
The department recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from cross-connections. All threats will be classified by degree of hazard and will
require the installation of approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices or double check valves. The following occupancies are hereby
classified as hazardous occupancies and will require the types of backflow prevention devices as listed in Chapter 4, AWWA-M14 manual:
(1) Nonresidential:
a. Premises with an auxiliary water supply either interconnected or not interconnected with the potable water supply;
b. Premises which use the city's potable water system as a subsidiary water system;
c. Premises where inspection is restricted;
d. Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes, and so forth;
e. Hotels/motels which have more than six units or include any of the uses or auxiliary uses as listed herein;
f. Piers, docks, and other water front facilities;
g. Laboratories;
h. Sewage treatment plants and sewage lift stations;
i. Food and beverage processing plants;
j. Chemical plants using a water process;
k. Metal plating plants;
l. Petroleum processing or storage plants;
m. Car washing facilities;
n. Premises with reclaimed water systems; and
o. Any use or occupancy which may be determined, by the department, as a hazardous classification.
(2) Residential.
a. Premises with an auxiliary water supply either interconnected or not interconnected with the potable water supply;
b. Premises which use the city's potable water system as a subsidiary water system;
c. Premises where inspection is restricted;
d. RV or manufactured housing parks, or such facilities which may include any of the uses or auxiliary uses as listed herein;
e. Multi-family, condominium, or cluster housing where one master meter is used to supply more than two units;
f. Piers, docks and other water front facilities; and
g. Any use or occupancy which may be determined, by the department, as a hazardous classification. NOTE: One- and two-family dwellings
may be allowed to use screw-on backflow prevention devices connected to all outside hose bibs in lieu of a single device connected to the
water service line at the meter.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-107. Permits.
The department shall not permit a cross-connection within the public water supply system unless it is considered necessary and that it cannot be
eliminated.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 319/444
(1) Permits that are required for each backflow prevention device are obtained from the building department. A fee of $10.00 shall be charged for
the initial permit and $10.00 shall be charged for the renewal of each permit.
(2) Permits for backflow prevention devices are indicated on the city's plumbing permit forms and will be used for both initial and renewal of
permits.
(3) Permits shall be renewed every year at time of annual testing (see section 102-94, Periodic testing, below) of backflow device and are
nontransferable. Permits are subject to revocation and become immediately revoked if the owner should so change the type of or degree of hazard
associated with the service.
(4) A permit is not required when fixture isolation is achieved with the utilization of a nontestable backflow prevention device.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-108. Existing in-use backflow prevention devices.
Any existing backflow prevention device shall be allowed by the department to continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supercede the
effectiveness of the present backflow prevention device, or result in an unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard has increased, as
in the case of a residential installation converting to a business establishment, any existing backflow prevention device must be upgraded to a reduced
pressure principal device, or a reduced pressure principle device must be installed in the event that no backflow prevention device was present.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-109. Periodic testing.
(a) Reduced pressure principle backflow devices shall be tested and inspected on an annual basis (see section 102-92, Permits, above).
(b) Annual testing shall be performed by a state certified tester with such test performed at the owner's expense.
(c) The testing shall be conducted during the department's regular business hours. Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require
additional charges to cover the increased costs to the department.
(d) Any backflow prevention device, which fails during a periodic test, will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the
repair, the device will be re-tested at owner's expense to ensure correct operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if the
backflow prevention device fails the test and cannot be repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more than 30 days after the test
date will be established. The owner is responsible for spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement device. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective
means of the owner insuring that uninterrupted water service during testing or repair of device and is strongly recommended when the owner desires such
continuity.
(e) Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than specified than in subsection (a) above, in cases where there is a history of test
failures and the department feels that due to the degree of hazard involved, additional tests will be borne by the owner.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-110. Records and reports.
Records: The department will initiate and maintain the following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on cross-connection permits.
(3) Copies of permits and permit applications.
(4) Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the commission as requested.
(Ord. No. 1115,  1, 5-25-99; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Secs. 102-111102-199. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. WASTEWATER SERVICE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 102-200. When water closets, sinks and wastewater connections required.
All owners or occupants of buildings, or agents for such owners, situated in any section of the city where a wastewater utility system exists, and where the
property line of the land on which any such building is situated extends to within 100 feet of any such wastewater utility system, are hereby required to
construct or cause to be constructed suitable water closets and sinks on such property, and to connect the same to the city wastewater utility system, under
the supervision of the director of public works. It shall be the duty of any such owner, occupant or agent to keep and maintain such water closets and sinks
in a usable and sanitary condition, and it shall be unlawful for any such owner, agent or occupant, while such building is occupied, to fail to have at least
one water closet connected to the city wastewater utility system at all times.
(Code 1972,  24-6; Ord. No. 1222,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-201. Septic tanks for buildings not connected to wastewater utility.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 320/444
Every occupied building within the city, which is not required by section 102-200 to be connected to the wastewater utility system, shall be connected to a
septic tank installed and maintained in accord with the rules and regulations of the state department of health.
(Code 1972,  24-8; Ord. No. 1222,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-202. Permit to deposit septic tank waste into wastewater system.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or deposit any septic tank waste into the city's wastewater system, without first obtaining a permit to do so
from the director of public works. The fee for such permit shall be $40.00 for each 1,000 gallons of waste to be so discharged or deposited.
(Code 1972,  24-9; Ord. No. 1222,  1, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  5, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Secs. 102-203102-220. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONNECTIONS
Sec. 102-221. Required.
(a) Existing structures. All existing homes, apartments, duplexes, hotels, motels, condominiums, washaterias, restaurants, shops, office buildings and
any other structure having a sink, restroom, floor drain or other means of disposing of wastewater shall be connected to the public wastewater utility
system, provided that public wastewater collection lines for the system are in place within a public easement or right-of-way having a common border with
the property upon which the structure is built.
(b) New construction. All new structures as defined in subsection (a) of this section shall be connected to the public wastewater utility system before a
certificate of occupancy may be issued.
(Ord. No. 1222,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-222. Collection line extensions; septic permit applications.
(a) No septic permit application may be approved for any lot until it has been determined by the city that the city, or its approved contractors, cannot
extend the public wastewater collection line to the property in question within six months of the date of the application, and the city manager has approved
the issuance of the permit.
(b) The city shall continue to extend public wastewater collection lines to all existing structures as defined in subsection (a) of this section, subject to the
constraints, considerations and priorities listed below:
(1) Existing collection lines shall first be extended to the borders of the property to reach the greatest number of structures at the lowest cost per
new customer.
(2) Existing collection lines shall then be extended to the borders of the property to reach all remaining structures.
(3) Existing collection lines that must be enlarged, deepened, or relocated to service existing structures shall then be rebuilt.
(4) Any project having external funding, such as a grant or cost sharing by a citizen, landowner or other source, which lowers the net cost of
construction to the city, may be moved upward on the project priority list.
(5) Projects having greater environmental importance due to identified pollution may be moved upward on the priority list.
(6) In cases where the relative cost of two or more projects are similar, the potential for additional customers in the future shall be considered
when determining the priority for each project.
(Ord. No. 1222,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-223. Notice to connect with wastewater utility system when available.
(a) The city shall mail a notice to owners of all structures using the address provided on the adopted tax roll of the county when it is found that public
wastewater collection lines are adjacent to the property and the property is not connected to the public wastewater utility system. Failure to receive or
accept the notice shall not negate, delay, waive or nullify any provision of this section.
(b) The notice shall give the property owner 90 days to apply for a wastewater utility tap. The notice shall stipulate that the property must be connected
to the public wastewater utility system within 90 days after a wastewater utility tap is constructed.
(Ord. No. 1222,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-224. Enforcement.
(a) A violation of this division shall occur 90 days after receipt of notice if the property owner has not applied for installation of a wastewater tap and/or
90 days after installation of wastewater tap if the property owner has not connected the structure to the public wastewater collection line.
(b) Failure to comply with the provisions of this division shall constitute a class C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs, as defined in
subsection (a) of this section, shall constitute a new violation. Each violation is punishable by a fine as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 1222,  2, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Secs. 102-225102-245. Reserved.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 321/444
DIVISION 3. CONNECTION FEES
Sec. 102-246. Schedule of fees.
(a) For all original wastewater connections made and connected to city wastewater systems, the minimum tap or connection fee to charged to and aid by
the user of the wastewater facility of the city is as follows:
Wastewater Tap Fee
Full Tap - 4" $1,100.00
(b) The fee for a four-inch wastewater tap shall be $1,100.00, and such fee shall apply irrespective of when the wastewater tap is made. Any other
wastewater tap service fees will be subject to a determination to be made by the city's director of public works on a per-job basis, so that the city's actual
cost of the fee tap will be recuperated.
(c) Included within the full tap fee charge the city will furnish up to 60 feet of four-inch wastewater pipe and all necessary appurtenances needed to
make installation. Any expenses incurred for boring or cutting a street or curb and for installation of over 60 feet of wastewater pipe shall be borne by the
user. The user shall pay, prior to installation, the estimated cost of materials, labor and overhead as determined by the director of public works.
(Ord. No. 1222,  3, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1340,  6, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1404,  2, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-247. Payment of fees; permit obtained, connections made by licensed plumber.
All connection fees will be paid at the time that a plumbing permit is issued; being prior to commencing installation. A plumbing permit will have to be
taken out by a master plumber and all connections shall be made by a licensed plumber.
(Ord. No. 1222,  3, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-248. Disposition.
The fees collected under this division will be deposited into the operating revenue accounts of the wastewater collection and treatment division of the city.
(Ord. No. 1222,  3, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-249. Payment agreement; term; minimum payment.
(a) The city may enter into an agreement with the owner of a tract of land for which a plat has been recorded providing for payment of wastewater tap
fees.
(b) Agreement may not exceed six (6) months, and shall accrue interest of six percent APR.
(c) Minimum monthly payments shall not be less than $150.00.
(d) This provision shall be reviewed and re-authorized annually.
(Ord. No. 1531,  2, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1556  2, 1-10-12)
Secs. 102-250102-265. Reserved.
DIVISION 4. SERVICE CHARGES
Sec. 102-266. Wastewater rates inside city limits.
(a) Residential/single-family. There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential/single-family customers connected to wastewater
utility system inside its city limits, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based upon the customer's water tap and the customer's usage (in
gallons of water, as set forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
(1) For the first 0 to 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one billing calendar month by any one user, the following sum per
month:
Wastewater Tap Size (Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $21.16
1 or larger $23.81
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 322/444
(2) For all additional gallons used over 1,500 gallons the sum of $3.87 for each 1,000 gallons up to 5,000 gallons or fractional part thereof, used
in any one billing cycle.
(3) For all additional gallons used over 5,000 gallons the sum of $4.55 for each 1,000 gallons up to 15,000 gallons or fractional part thereof, used
in any one calendar month.
(b) Nonresidential/non-single-family. There shall be charged and collected by the city from all nonresidential/non-single-family customers connected to
wastewater utility system inside its city limits, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based upon the customer's water tap and the
customer's water usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
(1) For the first 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one billing calendar month by any one user, the following sum per month, to
wit:
Water Tap Size (Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $21.16
1 $26.43
1-1/2 $31.73
2 $42.30
3 $84.62
4 and larger $132.20
(2) For all additional gallons used over 1,500 the sum of $3.87 for each 1,000 gallons up to 5,000 or fractional part thereof.
(3) For all additional gallons used over 5,000 the sum of $4.55 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof.
(Ord. No. 1222,  4, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1404,  3, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 1469,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1498,  1, 5-11-10; Ord.
No. 1517,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1580,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1609,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1633,  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1653,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No.
1667,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1690,  1, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 1732,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-267. Wastewater rates outside city limits.
(a) Residential/single-family. There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential/single-family customers connected to wastewater
utility system outside its city limits, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based upon the customer's water tap and the customer's water
usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
(1) For the first 0 to 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one billing calendar month by any one user the following sum per
month:
Water Tap Size (Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $29.63
1 or larger $37.01
(2) For all additional gallons used over 1,500 gallons the sum of $5.42 for each 1,000 gallons up to 5,000 gallons or fractional part thereof, used
in any one billing cycle.
(3) For all additional gallons used over 5,000 gallons the sum of $6.38 for each 1,000 gallons up to 15,000 gallons or fractional part thereof, used
in any one calendar month.
(b) Nonresidential/non-single-family. There shall be charged and collected by the city from all nonresidential/non-single-family customers connected to
wastewater utility system outside its city limits, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based upon the customer's water tap and the
customer's water usage (in gallons of water), as set forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 323/444
(1) For the first 0 to 1,500 gallons, or fractional part thereof, used in any one billing calendar month by any one user, the following sum per
month:
Water Tap Size (Inches) Minimum Charge
3/4 $29.63
1 $37.01
1-1/2 $44.43
2 $59.23
3 $118.46
4 or larger $185.09
(2) For all additional gallons used over 1,500 the sum of $5.42 for each 1,000 gallons up to 5,000 or fractional part thereof.
(3) For all additional gallons used over 5,000 the sum of $6.38 for each 1,000 gallons or fractional part thereof.
(Ord. No. 1222,  4, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1404,  4, 10-9-07; Ord. No. 1469,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1498,  2, 5-11-10; Ord.
No. 1517,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1580,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1609,  1, 8-27-13; Ord. No. 1633,  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1653,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No.
1667,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1690,  1, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 1732,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-268. Contracted wastewater rates.
Wastewater rates charged to contracted wastewater customers shall not be affected by this division.
(Ord. No. 1222,  4, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1517,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1580,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1609,  1, 8-27-13; Ord.
No. 1633,  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1653,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1667,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1690,  1, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 1732,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-269. Rates if not on city water.
Any person using the city wastewater utility system, and not connected full-time to its municipal water system shall pay the following monthly charges:
Account Type Inside the City
Limits
Outside the City
Limits
Residential/single-family $37.52 $50.65
Nonresidential/non-single-family $42.72 $57.63
Commercial operations (carwashes/laundry), minimum* $186.00 $247.38
* Rate will be determined by the director of public works or his designee by comparing like services to other nonresidential users.
(Ord. No. 1222,  4, 8-13-02; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1517,  1, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1580,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1609,  1, 8-27-13; Ord.
No. 1633,  1, 8-26-14; Ord. No. 1653,  1, 8-25-15; Ord. No. 1667,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1690,  1, 8-22-17; Ord. No. 1732,  1, 8-28-18)
Secs. 102-270102-290. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1580,  1, adopted Aug. 28, 2012, repealed former  102-270 in its entirety which pertained to disconnection of service for
nonpayment and derived from Ord. No. 1340,  7, 12-13-05; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1517,  1, 9-28-10.
DIVISION 5. SEWER USE
Sec. 102-291. Definitions.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 324/444
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Act means Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et. Seq.
B.O.D. (biochemical oxygen demand) means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter by standard methods procedure
in five days at 20 degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight.
City means the City of Rockport, Texas, or any authorized person acting in its behalf.
COD means the value of the test for Chemical Oxygen Demand, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water &
Wastewater."
Domestic sewage means water-borne wastes normally discharged from sanitary conveniences of dwellings, including apartment houses and hotels, office
buildings, factories, restaurants and institutions, free from storm surface water and industrial wastes. The term "normal domestic sewage" shall mean
normal sewage for the city, in which the average concentration of suspended materials and five days B.O.D. is established at 250 parts per million each, by
weight, on the basis of the normal contribution of twenty-hundredths pounds per capita. It is further expressly provided that for the purpose of this article,
any waste that exceeds the above concentration of suspended materials and/or B.O.D. shall be classified as industrial waste and made subject to all
regulations pertaining thereto, whether or not such waste was partially of domestic origin.
Defective service line means a line transporting wastewater from a user facility to the public wastewater collection system that in addition allows the
entrance of infiltration and/or inflow.
EPA means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Fats, oils, and greases (FOG) means organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical test procedures established in 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to
time. All are sometimes referred to herein as "grease" or "greases."
Garbage means solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and disposing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
Generator means any person who owns or operates a grease trap/grease interceptor, or whose act or process produces a grease trap waste.
Grease trap or interceptor means a device designed to use differences in specific gravities to separate and retain light density liquids, waterborne fats, oils,
and greases prior to the wastewater entering the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices also serve to collect settleable solids, generated by and
from food preparation activities, prior to the water exiting the trap and entering the sanitary sewer collection system. Grease traps and interceptors are also
referred to herein as "grease traps/interceptors."
Grease trap waste means material collected in and from any grease trap/interceptor in the sanitary sewer service line of a commercial, institutional, multifamily
facility or industrial food service or processing establishment, including the solids resulting from de-watering processes.
Indirect discharge or discharge means the introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any non-domestic source.
Industrial wastes means all water-borne solids, liquids, or gaseous wastes resulting from any industrial manufacturing or food processing operation or
process, or from the development of any natural resource, or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage.
Infiltration means water entering the POTW at any location, public or private, by permeation through the ground and subsequent entry through defective
pipes, pipe joints, connections, manhole walls or similar such means of passage.
Inflow means water entering the POTW at any location, public or private, by means of surface stormwater or irrigation runoff, or piped transportation of
such waters.
Interference means a discharge which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its
treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal, or is a cause of a violation of the city's TPDES permit.
Person, establishment or owner means any individual, firm, company, association, society, corporation, partnership, or group, their agents, servants or
employees.
pH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion concentration of a solution.
POTW or Publicly owned treatment works means a treatment works which is owned by a state or municipality as defined by section 502(4) of the Clean
Water Act. This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial
wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes all sewers, pipes and other conveyances that convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The term also means
the municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment
works. For purposes of this ordinance, the terms "sanitary sewer system" and "POTW" may be used interchangeably.
Private service line means the pipe originating on private property and ending at the point of connection to the POTW (typically the property line)
including the clean out at the point of tie-in into the POTW. The private service line is the sole responsibility of the property owner to maintain and repair.
Prohibited connection means any piping arrangement or transportation system that conveys groundwater, stormwater or irrigation runoff, to the public
wastewater collection system.
Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food, exclusive of egg shells, bones, and similar matter that
have been shredded to such degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particles
greater than one-half inch in any dimension.
Public sewer means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties shall have equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 325/444
Sanitary sewer means a public sewer which carries sewage and to which stormwaters, surface waters and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
Sewage means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
Sewage treatment plant means any city-owned facility, devices and structures used for receiving and treating sewage from the city sanitary sewer systems.
Sewerage means a pipe or conduit for carrying sanitary sewage.
Sewerage works means all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage.
Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface, or are in suspension in water, sewage, or other liquids; and which, in accordance with
standard methods, are removable by laboratory filtering.
Standard methods means the laboratory procedures set forth in the latest edition, at the time of analysis, of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Waste Water as prepared, approved, and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the
Water Environment Federation.
TCEQ means the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality, and its predecessor and successor agencies.
Transporter means a person who is registered with and authorized by the TCEQ to transport sewage sludge, water treatment sludge, domestic seepage,
chemical toilet waste, grit trap waste, or grease trap waste in accordance with 30 Texas Administrative Code  312.142.
TSS means the value of the test for Total Suspended Solids, as described in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water &
Wastewater."
Unpolluted water or waste means any water or waste containing none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; acid or alkali; phenol, or other
substances in suspension, colloidal state or solution, and noxious or odorous gases. It shall contain no more than ten parts per million each of suspended
solids and B.O.D. The color shall not exceed 50 parts per million.
User means any person, including those located outside the jurisdictional limits of the city, which contributes causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of wastewater into the POTW, including persons who contribute such wastewater from mobile sources.
(Code 1972,  24-38; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1597,  1, 1-8-13)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 102-292. Prohibited discharges, substances.
(a) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any sanitary sewer, any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150 degrees Fahrenheit (65 degrees Celsius), or any discharge which causes the
temperature of the total treatment plant influent to increase at a rate of ten degrees Fahrenheit or more per hour or a combined total increase to a
plant influent temperature of 110 degrees Fahrenheit.
(2) Any water or wastes which contain wax, grease or oil, plastic, or other substance that will solidify or become discernibly viscous at
temperatures between 32 degrees to 150 degrees Fahrenheit.
(3) Flammable or explosive liquid, solids or gas, such as gasoline, kerosene, benzine, naphtha, and the like.
(4) Solid or viscous substances in quantities capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the proper operation
of the sewage works, such as ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch
manure, hair and fleshings, entrails, lime slurry, lime residues, slops, chemical residues, paint residues or bulk solids.
(5) Any garbage not within the definition of "properly shredded garbage" as defined in this article.
(6) Any noxious or malodorous substance which can form a gas, which either singly or by interaction with other wastes, is capable of causing
objectionable odors; or hazard to life; or forms solids in concentration exceeding the limits established in subsection (b) of this section; or creates
any other condition deleterious to structures or treatment processes; or requires unusual provisions, attention, or expense to handle such materials.
(7) Antimony, Beryllium, Bismuth, Cobalt, Molybdenum, Tin and Uranyl ion will not be discharged into the sanitary sewer system.
(b) Except in quantities or concentrations or with provisions as stipulated in this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, to any sanitary
sewer, water or wastes containing:
(1) Acids or alkalies which attack or corrode sewers or sewage disposal structures, or have a pH value lower than 5.5 or higher than 9.5.
(2) The concentration of cyanide or cyanogen compounds allowed to be discharged into the sanitary sewer system shall not exceed 1.0 mg/l.
(3) Materials which exert or cause:
a. Unusual concentrations of solids or composition; as for example, total suspended solids of greater than 250 parts per million of inert
nature or such as Fuller's earth and/or total dissolved solids such as sodium chloride, or sodium sulfate.
b. The color shall not exceed 50 units as measured by the Platinum-Cobalt Method of Determination.
c. Biochemical oxygen demand or an immediate oxygen demand greater than 250 parts per million.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 326/444
d. High hydrogen sulfide content.
e. Unusual flow and concentration, which shall be pretreated to a concentration acceptable to the city water and sewer system if such wastes
can cause damage to collection facilities, impair the processes, incur treatment cost exceeding those of normal sewage, or render the water
unfit for stream disposal or industrial use.
(4) Discharge of concentrations into the sanitary sewer system of the following substances shall not exceed the following percentages:
Substance mg/l
Arsenic 0.05
Barium 5.0
Boron 1.0
Cadmium 0.02
Chromium (Hexa) 0.05
Chromium (Tri) 5.0
Copper 1.0
Iron 0.3
Phenols 0.005
Lead 0.1
Manganese 1.0
Mercury 0.005
Nickel 1.0
Selenium 0.02
Silver 0.1
Zinc 5.0
(c) No person may discharge radioactive wastes or isotopes into the sanitary sewer system without consulting the city for permission; such material will
be handled in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations controlling the discharge of radioactive wastes into public sewers.
(Code 1972,  24-39; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1597,  1, 1-8-13)
Cross referenceSolid waste, ch. 82.
Sec. 102-293. Fats, oil and grease (FOG).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 327/444
(a) Installations.
(1) New facilities. Food processing, food service and/or multi-family facilities which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities
which will be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility, where such facility did not previously exist, shall be required to design,
install, operate and maintain a grease trap/interceptor in accordance with locally adopted plumbing codes or other applicable ordinances. Grease
traps/interceptors shall be installed and inspected prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
(2) Existing facilities. Existing grease traps/interceptors must be operated and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations and in accordance with these model standards, unless specified in writing and approved by the POTW.
(3) All grease trap/interceptor waste shall be properly disposed of at a facility in accordance with federal, state, or local regulation.
(b) Cleaning and maintenance.
(1) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be maintained in an efficient operating condition at all times.
(2) Each grease trap pumped shall be fully evacuated unless the trap volume is greater than the tank capacity on the vacuum truck in which case
the transporter shall arrange for additional transportation capacity so that the trap is fully evacuated within a 24-hour period, in accordance with 30
Texas Administrative Code  312.143.
(c) Self-cleaning.
(1) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must receive approval from the POTW annually prior to removing grease from their own grease trap(s)
located inside a building, provided:
a. The grease trap is no more than 50 gallons in liquid/operating capacity;
b. Proper on-site material disposal methods are implemented (e.g. absorb liquids into solid form and dispose into trash);
c. The local solid waste authority allows such practices;
d. Grease trap waste is placed in a leak proof, sealable container(s) located on the premises and in an area for the transporter to pump-out;
and
e. Detailed records on these activities are maintained.
(2) Grease trap self-cleaning operators must submit a completed self-cleaning request to the POTW for approval. The written request shall
include the following information:
a. Business name and street address;
b. Grease trap/interceptor operator name, title, and phone number;
c. Description of maintenance frequency, method of disposal, method of cleaning and size (in gallons) of the grease trap/interceptor; and
d. Signed statement that the operator will maintain records of waste disposal and produce them for compliance inspections.
(3) Self-cleaners must adhere to all the requirements; procedures and detailed record keeping outlined in their approved application, to ensure
compliance with this ordinance. A maintenance log shall be kept by self-cleaning operators that indicates, at a minimum, the following information:
a. Date the grease trap/interceptor was serviced;
b. Name of the person or company servicing the grease trap/interceptor;
c. Waste disposal method used;
d. Gallons of grease removed and disposed of;
e. Waste oil added to grease trap/interceptor waste; and
f. Signature of the operator after each cleaning that certifies that all grease was removed, disposed of properly, grease trap/interceptor was
thoroughly cleaned, and that all parts were replaced and in operable condition.
(4) Violations incurred by grease trap self-cleaners will be subject to enforcement action including fines and/or removal from the self-cleaner
program.
(d) Cleaning schedules.
(1) Grease traps and grease interceptors shall be cleaned as often as necessary to ensure that sediment and floating materials do not accumulate to
impair the efficiency of the grease trap/interceptor; to ensure the discharge is in compliance with local discharge limits; and to ensure no visible
grease is observed in discharge.
(2) Grease traps and grease interceptors subject to these standards shall be completely evacuated a minimum of every 90 days, or more
frequently when:
a. Twenty-five percent or more of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device to the
invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 328/444
b. The discharge exceeds BOD, COD, TSS, FOG, pH, or other pollutant levels established by the POTW; or
c. If there is a history of non-compliance.
(3) Any person who owns or operates a grease trap/interceptor may submit to the POTW a request in writing for an exception to the 90-day
pumping frequency of their grease trap/interceptor. The POTW may grant an extension for required cleaning frequency on a case-by-case basis
when:
a. The grease trap/interceptor owner/operator has demonstrated the specific trap/interceptor will produce an effluent, based on defensible
analytical results, in consistent compliance with established local discharge limits such as BOD, TSS, FOG, or other parameters as determined
by the POTW; or
b. Less than twenty-five (25) percent of the wetted height of the grease trap or grease interceptor, as measured from the bottom of the device
to the invert of the outlet pipe, contains floating materials, sediment, oils or greases.
(4) In any event, a grease trap and grease interceptor shall be fully evacuated, cleaned, and inspected at least once every 180 days.
(e) Manifest requirements.
(1) Each pump-out of a grease trap or interceptor must be accompanied by a manifest to be used for record keeping purposes.
(2) Persons who generate, collect and transport grease waste shall maintain a record of each individual collection and deposit. Such records shall
be in the form of a manifest. The manifest shall include:
a. Name, address, telephone, and commission registration number of transporter;
b. Name, signature, address, and phone number of the person who generated the waste and the date collected;
c. Type and amount(s) of waste collected or transported;
d. Name and signature(s) of responsible person(s) collecting, transporting, and depositing the waste;
e. Date and place where the waste was deposited;
f. Identification (permit or site registration number, location, and operator) of the facility where the waste was deposited;
g. Name and signature of facility on-site representative acknowledging receipt of the waste and the amount of waste received;
h. The volume of the grease waste received; and
i. A consecutive numerical tracking number to assist transporters, waste generators, and regulating authorities in tracking the volume of
grease transported.
(3) Manifests shall be divided into five parts and records shall be maintained as follows:
a. One part of the manifest shall have the generator and transporter information completed and is given to the generator at the time of waste
pickup.
b. The remaining four parts of the manifest shall have all required information completely filled out and signed by the appropriate party
before distribution of the manifest.
c. One part of the manifest shall go to the receiving facility.
d. One part shall go to the transporter, who shall retain a copy of all manifests showing the collection and disposition of waste.
e. One copy of the manifest shall be returned by the transporter to the person who generated the wastes within 15 days after the waste is
received at the disposal or processing facility.
f. One part of the manifest shall go to the local authority.
(4) Copies of manifests returned to the waste generator shall be retained for five years and be readily available for review by the POTW.
(f) Alternative treatment.
(1) A person commits an offense if the person introduces, or causes, permits, or suffers the introduction of any surfactant, solvent or emulsifier
into a grease trap. Surfactants, solvents, and emulsifiers are materials which allow the grease to pass from the trap into the collection system, and
include but are not limited to enzymes, soap, diesel, kerosene, terpene, and other solvents.
(2) It is an affirmative defense to an enforcement of this chapter that the use of surfactants or soaps is incidental to normal kitchen hygiene
operations.
(3) Bioremediation media may be used with the POTW's approval if the person has proved to the satisfaction of the POTW that laboratory
testing which is appropriate for the type of grease trap to be used has verified that:
a. The media is a pure live bacterial product which is not inactivated by the use of domestic or commercial disinfectants and detergents,
strong alkalis, acids, and/or water temperatures of 160F (71C).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 329/444
b. The use of the media does not reduce the buoyancy of the grease layer in the grease trap and does not increase the potential for oil and
grease to be discharged to the sanitary sewer.
c. The use of the bioremediation media does not cause foaming in the sanitary sewer.
d. The BOD, COD, and TSS discharged to the sanitary sewer after use of the media does not exceed the BOD, COD, and TSS which would
be discharged if the product were not being used and the grease trap was being properly maintained. pH levels must be between 5 and 11.
(4) All testing shall be scientifically sound and statistically valid. All tests to determine oil and grease, TSS, BOD, COD, pH, and other pollutant
levels shall use appropriate tests which have been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Texas Commission on Environmental
Quality and which are defined in Title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 136 or Title 30, Texas Administrative Code  319.11. Testing shall be
open to inspection by the POTW, and shall meet the POTW's approval.
(g) Schedule of penalties.
(1) If the POTW determines that a generator is responsible for a blockage of a collection system line the generator shall owe a civil penalty of
$1,000.00 for the first violation, $1,500.00 for a second violation, and $2,000.00 for the third violation within a two-year period. Continuous
violations shall result in an increase in penalty by $500.00 and may also result in termination of services.
(2) Any person violating any of the provisions of this division shall be subject to a written warning for the first violation, a $1,000.00 civil
penalty for the second violation, a $1,500.00 civil penalty for the third violation, and a $2,000.00 civil penalty for the fourth violation within a twoyear
period. Consistent violations will result in a $500.00 increase in civil penalty and may result in termination of service.
(Ord. No. 1597,  2, 1-8-13)
Sec. 102-294. Pretreatment and control of industrial wastes.
(a) Persons or owners discharging industrial wastes which exhibit any of the prohibited wastes set out in this article shall be required to pretreat such
wastes or otherwise dispose of such wastes so as to make the remaining waste acceptable to the city prior to admission of such waste into a sanitary sewer.
(b) Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment and control facilities shall be submitted for the
approval of the city, and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until approval is obtained in writing. Preliminary treatment and control
facilities shall be constructed so as to provide all of the following:
(1) Prevention of prohibited waste from entering a sanitary sewer.
(2) Control of the quantities and rates of discharge of industrial wastes into a sanitary sewer.
(3) An accessible entry so that any authorized employee of the city may readily and safely measure the volume and samples of the flow prior to
the admission of such industrial wastes into a sanitary sewer.
(c) When preliminary treatment and control facilities are provided for any water or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and
effective operation by the owner at his expense.
(d) The director of public works and other duly authorized employees of the city acting as his duly authorized agent and bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to gain access to such properties as may be necessary for the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling
and testing of sewage and industrial wastes.
(Code 1972,  24-40; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1597,  3, 1-18-13)
Note-Formerly numbered as  102-293
Sec. 102-295. Surcharge for wastes of abnormal strength.
(a) Industrial waste charge and added costs.
(1) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city does not cause overloading of the sewage collection, treatment or disposal
facilities of the city, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall enter into an agreement which provides that the
discharger pay an industrial waste charge to be determined from the schedule of charges.
(2) If the volume or character of the waste to be treated by the city requires that wastewater collection, treatment, or other disposal facilities of
the city be improved, expanded, or enlarged in order to treat the waste, then prior to approval, the city and the person making the discharge shall
enter into an agreement which provides that the discharger pay in full all added costs the city may incur due to acceptance of the waste.
(3) The agreement entered into pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section shall include but not be limited to:
a. Amortization of all capital outlay for collecting and treating the waste, including new capital outlay and the proportionate part of the value
of the existing system used in handling and treating the waste.
b. Operation and maintenance costs including salaries and wages, power costs, costs of chemicals and supplies, proper allowance for
maintenance, depreciation, overhead and office expense.
(4) Amortization shall be completed in a 24-year period and payment shall include all debt service costs.
(b) Schedule of charges. Industrial waste charges shall be calculated by the following formula:
Ci = voVi + boBi + soSi
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 330/444
Note: The principle applies equally well with additional terms (e.g., chlorine feed rates)
Where:
Ci = charge to industrial users, $/month
vo = unit cost of transport and treatment chargeable to volume, $/1,000 gal.
bo = unit cost of treatment chargeable to BOD, $/lb.
so = unit cost of treatment (including sludge treatment) chargeable to SS, $/lb.
Vi = volume of wastewater from industrial users, gal./mo.
Bi = amount of BOD from industrial users, lb./mo.
Si = amount of SS from industrial users, lb./mo.
(c) Adjustment of charges.
(1) The city shall adjust charges at least annually to reflect changes in the characteristics of wastewater based on the results of sampling and
testing.
(2) Increases in charges shall be retroactive for two billing periods and shall continue for six billing periods unless subsequent tests determine
that the charge should be further increased.
(3) The city shall review at least annually the basis for determining charges and shall adjust the unit treatment cost in the formula to reflect
increases or decreases in wastewater treatment costs based on the previous year's experience.
(4) The city shall bill the discharger by the month and shall show industrial waste charges as a separate item on the regular bill for water and
sewer charges. The discharger shall pay monthly in accordance with practices existing for payment of sewer charges.
(Code 1972,  24-41; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1597,  3, 1-18-13)
Note-Formerly numbered as  102-294
Sec. 102-296. Defective sewers.
Any owner of any property connecting to the POTW for the first time or replacing an existing yard line shall install and maintain a sewer cleanout at the
point of tie-in to the city's service line. To minimize groundwater infiltration and surface water inflow to the public sewer system that overloads pipelines
and inhibits wastewater treatment, the city hereby requires the owner of any property on which a defective sewer line or a prohibited connection is located
to repair the service line or remove the prohibited connection at the owner's expense.
(a) Defective service line. The city will investigate and determine if a service line is defective. Cracked, broken, crushed or similarly damaged
lines, lines with separated joints, or lines with any condition that allows infiltration of groundwater, shall be considered defective.
(b) Prohibited connections. The city will investigate and determine if a connection to the public sewer is a prohibited connection. Prohibited
connections may be direct to the public sewer or indirect through the property service line. Roof drains, yard drains, driveway and parking area
drains, foundation drains, exterior stairwell drains, uncapped cleanouts, sumps or any other system that conveys groundwater or surface runoff to a
public sanitary sewer may be considered a prohibited connection, even though such connection may not have been prohibited under existing
ordinance, regulations or standards at the time of construction.
(c) Administrative procedure. The codes enforcement officer will provide written notice to the property owner by certified mail that corrective
action is required. The written notice will specify the action that is needed such as partial repair, replacement or disconnection. The property owner
shall have 30 days from the date of the notice to complete the work. If the property owner fails to complete the work, the codes enforcement officer
will file appropriate damages in municipal court for violation of the (city) Municipal Code. In addition to prosecution in municipal court, the city
may pursue a civil action by injunction in any court of competent jurisdiction to temporarily or permanently enjoin the continuation of wastewater
collection service because of a public health nuisance. Further, the city may suspend water service to property until the violations are corrected.
(d) Corrective action. Plumbing work shall be done in accordance with all city, state and federal codes, regulations and standards. The city in no
way whatsoever assumes any responsibility or liability for corrective action undertaken by the property owner or plumbing contractor. All
prohibited connections shall be disconnected immediately at the public sewer or sanitary service line and capped with a watertight seal. All
corrective work shall be inspected and accepted by the city prior to the line being covered and returned to service. Reconnection of terminated
service shall be at the owner's expense.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 331/444
(Ord. No. 1597,  3, 4, 1-8-13)
Sec. 102-297. Disconnecting waste disposal service.
The city shall retain the right to disconnect waste disposal service in the following circumstances:
(1) Where acids or chemicals damaging to sewer lines or treatment processes are released to the sewer causing rapid deterioration of these
structures or interfering with proper treatment of sewage, the director is authorized immediately to terminate service by such measures as are
necessary to protect the facilities.
(2) Where any governmental agency informs the city that the effluent from the treatment plant is no longer of a standard permitted for surface
runoff and it is found that the owner is delivering waste water to the city's system that cannot be sufficiently diluted by mixing with the city's waste
or requires treatment that is not provided by the city as normal domestic treatment. In this instance, the city shall immediately supply the owner
with the governmental agency's report and provide the owner with all pertinent information. The owner's waste line will then be disconnected when
the city is informed that it can no longer continue to release its effluent for surface runoff. The owner's waste treatment service shall remain
disconnected until such time that the owner has provided additional pretreatment facilities designed to remove the objectionable cause from his
industrial wastes.
(3) Where the owner delivers his waste water at an uncontrolled, variable rate in sufficient quantity that it causes an imbalance in the sewage
treating system.
(Code 1972,  24-42; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1597,  4, 1-8-13)
NoteFormerly numbered as  10-295.
Sec. 102-298. Continued use of sewer after refusal to pay.
Any person failing or refusing to pay the charges provided for in this article, or to deposit the proper sum in the event of a dispute as to the amount of such
charges, in the time and manner provided, and who continues to discharge waste from his property into the sanitary sewer systems of the city shall be
guilty of an offense and upon continuance thereof shall be fined as provided in section 1-7 of this Code. Each and every day that such violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. The conviction of a person for such an offense shall not be a bar to the institution by the
city of a suit for the collection of the delinquent charges and for an injunction to enjoin such person from discharging waste into the sanitary sewer systems
of the city without complying with the provision of this division and paying the charges established hereby.
(Ord. No. 1597,  5, 1-8-13)
Secs. 102-299102-399. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. SURCHARGE REVENUE ACCOUNT*
Sec. 102-400. Authorization.
A special account titled municipal utility bill surcharge revenue account shall be established and maintained by the city for the purpose of collecting a
monthly surcharge on all municipal utility bills.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09)
Sec. 102-401. Surcharge.
(a) Single unit customer. A surcharge in the amount of $1.35 per municipal utility bill per month is hereby established for each non-wholesale single
unit customer.
(b) Multi-unit customer. A surcharge in the amount of $1.35 for each meter connection, plus $0.27 for each space, room, apartment, condo or like
multiple unit, per municipal utility bill per month, is hereby established for each non-wholesale multi-unit customer. Multi-unit customers shall include but
not limited to R.V. parks, apartments, condominiums, hotels/motels and shopping centers.
(c) Wholesale customer. A surcharge per municipal utility bill per month is hereby established for each wholesale customer in an amount equal to the
sum of $1.35 per each single unit served, plus $0.27 for each space, room, apartment, condo or like multiple unit served by the wholesale customer.
Wholesale customers shall include all contracted resale customers being charged wholesale water rate.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09; Ord. No. 1509,  1, 8-24-10)
Sec. 102-402. Use of revenues.
Use of the revenues resulting from the municipal utility bill surcharge are expressly limited for the exclusive purpose of capital outlay purchases by the
Rockport, Fulton and Lamar Volunteer Fire Departments. Capital outlay is defined as any material item having an intended life of more than two years
and/or a unit cost of more than $100.00.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09)
Sec. 102-403. Administration; date of allocation of revenues; date of annual reporting.
(a) Allocation of revenues. The city shall retain five percent of all surcharge revenues collected for the purpose of administration of the surcharge. On or
before October 15, of each year the city shall disburse the fund balance to the Rockport, Fulton and Lamar Volunteer Fire Departments as follows:
(1) Fulton Volunteer Fire Department, 23 percent;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 332/444
(2) Rockport Volunteer Fire Department, 77 percent; and
(3) Lamar Volunteer Fire Department will receive funds generated from the municipal utility service accounts (natural gas) on the Lamar
Peninsula.
(b) Required reporting. The Rockport, Fulton and Lamar Volunteer Fire Departments must present an annual report to the Rockport City Council
outlining the use of the funds from the prior disbursement on or before the second regularly scheduled city council meeting of the month of October. Funds
held by each volunteer fire department must be maintained in a fully insured account. No fire department is obligated to spend the funds allocated to them
every year. Funds may carry over from year to year.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09)
Sec. 102-404. Penalties.
(a) Failure to pay. Municipal utility customers who fail to pay the municipal utility bill surcharge under this article will be subject to the suspension or
loss of municipal utility service until the delinquent bills and all appropriate reconnect fees are paid in full.
(b) Failure to expend properly. Should any fire department misuse the funds allocated to them under this article the council shall have the option of:
(1) Requiring a repayment of a like amount to the municipal utility bill surcharge revenue account;
(2) Deducting a like amount from the next annual disbursement, with the funds remaining in the municipal utility bill surcharge revenue account;
or
(3) Deducting a like amount from the next annual disbursement and adding that amount to the disbursement to the other volunteer fire
department.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09)
Sec. 102-405. Scheduled review.
The allocation of municipal utility surcharge revenues outlined above shall be reviewed by the Rockport and Fulton Fire Chiefs during the budget process
on even numbered years. The allocation of revenues may be reviewed and amended sooner upon a receipt of a written request from both the Rockport Fire
Chief and the Fulton Fire Chief. To the extent possible, the allocation of municipal utility surcharge revenue shall be based upon the percentage of actual
municipal utility accounts for Rockport and for Fulton, excluding all accounts within dual response areas of Rockport and Fulton.
(Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1487,  1, 12-15-09)
Secs. 102-406102-499. Reserved.
ARTICLE V. NATURAL GAS SERVICE
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 102-500. Only authorized personnel to turn on gas service.
No natural gas from the city owned or operated natural gas supply shall be turned on for service into any premises by any person but the director of public
works or some person authorized by him to perform such service.
(Ord. No. 1431,  1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-501. Tampering with or injuring gas property; tampering fee.
It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to tamper with or alter any part of the natural gas or supply system or any meter. Any person
found tampering with natural gas utility property is subject to a $50.00 tampering fee in addition to any state law that may apply.
(Ord. No. 1431,  1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-502. Interruption of service.
Deliveries of natural gas to commercial or industrial customers may be interrupted or curtailed in case of shortage, or threatened shortage, of natural gas
supply from any cause whatsoever, to conserve natural gas for residential and other human need customers served hereunder, according to all mandatory
orders of governmental agencies having jurisdiction.
(Ord. No. 1431,  1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-503. Definitions.
British Thermal Unit (BTU) means the standard unit of measurement used to measure heat energy and to convert CCFs to Therms. It is the amount of heat
required to increase the temperature of a pint of water (which weighs exactly 16 ounces) by one degree Fahrenheit.
CCF means the amount of natural gas used presented in a unit of measurement applicable to natural gas (i.e. hundreds of cubic feet). CCFs used is
calculated by subtracting the beginning read from the ending read.
CCFs used means the amount of natural gas used presented in a unit of measurement applicable to natural gas (i.e. hundreds of cubic feet). CCFs used is
calculated by subtracting the beginning read from the ending read.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 333/444
Cubic foot (CF) means the most common measurement of gas volume. One cubic foot is equal to the amount of natural gas required to fill one cubic foot
under standard temperature and pressure. One cubic foot is approximately 1,025 British Thermal Units (BTUs). 100 Cubic Feet = 1 CCF.
MCFs used means the amount of natural gas used pressed in a unit of measurement applicable to natural gas (i.e. thousands of cubic feet). MCFs used is
calculated by subtracting the beginning read from the ending read.
Natural gas means the energy fuel is a mixture of naturally occurring combustible gases found underground and is widely used for heating and cooking, as
well as for a variety of industrial applications.
(Ord. No. 1431,  1, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Secs. 102-504102-515. Reserved.
DIVISION 2. CONNECTIONS
Sec. 102-516. Meters.
Meters for the measurement of utility services furnished by the city shall be furnished and installed by, and shall remain the property of, the city.
(Ord. No. 1431,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-517. Rates for natural gas tap/meter installation.
(a) There shall be charged and collected by the city, a fee for each natural gas tap/meter installation. A minimum charge for the first 50 feet of service
pipe installed as follows:
Meter Size Fee
R-275 $200.00
R-415 $350.00
(b) Every foot thereafter shall be charged at $4.00 per foot. Nonstandard tap/meter installations, additional main line length, road bores, meter
relocation, etc. will be charged at actual additional cost.
(Ord. No. 1431,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1470,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1480,  1, 11-3-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-518. Disposition, use of fees.
The fees collected under this division will be deposited into the annual operating revenues of the natural gas utility account of the city. The extension fees
collected under this division will be deposited into the revenues account compatible with the budget under which the labor and material expenses were
incurred.
(Ord. No. 1431,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-519. Conformity to railroad commission and city standards.
The gas lines constructed under this article shall conform to the specifications of the Texas Railroad Commission and to the recommendations of the city
engineer and director of public works, in the design, size and layout of the gas distribution system. The natural gas line shall be acceptable, without
penalty, to the Texas Railroad Commission and shall be approved by the city engineer and the director of public works. All materials and installations for
natural gas lines shall be in accordance with the railroad commission's standards and the city standards for same and shall be approved by the railroad
commission and by the director of public works and by the city engineer.
(Ord. No. 1431,  2, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Sec. 102-520. Payment agreement; term; minimum payment.
(a) The city may enter into an agreement with the owner of a tract of land for which a plat has been recorded providing for payment of wastewater tap
fees.
(b) Agreement may not exceed six months, and shall accrue interest of six percent APR.
(c) Minimum monthly payments shall not be less than $150.00.
(d) This provision shall be reviewed and re-authorized annually.
(Ord. No. 1531,  3, 2-8-11; Ord. No. 1556  3, 1-10-12)
Secs. 102-521102-530. Reserved.
DIVISION 3. SERVICE CHARGES
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 334/444
Sec. 102-531. Natural gas rates inside city limits.
There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential and commercial customers of natural gas supplied by the city inside its city limits, as
now or hereafter established, the amount of money based on customer's usage (in cubic centimeters), as set forth in the following schedule of rates and
charges:
Demand Rate $22.11
Per 1,000 CF $2.46
Note: Rates do not include purchased gas adjustment and sales tax, where applicable.
(Ord. No. 1431,  3, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1467,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1581,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1610,  1, 8-27-13; Ord.
No. 1668,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1733,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-532. Natural gas rates for Town of Fulton.
There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential and commercial customers of natural gas supplied by the city to customers within the
corporate city limits of the Town of Fulton, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based on customer's usage (in cubic centimeters), as set
forth in the following schedule of rates and charges:
Demand Rate $22.11
Per 1,000 CF $2.46
Note: Rates do not include purchased gas adjustment and sales tax, where applicable.
(Ord. No. 1431,  3, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1467,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1581,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1610,  1, 8-27-13; Ord.
No. 1668,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1733,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-533. Natural gas rates for unincorporated areas of Aransas County.
There shall be charged and collected by the city from all residential and commercial customers of natural gas supplied by the city to the unincorporated
areas of Aransas County, as now or hereafter established, the amount of money based on customer's usage (in cubic centimeters), as set forth in the
following schedule of rates and charges:
Demand Rate $22.11
Per 1,000 CF $2.46
Note: Rates do not include purchased gas adjustment and sales tax, where applicable.
(Ord. No. 1431,  3, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1467,  1, 9-22-09; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09; Ord. No. 1581,  1, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 1610,  1, 8-27-13; Ord.
No. 1668,  1, 8-23-16; Ord. No. 1733,  1, 8-28-18)
Sec. 102-534. Purchased gas adjustment.
The rates in this division are subject to gas cost adjustments as follows: rates will be adjusted monthly by the city following the receipt of notice of the cost
of natural gas from the supplier to pass on to the consumer the full amount of such cost adjusted for pressure base and natural gas loss and unaccounted-for
factors. Additional fees and charges paid to the supplier, which are necessary for the city to receive the natural gas, shall be include din the cost of natural
gas.
(Ord. No. 1431,  3, 5-13-08; Ord. No. 1486,  2, 12-1-09)
Chapters 103-105 RESERVED
Chapter 106
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 335/444
VEGETATION*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 106-1. Title.
This chapter shall hereinafter be known as the Rockport Tree and Landscape Regulations for the City of Rockport, Texas.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-2. Purpose and scope.
This chapter establishes requirements for the provision of landscape elements and their maintenance, tree preservation, buffering and screening of property
for the purpose of providing orderly, safe and attractive development of land while promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the community.
The city experiences frequent droughts; therefore, it is a purpose of these regulations to encourage the use of drought resistant plants that do not consume
large quantities of water.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-3. Applicability.
(a) The terms and provisions of this chapter apply to land as follows:
(1) All vacant and undeveloped land within the City of Rockport, Texas, including any newly annexed areas by the city, except specific lands or
uses of land as may be exempt herein.
(2) All existing land to be re-developed, including additions and alterations but excluding interior alterations, except specific lands or uses of
land as may be exempt herein.
(3) All land that may be subject to landscape maintenance unless as exempt herein.
(b) The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following:
(1) Rights-of-way, streets, parks, and any other public land under the ownership or jurisdiction of the city, except specific land or uses of land as
may be exempt herein.
(2) Any land under the ownership or jurisdiction of state or federal agencies or other governmental body when otherwise prohibited by statute.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural shall include the singular, words used in the singular include the
plural, words used in the masculine include the feminine, and words used in the feminine include the masculine. The word "shall" is mandatory and not
merely directory.
ANSI A300: Pruning standards set forth in the standard practices for trees, shrubs, and other woody plant maintenance document.
Buffer device: Means a wall, fence, barrier or vegetative matter that acts as a device to obscure or hide visual, noise or other types of nuisances that may be
related to an adjacent property or street.
Building official: See definition in Chapter 2 of the International Building Code.
Building site: A lot or portion of a lot which is designated on the building permit application, including any existing structures, proposed new structures,
parking layout and any other site requirements that may be pertinent to development.
Caliper: Any of various measuring instruments usually having two adjustable arms, legs, or jaws used especially to measure diameter or thickness.
Circumference: The measurement around the trunk of a tree at breast height, or 4.5 feet above the ground. Circumference is also diameter multiplied by
3.142. Refer to D.B.H. below.
City: Means the City of Rockport, Texas.
Critical root zone: For any tree, the area within a circle centered on the location of the trunk. The circle's diameter is one-half the sum of the broadest and
narrowest drip-line diameters (See Fig. 106-A.).
Damage: Means to take any action which could cause a tree's death, either immediately or after a reasonable period of time, such as severing the main
trunk or large branches or large roots, girdling, poisoning, carving, mutilating, touching with live wires, crushing or exposing roots, digging or drilling a
hole larger than three cubic feet (or a trench) within the critical root zone, covering a substantial part of the critical root zone with an impermeable surface,
adding an excessive depth of soil to the critical root zone or compacting a substantial part of the soil in the critical root zone to constitute an impermeable
surface. The above are examples and are not intended to limit this definition.
D.B.H (diameter at breast height): The diameter of a tree measured in inches at breast height or 4.5 feet above the ground. If a tree forks into multiple
trunks below 4.5 feet, the trunk is measured at its most narrow point beneath the forks.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 336/444
Drip-line: A vertical line extending from the outermost edge of the tree canopy to the ground (See Fig. 106-A).
Exempt tree: Except as otherwise provide, any tree on public or private property that has a trunk diameter less than six inches (18.75 inches circumference)
measured at D.B.H.
Ex-officio member: For the purpose of this chapter, the landscape official or such staff person designated to serve as liaison to the tree and landscape
committee, takes part in the deliberations thereof but shall have no vote, except serves as chairman in the absence of the vice-chairman.
Invasive plants: Exotic plants that crowd out or otherwise harm native plants because they have no natural enemies in the Texas Coastal Bend area and
therefore reproduce unchecked (See Table 106-D, Invasive Species).
Landscape official: A City of Rockport employee designated by the city manager to administer the provisions of this document. If no designee, the duties
and responsibilities herein shall default to the building official.
Landscaping: Any of the following combinations of living vegetative material, such as, but not limited to, grass, shrubs, vines, hedges, various forms of
ground cover plants, shade/canopy trees or palms. In addition, non-living durable material, excluding sand, concrete and other forms of paving material
may be used to compliment the landscaping for edging and decoration.
Landscape area: An area of property required to meet landscaping requirements as prescribed herein.
Natural area: An area of natural vegetation (brush, vines, grass, etc.) under a tree's canopy or drip line, which has no record of having been cleared and is
considered to be in a natural state.
Pre-development activity: Construction activity which includes demolition, moving of buildings, site clearing, grubbing, grading and any other activity
which disturbs the surface of land and is actually undertaken, or customarily undertaken, as preparation for development.
Protected tree: Any tree on public or private property that has a trunk diameter six inches (18.75 inches circumference) or greater measured at D.B.H.
Pruning: The cutting or removing any part of the branching structure of a tree in either the crown, trunk or root areas as defined by the latest ANSI A300
standard (See Fig. 106-C).
Public tree: Any tree now or hereafter growing on any city street right-of-way, in any city park, or any public area as designated by the city.
Street yard: The area of a lot which lies between the property line along a dedicated street and the actual wall line of the building; or, if no building exists,
to the rear of the property line; or if parking is between the property line and wall line of the building, then between the parking and the property line. Such
building lines extend outward from the corners of the building as illustrated in Fig. 106-B.
Tree: A woody plant having one well defined stem or trunk and a more or less definitely formed crown, and usually attaining a mature height of at least
eight feet.
Tree specialist: Means a person who possesses professional credentials that attest to such person's proficiency in the science of trees and/or tree ecosystems
(i.e.: forestry, arboriculture, etc.).
Tree survey: Means a comprehensive assessment of land containing trees and/or woody vegetation to ascertain their location, condition, size and species.
Such survey may be accomplished through aerial photography, topographical maps, on-site inspections/calculations or a combination thereof, which can be
adopted into a plan for subsequent development of said land.
Windswept Live Oak tree: Means any Live Oak tree (Quercus virginiana) whose crown shows a definite south-east to north-west influence as a result of
Rockport's prevailing southeasterly wind. No Windswept Live Oak tree shall be exempt from the necessity to obtain a permit prior to its destruction, as
provided herein, and shall be considered a protected tree.
Wood-for-wood: Means that for any given size (whole inches) of tree removed, relative size in wood is replaced. Example: one - eight-inch tree removed,
replacement may be with either one - eight-inch tree or the equivalent number of trees to equal or exceed the numerical size of the tree removed.
Xeriscape: The conservation of water and energy through creative landscaping. The word xeriscape comes from the Greek work "xeros", meaning "dry".
This does not mean the landscape is brown or devoid of plants. However, it does mean that it is a well designed landscape providing the same lush
appearance as other non-xeriscape landscapes, but requires significantly less water, energy and maintenance.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-5. Tree and landscape committee.
(a) There is hereby designated a committee to be known as the tree and landscape committee. This committee is to function as an advisory board to city
staff or city council, as the case may be, in regard to these regulations. Said committee shall be composed of seven members, to wit:
(1) Five qualified voters of the City of Rockport.
(2) One member from the Rockport Planning and Zoning Commission.
(3) One member from the Rockport Park and Leisure Service Board.
(4) The city landscape official shall serve as ex-officio member to the committee.
(b) Candidates for the tree and landscape committee shall be appointed by the Rockport City Council. In selecting citizens for the committee, every
consideration shall be given to include, but not limited to, landscape architects, urban planners, foresters, arborists, master gardeners, horticulturists, etc.
Appointed members shall serve overlapping three-year terms with no more than two members up for reappointment in any one-year cycle. Beginning on
the effective date of this chapter, two members will be appointed for three years, two members for two years and one member for one year. Any vacancy
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 337/444
occurring during the unexpired term of a member shall be filled by the city council for the remainder of the unexpired term. The committee shall elect
from its members a chairperson and vice-chairperson to serve for one year beginning in July of the year elected.
(c) Meetings and duties of the tree and landscape committee:
(1) The committee shall meet at least once a month or as often as needed to conduct business. The committee shall meet at least once a month or
as often as needed to conduct business.
(2) The committee shall make recommendations as necessary for the removal, replacement, protection or maintenance of existing protected trees,
significant trees, and newly planted trees; and, possible retention of areas of natural vegetation and use of native species in landscape plans.
(3) The committee shall review requests from a developer or property owner when it is deemed that there has been a misinterpretation of the
prescribed regulations or that the regulations are being administered unfairly.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-6. Buffering and screening.
(a) The purpose of a buffer, screening wall or fence between properties of dissimilar use is to eliminate or minimize potentially adverse impacts of noise,
light, unsightly structures, parking areas, or other incompatible uses.
(b) When a multifamily, commercial or industrial use is established on a building site located adjacent to any one- or two-family residential district, a
buffer device, landscaped area or both shall be provided in addition to any site landscaping that may be required of this document. Conversely, when a oneor
two-family residential use is established adjacent to any multifamily, commercial, industrial use, a buffer device, landscaped area or both may be erected
and maintained along the property line by the residential property owner(s).
(1) A fence or wall that is provided shall be built in accordance with zoning ordinance.
(2) All open space within a buffer yard shall be planted with grass or other vegetative ground cover.
(3) A buffer yard may provide additional plantings in excess of minimum requirements.
(4) A buffer yard may be interrupted in order to provide access (pedestrian or vehicular) to adjacent parcels.
(5) The provisions of this section shall not apply where the residential area is separated by a public street, drainage ditch, canal or stormwater
detention areas that are a minimum 30 feet in their least dimension.
(c) In all areas, other than one- and two-family residential districts, a continuous visual screen of either wood, masonry, vegetation, hedge (two-years at
maturity) or combination thereof shall be required upon completion of construction, alteration or change in use; for the following:
(1) When a nonresidential PUD district or nonresidential specially permitted use is adjacent to a one- or two-family residential area.
(2) To screen a service or loading area.
(3) To screen the open storage of materials or equipment.
(4) To screen refuse storage areas on three sides (refer to Chapter 82, Rockport Code of Ordinances regarding location of refuse storage areas).
(5) To screen all roof, ground and wall mounted mechanical equipment (e.g.: air conditioning equipment), which may be viewed from residential
uses, streets or public park areas.
(6) Screening shall consist of materials consistent with the primary building materials, and may include metal screening or louvers which are
painted to blend with the primary building.
(d) In no case shall the following uses be allowed as buffers: playfields, stables, swimming pools, tennis courts or similar active recreation uses; parking
areas; garbage dumpster or designated refuse collection areas (refer to Chapter 82, Rockport Code of Ordinances).
(e) In cases where these requirements can be better met through the use of alternate methods, approval may be granted by the tree and landscape
committee.
(f) Buffering and screening devices shall be maintained by the property owner at all times.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-7. Greenscape preservation account.
All landscape permit fees, tree removal fees, contribution fees, penalties and fines collected pursuant to this article shall be recorded and maintained in a
special account to be known as the City of Rockport Greenscape Preservation Account. Monies maintained in this account shall accrue interest at the short
term rates prevailing in the market. All such funds and accrued interest shall be used, when appropriated by city council, only for the purpose of funding
the installation and maintenance of trees on public property within the city. Funds may be used to obtain trees, other landscaping associated with tree
plantings, sprinklers and other items or materials necessary and proper for the preservation, maintenance, relocation and restoration of trees and tree
ecosystems on public land.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-8. Appeals.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 338/444
Should the city landscape official deny a request for a landscape plan, removal of a protected tree or that a property owner/developer is aggrieved by a
decision of the landscape official, the owner/developer shall, in writing, and within ten days of the action of the landscape official, appeal such action to
the tree and landscape committee for further review and final action. The tree and landscape committee shall have discretionary power on a case-by-case
basis to determine whether or not just cause exists to overturn the decision of the landscape official. The tree and landscape committee may consider all
matters it believes relevant to the particular request. The decision of the tree and landscape committee shall be final.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-9. Graphics.
The graphics shown in Figures 106-A through 106-E are intended to depict the written representation of specific requirements addressed herein and are not
intended to portray accuracy. In addition, these graphics may not be indicative for all areas of the city. Should there be a misinterpretation between the
written word and the graphic, the written word shall prevail. Interpretation shall be made by the enforcing authority.
Figure 106-A
Tree Drip line and critical root zone
Figure 106-B
Street yards
Figure 106-C
Lot Lay-out and Buffer Areas
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 339/444
NOTE: Landscaping adjacent to public right-of-way
1. Minimum of five feet wide strip adjacent to right-of-way boundary with landscape barrier of at least two feet height, plus one tree per each 50
feet of street frontage.
2. All other areas between right-of-way and of-street vehicular use area shall be landscaped.
Figure 106-D.
Street Corner Vision Triangles
NOTE: Visibility triangles-No landscape materials above three feet high or below seven feet high shall be allowed within the visibility triangle as shown
above.
Figure 106-E.
Refuse Buffering
NOTE: All enclosures to be six-foot minimum height.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 340/444
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-10. Actions unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to develop and/or maintain property in violation of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-11. Noncompliance and enforcement.
(a) Enforcement authority. The landscape official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any tree or landscape plan may be examined or reexamined
at any time by the landscape official. If the landscape official determines the plan is deficient either preceding or proceeding development or is
determined to be no longer in compliance with reviewed and/or approved plans, the following actions may be taken:
(1) Refusal to issue permits until plan is made to conform or a sufficient plan is provided and approved.
(2) Refusal to issue certificate of occupancy.
(3) Issuance of a stop work order.
(4) Notice of violation issued as set forth below.
(b) Notice of violation. Whenever any tree or landscape plan is found to be in violation of this article, the owner/developer of the affected property shall
be given notice of the violation and a time to cure the violation as provided by this section. The notice must be in writing and may be given:
(1) By hand delivery to the owner or person in possession of the property;
(2) By letter addressed to the owner at the owner's last known address as indicated in the records of the Aransas County Appraisal District; or
(3) If the owner or person in possession cannot be contacted by (1) or (2) above, then the city may attempt to notice the owner/developer by one
of the following additional methods:
a. By publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least twice within ten consecutive days;
b. By posting the notice on or near the front door of each building on the property to which the violation relates; or
c. By posting the notice on a placard attached to the property to which the violation relates if the property contains no buildings.
The notice shall set forth the specific violation(s) and what action(s) shall be necessary to bring the plan or property into compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-12. Remedies for violation.
(a) Cumulative remedies. If the property has not been brought into compliance within 90 days after notification and no appeal has been made by the
owner/developer, the city may pursue any remedy or remedies available at law or in equity for a violation of this article, including, but not limited to,
injunctive relief. No election of one remedy shall preclude the utilization of any other remedy. All remedies available to the city to enforce this article are
cumulative.
(b) Penalty. Failure to comply with any provision of this chapter constitutes a class C misdemeanor punishable as provided by the general penalty
provisions of section 1-7 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances. Each day of violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation.
(Ord. No. 1349,  2, 9-5-06)
Secs. 106-13106-14. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TREE REGULATIONS
Sec. 106-15. Protection of trees.
No clear-cutting of land is allowed and no person shall intentionally damage, transplant or remove any protected tree on any real property within the city
unless specifically authorized through approval of an official landscape plan, site plan, building permit or on a case-by-case basis.
(1) For initial site preparation that includes, but not limited to, brush clearing, removal of exempt trees where necessary, exploratory work
necessary to perform required surveying, engineering or tree survey work, a permit for such work shall be obtained from the building official prior
to such work being performed. Such permit does not include the construction of retaining walls, drainage infrastructure or other structures (for the
purpose of this provision, a City of Rockport Application for Building Permit shall act as the site preparation permit application).
(2) Trees that are designated on an approved plan for which a building permit is required are exempt from the requirements of a separate removal
permit. If the site does not contain any protected trees, a letter prepared by a tree specialist or an affidavit submitted by a third party acceptable to
the city shall be submitted to the city, which verifies that protected trees are not on the subject site. Protected trees shall not be removed without
approval of the landscape official or as otherwise provided herein. Only exempt trees, as addressed herein, may be removed through permit without
prior approval. EXCEPTION: Should exempt trees constitute more than 65 percent of the trees on a property, excluding one- or two-family
dwelling lots, approval must be obtained through mitigation of a site/tree plan with the tree and landscape committee.
(3) Criteria for issuance of a protected tree removal permit.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 341/444
a. Except as otherwise provided, protected trees may be removed for the following reasons:
1. Trees that are hazardous, diseased or infectious and trees in decline, as certified by a tree specialist;
2. Trees or their root systems causing visible damage to structures, utilities or areas used for pedestrian and vehicular traffic;
3. Trees or their root systems that may cause damage to structures, utilities or areas used for pedestrian and vehicular traffic as certified
by a State of Texas registered engineer;
4. Trees within power line easements that cannot be properly pruned by the city or a local utility company;
5. Trees, after proper pruning, which cause safety-related problems;
6. Trees to be removed, cut, or disturbed within the footprint or within ten feet of one- and two-family dwellings (existing or new),
along with ancillary structures or uses (driveways, pools, storage sheds, etc.); or
7. For movement of buildings.
b. Trees or tree plans that do not meet any of the criteria in subsection (3)a. above or which have a Windswept Live Oak Tree on the
property or plan, shall be reviewed by the tree and landscape committee. The tree and landscape committee shall determine which trees may be
removed as necessary in order to develop the property in a reasonable and prudent manner.
c. Application for tree removal permits must be made at the office of the landscape official in advance of the time the work is to be done (for
the purposes of this section, a City of Rockport Building Permit Application shall act as the tree removal permit application). Said application
shall contain a tree survey of the affected property showing actual or schematic location of all existing protected trees, or, in the case of site
improvements, a site plan showing the location of all structures and parking areas proposed to be built and those protected trees to be removed
and any tree(s) to be planted, or a general description of trees requested to be removed pursuant to subsection (3)a., above and is satisfactory to
the landscape official. The landscape official shall then issue the permit or, when applicable under subsection (3)b. above, issue the permit if
the proposed work is approved by the tree and landscape committee. Any permit granted shall contain a definite date of expiration not to
exceed 180 days with said work completed in the time allowed on the permit. Any permit shall be void if its terms are violated. Within five
days after tree(s) removal, notice of completion shall be given to the landscape official.
(4) Mitigation policies. Due to large areas usually involved in commercial property development and the need to prevent stripping such areas of
trees, such development shall strive to retain as many trees within parking lot areas or within nondeveloped areas as possible, and/or meet the
landscaping requirements as addressed in article III of this chapter. Should the development plan not meet the criteria as addressed herein or the
developer submits an alternate plan, the landscape official shall submit such plan to the tree and landscape committee for further review and
recommendation.
(5) Protection of Windswept Live Oak trees.
a. Windswept Live Oak trees are considered a special natural resource unique to this area, shaped and created by forces of nature, and are
irreplaceable. Windswept Live Oak trees provide character and beauty to the community, and special preservation of such trees benefits the
community. Windswept Live Oak trees are deserving of extra consideration by the tree and landscape committee before any such tree is
permitted to be removed.
b. The tree and landscape committee may deny any application for removal of a Windswept Live Oak tree purporting to meet the criteria set
forth in subsection (3)a. above, unless the committee finds by clear and convincing evidence that the applicant's stated reasons for removal
exist in fact and the removal is imminently necessary to accomplish the applicant's stated reason(s).
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1414,  1, 12-11-07; Ord. No. 1530,  1, 1-25-11)
Sec. 106-16. Replacement tree criteria.
(a) All protected trees removed in accordance with the provisions contained herein shall be replaced in accordance with Table 106-B.
Table 106-B. Replacement tree schedule.
Each [Existing] Tree Will Be Replaced By... Replacement size...
Less than 6" DBH Determined by the Tree & Landscape
Oversight Committee in accordance with
Sec. 106-15, B, above.
Over 6" up to 9" DBH 2 trees 2" DBH  each
over 9" up to 12" DBH 3 trees 2" DBH - each
over 12" up to 18" DBH 4 trees 4" DBH - each
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 342/444
over 18" 5 trees 4" DBH - each
(b) In case of unusual circumstances where the above schedule can not feasibly be met, a removed tree(s) may be replaced wood-for-wood or replaced
according to an accepted landscape plan that is approved by the tree and landscape committee. As many trees as possible will be replaced. Replacement
trees must be planted in the same location or as near as possible to the removed trees (unless imposing an unreasonable hazard) and be maintained in good
health.
(c) Replacement trees may be of any species recommended in Table 106-D of this article or as may be accepted on a tree and landscaping plan by the
tree and landscape committee. Live oak trees on property other than one- and two-family dwellings should not, if feasible, be replaced with palm trees.
(d) When it is found impractical to relocate or replace on the same property, replacement may be made upon public property, parks and within rights-ofway
subject to approval from the city. Trees accepted by other organizations shall be negotiated with the city. In lieu of trees, a cash contribution may be
accepted by the city in an amount agreed upon with the developer and deposited into the Greenscape Preservation Account described in section 106-7.
(e) Replacement trees shall be required for removal of protected trees on residential property for uses other than one- and two-family dwellings at a ratio
prescribed in Table 106-B above.
(f) Replacement trees shall be required for removal of protected trees in public parks and other public open spaces at a ratio of wood-for-wood or by an
accepted landscaping plan which includes the planting of trees, unless otherwise recommended by the Rockport Park and Leisure Service Board.
(g) Replacement trees shall be required for removal of protected trees in parking areas at nonresidential development sites at a ratio prescribed in Table
106-B above, or by an accepted landscaping plan which includes the planting of trees.
(h) Replacement trees shall be required for removal of protected trees in other than parking areas at nonresidential development sites at a ratio of woodfor-
wood or by an accepted landscaping plan which includes the planting of trees.
(i) No replacement trees are required for the removal of protected trees within the footprint of approved buildings on a development site unless the only
trees on said site are within the footprint of said building(s). In such a case, replacement trees shall be required at a ratio of one-half the trees required in
Table 106-B above.
(j) No replacement trees are required for the removal of protected trees in public streets, alleys or rights-of-way (this may include easements where
utilities or other services are provided).
(k) No replacement trees are required for the removal of protected trees by a utility company during the normal course of maintaining easements or city
rights-of-way.
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-17. Tree protection during development.
During development of any site, other than one- and two-family dwelling sites and other than that addressed in section 106-15, the following measures will
be utilized to protect any tree on site that is not designated for removal:
(1) Soil disturbance/grade changes under the canopy of a preserved or planted tree shall be in accordance with an approved grading/landscaping
plan submitted by a tree specialist. Such plan shall be accepted and approved by the tree and landscape committee prior to site work.
(2) Insure that grade changes under the canopy of a preserved or planted tree are conducted where no more than two inches of soil is removed or
added unless approved otherwise by a recognized tree specialist.
(3) When necessary, additional measures may be taken to build tree wells, retaining walls, etc., to ensure protection of trees (reference may be
made to the publication Protecting Existing Landscape Trees from Construction Damage Due to Grade Changes as published through the Texas
A&M University System for detailed information).
(4) Ensure additional protective measures against:
a. Unnecessary cutting, breaking, or skinning of roots.
b. Skinning and bruising of bark.
c. Smothering of trees by stockpiling construction or excavation materials within drip-line.
d. Excessive vehicular traffic, the parking of construction vehicles, machinery, or as staging areas for construction materials, within drip
line.
(5) Erect temporary wooden barricades, chain-link fencing or plastic fencing around areas to be protected before commencement of any site
work. Barricades are to be four feet high minimum supported by approved means and set deep enough in the ground to be stable without additional
support. For protected trees, protective barricades shall be placed a minimum distance of ten feet from the base of each protected tree. Nothing shall
be placed inside of protective barricades, including but not limited to construction material, machinery, chemical or temporary soil deposits. Paving,
excavating or landscaping in and around trees must be done in accordance with approved plans. Extra care must be taken at this time by the
contractor to insure that no damage to the tree or its roots occurs.
(6) All tree protection zones shall be designated as such with "Tree Protection Area - Caution Do Not Enter" signs posted visibly on all sides of
the fenced area.
(7) Utilities shall not be installed in this tree protection area unless so authorized by the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 343/444
a. Trenching shall be no closer than six times the diameter at breast height (DBH) to the effected tree nor disrupt more than 30 percent of the
drip line root area.
b. No other types of disturbance or construction shall be allowed under the drip line of any tree without prior approval by the landscape
official.
(8) Limit construction equipment access, material storage, fuel tanks, chemical or cement rinsing, vehicle parking and site office locations to
non-tree areas.
(9) Do not allow trash or debris to be burned beneath trees.
(10) Grading, filling, and ditching in the tree protection zone is prohibited unless authorized by the landscape official.
(11) Provide water and fertilizer to trees as required to maintain their health during construction work.
(12) If trees are wounded or stressed during construction, any wounds to the bark should be cleaned to sound wood by removing loose bark and
wood, leaving a smooth edge around the wound. A wound dressing should only be applied to oak trees.
(13) One- and two-family dwelling sites shall be managed on a case-by-case basis through the building permit.
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-18. Obstruction; pruning of trees.
(a) Maintenance pruning allows for the healthy uniform growth of trees. Tree pruning should be accomplished in accordance with the procedures set
forth in the latest ANSI A300 standard. The use of unnatural pruning techniques will be considered an unauthorized removal of a tree unless the tree is
designated on an approved landscape plan to be shaped or formed in an unnatural pattern or to be maintained at a certain height. (Additional references
include: A Guide to Growing Healthy Trees in the Corpus Christi Area, published by the Tree Awareness Council; and Tree Tips - A Planning Guide,
published by CP&L).
(b) It shall be the duty of any person or persons owning or occupying real property bordering on any street or public way upon which property there may
be trees or other vegetation, to prune such trees or other vegetation on their property in such a manner that they will not obstruct or shade street lights,
obstruct the passage of pedestrians, obstruct vision or traffic signs, obstruct flow of vehicular traffic, or obstruct view of any street or alley intersection.
Minimum clearance of any overhanging portion thereof shall be determined by the city public works department.
(1) Notice to prune. Should any person or persons owning real property bordering on any street fail to prune trees as herein above provided, the
landscape official shall order such person, or persons, within ten days after receipt of written notice, to prune such trees.
(2) Order required. The order required herein shall be served in accordance with notification procedures as outlined in section 106-11, of this
article.
(3) Failure to comply. When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply within the specified time, the landscape official may have
such trees pruned in the interest of public safety.
(c) On any corner lot, no vegetation shall be permitted or maintained higher than three feet above ground level or average street level within a vision
triangle formed by a straight line from the points of the two intersecting right-of-way lines 20 feet back from their common intersection. This restriction
shall not apply to permanent structures authorized by other sections of this article nor by other local, state or federal laws. This restriction shall not apply to
the trunks of trees as long as said trees are not clustered in a way so as to impede vision and are pruned so that all overhanging limbs will not impede
vision.
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-19. Oak Wilt protection.
There are numerous states within the Continental U. S. with Oak Wilt disease. Only Texas has epidemics in Live Oak populations. This deadly tree disease
could spread in our direction. As an aid in combating this tree disease the Texas Forest Service highly recommends the following preventive measures be
practiced before and after any tree in our area is diagnosed with Oak Wilt:
(1) Preventive measures.
a. Avoid wounding trees (trunks, branches, roots) from February 1 to June 1;
b. To be extra cautious, paint all wounds and freshly cut stumps, regardless of the season.
c. Only use seasoned oak firewood. Never use red oak from unknown origins.
(2) Prevent new centers.
a. Cut and dispose (burn, bury, or chip) of diseased red oaks immediately.
b. Avoid wounding trees (trunks, branches, roots) from February 1 to June 1.
c. To be extra cautious, paint all wounds and freshly cut stumps, regardless of the season.
d. Only use seasoned oak firewood. Never use red oak from unknown origins.
(3) Stop spread through roots.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 344/444
a. Circle the infection center with a trench at least four feet deep and 100 feet beyond the last symptomatic tree.
b. Uproot all symptomatic and buffer trees within the 100-foot barrier (except those injected with approved fungicide).
(4) Inject high-value oaks with fungicide.
a. Identify high-value oaks that are located 25 feet to 150 feet from infected oaks.
b. Propiconazole is the current recommended fungicide by the Texas Forest Service.
(5) Plant resistant trees.
a. Plant only recommended non-oak species or oak species that are from the White Oak sub-family.
b. Strive for diversity where one species does not constitute more than 15 percent of the total population.
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-20. Formosan Termite protection.
There are numerous counties within Texas with Formosan Termites, Aransas County among them. Early detection is particularly important for the
maintenance of tree health and structural soundness of urban trees. The ultimate goal should be to increase community awareness of the seriousness of
Formosan Subterranean Termite (FST) populations in the city, to reduce or eliminate the impact humans assist in the unwanted dispersal of FST (e.g., the
disposal of infested wood into city landfills, recycling and transfer centers). As an aid in combating FST the following suggested remedies may be applied
should a tree or any cellulose material be diagnosed with FST a tree or insect specialist:
(1) Detection.
a. Check for any stage of development of the Formosan termite, Coptotermes formosanus and other species of the genus Coptotermes.
b. Check railroad cross ties, utility poles, firewood and all cellulose material that has been in contact with soil.
c. Check any other products, articles or methods used to transport any type article whatsoever when it is determined by an inspector
(certified pest control agent) that they present a risk of spread of the Formosan termite and the person in possession thereof has been notified in
writing.
(2) Conditions governing handling, movement and sale of regulated articles.
a. Articles (tree or cellulose material) found in violation of these regulations shall be destroyed and/or disposed of in a manner approved by
a certified pest control agent.
b. When the article has been properly fumigated by a licensed and/or certified pesticide applicator and proof of treatment is present with the
article then said article can be deemed free of Formosan termites.
(Ord. No. 1349,  3, 9-5-06)
Secs. 106-21106-29. Reserved.
ARTICLE III. LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
Sec. 106-30. Landscape permit required.
A landscape permit is required for the following and shall apply to the street yard of B-1 zoned development sites where any of the following conditions
are present:
(1) New construction:
a. Any new building construction for which a building permit is required.
b. Any construction of a new parking lot.
(2) Additions/renovations:
a. Any building addition or renovation exceeding 50 percent of the existing building area as defined by the footprint of the existing building
for which the building permit is required.
b. Any parking lot addition within the street yard by more than 2,000 square feet or ten percent in area of the existing parking lot whichever
is greater for which a building permit is required.
(3) EXCEPTIONS:
a. A landscape permit shall not apply to residential uses with less than three dwelling units within B-1 zoning districts.
b. A landscape permit shall not apply to exterior or interior finishing and remodeling that does not increase the existing building area or
parking area of the existing development.
c. A landscape permit shall not apply to reconstruction of an existing building which was destroyed or ruined by flood, fire, windstorm, or
act of God as long as the reconstruction of the existing building does not alter the footprint or area of the existing building and/or parking lot.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 345/444
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-31. Application for permit.
When this section applies to a building site, a landscape plan must be submitted with the building permit application along with associated drawings for the
new development (for the purposes of this section a City of Rockport Building Permit Application shall act as the landscape permit application).
(1) Two sets of the landscape plans must accompany the building permit application. The landscape plans shall include drawings or overlays,
consistent in scale with the building site plan drawings, of proposed landscaped areas with dimensions, and a plant list specifying plant size and
associated points consistent with the requirements herein. If changes are made during the installation process, amendments to the landscape plan
shall be provided to the landscape official for approval. Preparation of the landscape plan must be completed and endorsed by one of the following:
a. Landscape architect currently registered to practice in the state;
b. Certified master gardener or certified nurseryperson; or
c. Owner.
(2) The landscape plan shall contain and clearly index the following information:
a. Project name, street address, legal description, date, north arrow;
b. Location of lot lines, dimensions of the building site and street yard;
c. Size of the proposed landscape area (street yard) for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of this article;
d. Clearly referenced tabulation of points earned by the plan for the purposes of satisfying the requirements of this article;
e. Description of the plant material shown on the plan, including names (common and botanical), quantities, sizes at installation (heights,
spread, and spacing); and
f. Identification of existing trees and vegetation (size, location, and species) to be preserved as part of the landscape plan and point
tabulation.
(3) The landscape official shall review the landscape plan to verify compliance with this article prior to issuance of any permit.
(4) The landscape official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy with a term up to six months, prior to the installation of the
requirements of this article under the following circumstances:
a. Weather consideration requirements for plant species installation; or
b. Receipt of a performance bond or corporate surety bond for landscaping in the amount of $10,000.00.
Failure to comply within the temporary term of six months shall constitute violation of this article and subject the owner to enforcement
penalties and procedures.
(5) The landscape official may issue a permanent certificate of occupancy prior to the installation of the requirements where a lending institution
will not accept a temporary certificate of occupancy for permanent financing and:
a. The applicant presents a signed affidavit by an official of the lending institution citing this requirement; and
b. The applicant presents a signed affidavit acknowledging that if the requirements of this article are not met within six months from the date
on the permanent certificate of occupancy, the owner will be in violation of this article and subject to enforcement penalties and procedures;
and
c. Receipt of a performance bond or corporate surety bond for landscaping in the amount of $10,000.00.
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-32. Landscape requirements.
(a) General.
(1) Plant materials: No artificial plant materials or art objects, shade devices, or any other manmade item may be used to satisfy the requirements
of this article. (Plant heights are measured from the top of the root ball or from the soil level in the container, if the plant is in a container, and are
awarded points at the time of planting.).
(2) Permeable area: All planted areas and tree wells shall provide sufficient permeable area to foster plant maturity and health.
(3) Water sources: If an irrigation system is not installed at the time of installation, a readily available water supply must be provided with at least
one water outlet located within 100 feet of any planted area.
(4) Parking lots: To reduce the thermal impact of un-shaded parking lots, trees shall be planted in islands at the ends of parking spaces and
throughout parking spaces so that no portion of the lot is more than 64 feet away from the trunk of a tree unless otherwise approved by the
landscape official. This provision is in addition to required landscape points addressed herein.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 346/444
(b) Specific. The required landscaped area of the site shall be equal to five square feet per linear foot of street frontage, or 15 percent of the defined
street yard, whichever is less, to be placed within the street yard area as defined herein. If parking is between the property line and wall line of the
building, then a strip of land at least five feet in depth located between the abutting right-of-way (street) and the off-street parking area or other vehicular
use area which is exposed to an abutting right-of-way shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall include one tree for each 50 lineal feet or fraction
thereof of right-of-way (street) frontage. A total of one-half point per one square foot of landscape area is required for all permitted landscaping plans, as
described in section 106-33 below.
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-33. Landscape points.
(a) Existing vegetation preservation.
(1) Points may be earned through existing vegetation, tree preservation and natural areas under tree canopies. Points for existing vegetation and
trees will be based on size and tabulated as if newly planted under the landscape plan. Such natural areas that may be left under tree canopies may
only be applicable to common or undisturbed areas on a development site that are not determined as hazardous or as a threat to crime prevention.
No plant considered as invasive shall be allowed as part of a landscaping plan under this Code (refer to Table 106-D.8 Invasive Species for
illustration purposes only).
(2) Xeriscape vegetation may earn points based upon like vegetation as listed in Table 106-A, or, for related vegetation as listed in Table 106-D,
as determined by the landscape official.
(b) Newly planted vegetation.
(1) Street trees: Five bonus points per tree, existing or new, installed along the property line perimeter of the street right-of-way, can be awarded.
(2) Landscape areas: The area required to be landscaped under this division, including xeriscape and natural areas, shall earn points with trees,
shrubs and vegetative plantings as indicated in Table 106-A., of this article.
(3) NOTICE: Consideration should be given to placement and growth potential in regards to utility high wires or other obstacles adjacent to
property boundaries and public rights-of-way.
Table 106-A. Point Tabulation Chart.
Plant Classification Size at Time of Planting Points
Tree (other than palm) 2" or larger caliper 20
Palm Tree or Cycad  Small Each 1" height of wood (trunk or bulb) (max 20
pts.)
1
Palm Tree  Large Each 1' height of trunk (max 30 pts.) 3
Shrub, Perennial or Tree < 3/4"
caliper
1 gallon 2
Shrub, Perennial or Tree < 3/4"
caliper
3 - 5 gallon 5
Shrub, Perennial or Tree < 3/4"
caliper
10 gallon 7
Shrub, Perennial or Tree < 3/4"
caliper
15 gallon 10
Shrub, Perennial or Tree < 3/4"
caliper
25 gallon/Burlap & Ball 15
Ground Cover or Vine 1 gallon 1
Ground Cover or Vine 5 gallon 2
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 347/444
Perennial or Ground Cover 1 flat 5
Grass (see exceptions in Table 106-
D.7)
5 square feet 0.5
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1530,  2, 1-25-11)
Sec. 106-34. Landscape maintenance.
(a) Plant maintenance and replacement. Required plants must be maintained in a healthy condition at all times. Any plant that dies must be replaced with
another living plant that is equivalent in points at least to the initial plant selection within the approved landscape plan within 90 days after notification by
the city, if that plant(s) moves the plan below the required points. EXCEPTION: The landscape official may extend the time period for plant replacement
up to 60 days to accommodate weather conditions and planting requirements.
(b) Easements. Property owners may elect to plant within easements within their properties. If easements are not located within their properties, points
will not be awarded. Damage to existing plantings in easements due to utility repairs by utility companies or the city will be repaired by the property
owner. NOTICE: If an easement becomes unusable, an alternate landscape plan shall be provided to the landscape official for approval.
(c) Replacement of trees. Should a tree die or be removed within two years of planting for which credit has been obtained pursuant to the terms required
herein, landscape replacement sufficient to equal the area credited shall be required. Tree replacement shall be in accordance with sections 106-16 and
106-35 of this chapter.
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06)
Sec. 106-35. Recommended plant species list.
The plants listed below in Table 106-D.1 through Table 106-D.7 are recommended for the Texas coastal zone and immediate environs of the City of
Rockport. They are chosen because they are non-evasive and have a lush, "tropical" look while being cold hardy (except as noted) and do not require
excessive water and fertilizer once established (except as noted). These plants may not be practical for all areas of the city, therefore the water and sunlight
requirements of each specific plant should be considered before its placement on the landscape plan. In addition to the plants set forth in Table 106-D.1
through Table 106-D.7, plants specified in the publication entitled In Our Coastal Gardens - Native and Adapted Plants for the Coastal Bend, published by
the Aransas/San Patricio Master Gardener Association, a program sponsored by the AgriLIFE Extension Service, Texas A&M System, are allowed and
such "publication" is incorporated herein by reference. Plants not in the publication or in the above tables are not allowed unless approved by the Tree &
Landscape Committee. Please see Table 106-A., to calculate points for all plants.
LEGEND FOR TABLES:
F = likely to die in hard freeze
G = suitable for ground cover
H = habitat plant (good for birds and/or butterflies)
N = Coastal Bend native
T = tropical look
W = needs moderate water
Table 106-D.1: Plant specie listTREES
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME
Acacia famesiana Huisache (H, N)
Araucaria heterophylla Norfolk Island Pine (F)
Bauhinia purpurea Orchid Tree
Brassaia actinophylla, Schefflera actinophylla Umbrella Tree, Banyon (F, T)
Caesalpinia Mexicana Mexican Poinciana (H, T)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 348/444
Cercis canadensis var. Mexicana Mexican Redbud (H, T)
Cercis canadensis var. texensis Texas Redbud (H, T)
Chilopsis linearis Desert Willow (H, T)
Citrus sp. Citrus (Mex.lime, orange, lemon) (F, T)
Cordia boissieri Wild Olive (F, H, T)
Diospyros texana Texas Persimmon (H, N)
Ehretia anacua Anaqua (N, H)
Ilex Vomitoria Yaupon Holly (H, N)
Juniperus chinensis Twisted Hollywood Juniper
Myrica cerifera Wax Myrtle (H, N, T)
Parkinsonia aculeate Retama (H, N)
Persea borbonia Red Bay (H, N, T)
Pinus thunbergia Japanese Black Pine
Pithecellobium flexicaule Texas Ebony (F, H, N)
Prosopis glandulosa Mesquite (H, N)
Prunus Mexicana Mexican Plum (H)
Quercus macrocarpa Bur Oak (N, H)
Quercus virginiana Live Oak (H, N)
Sophora secundiflora Texas Mountain Laurel (H, N, T)
Taxodium mucronatum Montezuma Bald Cypress (W)
Ulmus crassifolia Cedar Elm (N)
Ungnadia speciosa Mexican Buckeye
Vaccinium arboretum Farkleberry (N, H)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 349/444
Vitex agnus-castus Lavender Tree, Chaste Tree (H)
Table 106-D.2: Plant specie listLARGE PALMS
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME POINTS AWARDED
Arecastrum romanzoffianum Queen Palm (T) No
Brahea armata Mexican Blue Palm (T) Yes
Livistona chinensis Chinese Fan Palm (T) No
Sabal palmetto Florida Sabal (T) No
Sabal Texana Texas Sabal (N, T) Yes
Washingtonia robusta Fan Palm (F, T) No
Washingtonia filifera Fan Palm (T) No
Table 106-D.3: Plant specie listSMALL PALMS AND CYCADS
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME POINTED AWARDED
Butia capitata (Cocos Australis) Pindo, Jelly Palm, (T) Yes
C'hamaerops humilis Meditenanean Fan Palm (T) No
Cycas revolute Sago Palm (T) No
Phoenix roebelenii Pygmy Date Palm (T) No
Sabal minor Dwarf Palmetto (N, T) Yes
Table 106-D.4: Plant specie listSHRUBS
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME COMMENTS
Anisacanthus quadrifidus var
wrightii
Flame Acanthus (H, T)
Berberis trifoliolata Agarito (N.H)
Caesalpinia pulcherrima Pride of Barbados (F, T)
Callicarpa americana American Beautyberry (H, N,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 350/444
T)
Callistemon spp. Bottlebrush (F, H, T)
Carissa spp. Natal Plum (F, T)
Dasylirion Texana Texas Sotol
Duranta repens Brazilian Sky Flower (F, H)
Eriobotrya hybrid Coppertone Loquat (W)
Erythina herbacea Coral Bean (H, N)
Euryops pecinatus Golden Shrub Daisy (F, H)
Eysenhardtia Texana Texas Kidneywood (H, N)
Feijoa sellowiana Pineapple Guava (F, H, T)
Hamelia patens Fire Bush, Hummingbird Bush
(F, H, T)
Hesperaloe parviflora Red Yucca (H, N)
Hibiscus spp. Tropical Hibiscus (F, T)
Ilex vomitoria nana Dwarf Yaupon
Justicia spicigera Mexican Honeysuckle (H, T)
Lantana spp. Lantana (H, N, T)
Leucophyllum spp. Sage, Cenizo (H, N, T)
Malpighia glabra Barbados Cherry (F, H, N, T)
Malvaviscus drummondii Turk's Cap (H, N, T)
Nerium oleander Oleander (F, T)
Raphiolepis indica Indian Hawthorn (H, T)
Russelia equesetiformis Firecracker Plant {F, H, T)
Salvia greggii Autumn Sage (H, N, T)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 351/444
Sophora tomentosa Yellow Sophora (N, H)
Tecoma stans Yellow Bells, Esperanza (H, T) Correct name
Vigueria stenoloba Skeleton Leaf Goldeneye (H)
Vitex trifolia Veronica (F, T) Correct name-Variegated
Yucca pendula Softleaf Yucca (H)
Yucca thompsonia Thompson Yucca (H)
Yucca treculeana Spanish Dagger (H, N)
Table 106-D.5: Plant specie listHERBACEOUS PERENNIALS
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME COMMENTS
Agapanthus spp. Lily of the Nile (T, W)
Artemesia "Powis Castle" Artemesia (G)
Asclepias sp. Butterfly Weed (H, N)
Asclepias tuberose or Asclepias
curassavica
Butterfly Weed (N, H)
Aster oblongifolius Fall Aster (G, H)
Chasmanthium latifolium Inland Seaoats Grass (N, H)
Chroemalena odoratum Crucita Mistflower (N, H)
Cuphea hussopifolia Mexican Heather (F, G)
Hedychium coronarium, Alpina
zerumbet
Gingers (F, T)
Jatropha spp. Jatropha (F, T)
Justicia brandegeana Shrimp Plant (H, T)
Kalanchoe sp. Kalanchoe (G)
Lantana montevidensis, L. Trailing Lantana (G)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 352/444
sellowiana
Melampodium leucanthum Blackfoot Daisy (G, H)
Muhlenbergia capillaries Gulf Coast Muhly (G, N)
Muhlenbergia lindheimeri Big Muhly Grass (N, H)
Musa ssp. Banana (F, T)
Penstemon tenuis Gulf Coast Penstemon (G, H, T,
W)
Pentas lanceolata Pentas (H, T)
Phyla incisa, Phyla nodiflora Frog Fruit (G, N)
Physostegia angustifolia Spring Obedient Plant (H, G, T,
W)
Plumbago spp. Blue or White Plumbago (F, G,
H, T)
Rivina humilis Pigeonberry (G, H, N, T)
Rosemarinus sp. Rosemary (G)
Ruellia brittoniana Katy's Ruellia (G, W)
Sa1via coccinnea Red sage (H, N, T)
Salvia leucantha Mexican Bush Sage (H, T)
Salvia "Indigo Spires" Salvia "lndigo Spires" (H, T)
Schizachyrium scoparium Little Bluestem Grass (N, H)
Stemodia tomentosa Wooly Stemodia (G, N, T) Sandy soil only
Stipa tenuissima Mexican Feather Grass (N)
Strelitzia Nicolai Giant Bird of Paradise (T, W)
Strelitzia reginae Bird of Paradise (T, W)
Tagetes lemmonii Copper Canyon Daisy (H)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 353/444
Trachelospermum asiaticum Asiatic Jasmine (G, T)
Wedelia texana Orange Zexmenia (G, H, N) New name
Wedelia trilobata Wedelia (G, T)
Table 106-D.6: Plant specie listVINES
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME
Atntigonon leptopus Cora1 Vine, Queens Wreath (F, H, T)
Bignonia capreolata Crossvine (H, T)
Bougainvila spp. Bougainvillea (F, T)
Lonicera sempervirens Coral Honeysuckle (H, T)
Passiflora incarnataus Passionflower (H, N, T)
Senecio confusus Mexican Flame Vine (H)
Stigimaphyllon ciliatum Butterfly Vine (F, H, T)
Tecomaria capensis Cape Honeysuckle (F, H, T)
Trachelospermum jasminoides Confederate Jasmine (H, T)
Table 106-D.7: Plant specie listGRASS
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME POINTS AWARDED
Buchloe dactyloides Buffalo Grass Clay soils only; Yes
Cynodon dactylon Bermuda grass No
Paspalum vaginatum Seashore Paspalum Yes
Stenotaphrum secumdatum
"Floralawn"
St Augustine grass "Floralawn" No
Stenotaphrum secumdatum
"Floratam"
St Augustine grass "Floratam" No
Zoysia japonica Zoysia grass Yes
Table 106-D.8: Plant specie listINVASIVE SPECIES (for illustration purposes only)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 354/444
SCIENTIFIC NAME COMMON NAME COMMENTS
Eichornia crassipes Water Hyacinth Not allowed
Hibiscus tiliaceus Hibiscus Tree (F, T) Not allowed
Lonicera japonica Japanese Honeysuckle Not allowed
Melia azedarach var.
umbraculformis
Chinaberry, Texas Umbrella
Tree
Not allowed
Pistia stratiotes Water Lettuce Not allowed
Ricinus communis Castor Bean Not allowed
Sapium sebiferum Chinese Tallow Not allowed
Schinus terebinthifolius Brazilian Pepper Not allowed
Smilax bona-nox Green Briar Considered native, not allowed
Tamarix sp. Salt Cedar Not points
Vitis mustangensis Mustang Grape Considered native, not allowed
Invasive aquatics as listed by Texas Parks & Wildlife Department
(Ord. No. 1349,  4, 9-5-06; Ord. No. 1530,  3, 1-25-11)
Chapters 107-109 RESERVED
Chapter 110
VEHICLES FOR HIRE*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 110-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
Conduct a taxicab business means the use of one or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city, by the owner thereof, for the purpose of carrying
passengers for hire, either by driving the same himself or having the same driven by some other person. This definition shall not apply to any licensed
chauffeur hired as a driver by any person holding a permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 355/444
Cruise, cruising means the movement of unoccupied taxicabs over the public streets of the city in search of, or soliciting prospective passengers for hire
except, however, unoccupied taxicabs proceeding to answer a telephone call for taxicab service from a passenger having intention to hire said taxicab, and
taxicabs returning by the most direct route after having discharged a passenger to the garage where such taxicab is housed or to the unoccupied stand
nearest to the place of discharge of the passenger, shall not be construed to be cruising.
Owner means any person who has the control, direction, maintenance and the benefit of the collection of revenue derived from the operation of an vehicle
for hire on or over the streets or public ways of the city, whether as owner or otherwise, except a "driver" as defined in this section.
Limousine service means the luxurious, prearranged transportation by chauffeur-driven vehicle of one or more persons from or to a location within the city
limits not upon a schedule or over a fixed route. It shall not include taxicab service, airport limousine service or transportation provided in relation to
funeral services. Limousine means a vehicle that has a manufacturer's rated seating capacity of not more than 15 passengers and that is used for the
transportation of persons.
Sightseeing service means conveying any person or persons in any vehicle, including horse-drawn carriages, for predetermined periods of time or between
fixed points for the purpose of displaying the various natural and manmade points of interest and the economic and cultural institutions of the Corpus
Christi area within the city or from locations within the city to locations outside the city, and shall not include the basic provisions of taxicab service or
airport limousine service or charter bus service. Sightseeing service defined herein shall refer to transportation provided in vehicles owned by the permit
holder.
Taxicab means any vehicle carrying passengers for hire, except motor buses or motor coaches operated by bus lines over designated routes in and through
the city.
Towing vehicle means any vehicle used by a wrecker for the towing or transporting of other vehicles (or other property) in the course of his or her business.
Wrecker service means a business of, or offering the services of, a vehicle wrecker or towing service, whereby motor vehicles are or may be towed or
otherwise removed from one place to another by the use of a motor vehicle adapted to and designed for that purpose.
(Ord. No. 1396,  2, 8-14-07)
Cross referenceDefinitions generally,  1-2.
Sec. 110-2. Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a taxicab, limousine or sightseeing, or wrecker business within the city without first obtaining a permit so to
do.
(Ord. No. 1396,  2, 8-14-07)
Secs. 110-3110-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. TAXICABS
DIVISION 1. GENERALLY
Sec. 110-26. Taxicabs must be owned by person conducting business.
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting a taxicab business in the city to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, as a taxicab, any vehicle not
owned by him.
(Ord. No. 1396,  4, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-27. Insurance.
(a) The holder of any permit to conduct a taxicab business in the city shall, at all times during the life of such permit, keep each and every vehicle
operated by him under his permit insured in a company authorized to do business in the state, indemnifying the permittee for injury or death or property
damage resulting from the operation of such vehicle. Such policies of insurance shall not be cancelled or surrendered, except upon written notice to the
city secretary. Failure of any permittee to procure and file the policies of insurance as required by this section shall immediately forfeit and make null and
void such permit and all rights thereunder shall at once cease.
(b) Before any license or permit shall be issued to any owner or operator, or before any renewal of a license or permit shall be granted, the owner or
operator should be required to file a certificate of insurance wit the city secretary and thereafter with a company duly authorized to do business in the state
and performable in the county insuring the public against any loss or damage that may result to any person or property from the operation of such vehicles;
provided, that the maximum amount of recovery in such policy of insurance specified shall not, for each vehicles, $40,000.00 bodily injury for each
person; $80,000.00 aggregate for bodily injury; and $30,000.00 property damage. Each insurance policy shall require notice from the insurer to the city at
least ten days before any such policy is to be terminated for any reason by the insurer or by the insured.
(Ord. No. 1396,  4, 8-14-07; Ord. No. 1409,  1, 12-11-07)
Sec. 110-28. Cruising prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any driver of any taxicab to drive or cruise about on the streets of the city seeking passengers who have not theretofore ordered or
called for a taxicab.
(Ord. No. 1396,  4, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-29. Parking on streets prohibited.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 356/444
It shall be unlawful for the holder of any permit issued under the terms of this article, or the agent, servant or employee of such permittee, to park or leave
standing any taxicab on the streets of the city, except while loading and unloading passengers into and from such taxicab.
(Ord. No. 1396,  4, 8-14-07)
Cross referenceStreets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 86.
Sec. 110-30. Application fee.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating taxi service shall make application to the city secretary. Such application shall be addressed to
the city council and shall be signed, under oath, by the applicant. It shall state the name and address of such applicant; whether the applicant is an
individual, firm or corporation, and if a firm, the name and address of each member thereof; and the number, types and seating capacity of each vehicle to
be operated; shall be sworn to by the applicant; and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50.00.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-31. Approval or disapproval of application.
It shall be the duty of the city secretary, when an application for a permit under this article is filed with him, at the next regular meeting of the city council
following the filing of such application, to call the attention of the council thereto. Upon consideration of the application, the city council may approve or
disapprove it, as in its discretion may seem to the best interest of the citizens of the city and the public in general.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-32. Fee.
The fee for a permit required by this division shall be $35.00 for each taxicab to be operated under the permit.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-33. Issuance; contents.
If an application for a permit under this division is approved by the city council, such permit shall be issued and signed by the city secretary and sealed
with the seal of his office. Such permit shall be dated on the day of its issuance; shall bear a serial number; shall show the name and address of the
permittee; that the permittee has been authorized by the city council to conduct a taxicab business in the city for a period of one year following the date of
issuance; and that such permit is subject to cancellation at any time by the city council in case of any violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-34. Term.
A permit issued under this division shall be valid for a period of one year from its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-35. Identification.
Every holder of a permit granted under the terms of this article shall have and keep painted, in fast colors contrasting with the color of the vehicle, on each
side of every vehicle used by him as a taxicab, the words: "Taxi Permit - Rockport". The letters and figures shall not be less than five inches in height.
A City of Rockport Vehicle/Business Permit shall be issued for each taxicab. Said vehicle/business permit shall be placed on the top right hand corner of
the windshield of each permitted vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-36. Operation of additional vehicles under permit.
If at any time the holder of a taxicab permit shall desire to use any additional vehicle under the permit, he may do so only after he has made application to
the city council for and been granted a permit to use such additional vehicle. He shall furnish to the city secretary the same information regarding such
additional vehicle as is required in this division regarding those covered by the original permit, and shall pay to the city secretary the sum of $35.00 for
each such additional vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-37. Not assignable; revocation.
Any permit issued under the provisions of this division shall be non-assignable, and may be revoked by the city council at any time it shall appear to the
city council that the permittee has violated or failed to comply with any provision of this article.
(Ord. No. 1396,  5, 8-14-07)
Secs. 110-38110-50. Reserved.
Editor's noteOrd. No. 1396,  6, adopted Aug. 14, 2007, deleted  110-41-110-49, which pertained to permit and derived from Code 1972,  23-13, 23-
27, 28-28, 23-30-23-35.
ARTICLE III. LIMOUSINE OR SIGHTSEEING SERVICE
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 357/444
Sec. 110-51. Application; fee.
Any person desiring to engage in the business of operating any limousine or sightseeing service shall make application to the city secretary. Such
application shall be addressed to the city council and shall be signed, under oath, by the applicant. It shall state the name and address of such applicant;
whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and if a firm, the name and address of each member thereof; and the number, types and seating
capacity of each vehicle to be operated; shall be sworn to by the applicant; and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50.00.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-52. Approval or disapproval of application.
It shall be the duty of the city secretary, when an application for a permit under this division is filed with him, at the next regular meeting of the city
council following the filing of such application, to call the attention of the council thereto. Upon consideration of the application, the city council may
approve or disapprove it, as in its discretion may seem to the best interest of the citizens of the city and the public in general.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-53. Issuance; contents.
If an application for a permit under this division is approved by the city council, such permit shall be issued and signed by the city secretary and sealed
with the seal of his office. Such permit shall be dated on the day of its issuance; shall bear a serial number; shall show the name and address of the
permittee; that the permittee has been authorized by the city council to conduct a limousine or sightseeing service in the city for a period of one year
following the date of issuance; and that such permit is subject to cancellation at any time by the city council in case of any violation of this article.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-54. Identification.
A City of Rockport Vehicle/Business Permit shall be issued for each vehicle used in the operation of a limousine or sightseeing service. Said
vehicle/business permit shall be placed on the top right hand corner of the windshield of each permitted vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-55. Term.
A permit issued under this division shall be valid for a period of one year from its issuance, unless sooner revoked.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-56. Special regulations for horse-drawn carriages.
Any sightseeing permit issued pursuant to this article involving the use of horse-drawn carriages as a means of conveyance shall include regulations
promulgated by the police chief or his designated representative, relating to the following:
(1) Limitations on the specific streets which may be utilized by horse-drawn carriages and the hours of operations allowed.
(2) Safety requirements pertaining to reflectors, warning devices and other safety equipment used on the vehicles, and the types and design of
wheels and horse shoes which may be utilized.
(3) Sanitation procedures to ensure the cleanliness of streets and public ways and the proper disposal of waste.
(4) Health regulations safeguarding the care, feeding and watering of the horses or Health regulations safeguarding the care, feeding and
watering of the horses or other draft animals employed by the operator.
(5) Additional insurance requirements supplementing the minimum limits for automobile and general liability insurance required for limousine
and sightseeing operations generally.
(6) Any other rules, regulations or procedures which the police department deems necessary to maintain adequate safeguards for the operation of
horse-drawn carriages on the public streets not inconsistent with this section.
(Ord. No. 1396,  7, 8-14-07)
Secs. 110-57110-65. Reserved.
ARTICLE IV. WRECKER SERVICE
Sec. 110-66. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article will apply to all wreckers called on to transport vehicles on behalf of the city, its agents or police officers.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-67. Application and permit requirements.
All wreckers operating for the city shall make application to the city secretary. Such application shall be addressed to the city council and shall be signed,
under oath, by the applicant. It shall state the name and address of such applicant; whether the applicant is an individual, firm or corporation, and if a firm,
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 358/444
the name and address of each member thereof; and the number, types and seating capacity of each vehicle to be operated; shall be sworn to by the
applicant; and shall be accompanied by an application fee of $50.00.
The fee for a permit required by this article shall be $35.00 for each wrecker or tow vehicle to be operated under the permit.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-68. Minimum standards.
All wreckers shall be rated at no less than one ton and have a minimum gross carrying capacity of 3,500 pounds. All wreckers shall be equipped with the
following equipment, as a minimum:
(1) Power winch with a line/boom capacity of at least 6,000 pounds test strength.
(2) A towing sling or equivalent device to protect the towed vehicle.
(3) A blue or amber revolving light positioned on the uppermost portion of the roof.
(4) Power assisted brakes.
(5) The following peripheral equipment:
a. Fire extinguisher, five pound ABC type, or equivalent;
b. Pry bar;
c. Broom;
d. Shovel and container for collected debris; and
e. Police monitor or transmitter/receiver.
(6) Towing dollies.
(7) A sign or placard identifying the wrecker company or owner.
(8) Amber or blue flashing towing lights mounted at such a height as to be visible from the rear with a towed vehicle in place.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-69. Insurance requirements.
The following insurance coverage shall be maintained:
(1) One hundred thousand dollars bodily injury for each person;
(2) Three hundred thousand dollars aggregate for bodily injury; and
(3) One hundred thousand dollars property damage.
Current policy coverages shall be on file with the city secretary and maintained with the then current permit application.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-70. Vehicle/business permit.
A City of Rockport Vehicle/Business Permit shall be issued for each vehicle used in the operation of a wrecker service. Said vehicle/business permit shall
be placed on the top right hand corner of the windshield of each permitted vehicle upon inspection by the Rockport Police Department of all items
contained in section 110-68.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-71. Operational guidelines.
Operational guidelines shall be as follows:
(1) Wreckers called to the scene of a police action will be under the direct control of the person in charge at such scene.
(2) Wrecker drivers are directly responsible for the towed vehicle from the time that the vehicle is attached to the wrecker to the time that it is
reclaimed by the owner or sold at public auction.
(3) Wreckers responding to a police call shall obey all traffic controls unless advised by the dispatcher or officer in charge that the services are
needed under emergency conditions.
(4) Wrecker drivers called to the scene of a collision will be required to comply with state law by removing all broken glass and debris from
roadway.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 359/444
(5) Drivers of vehicles involved in collisions may designate a particular wrecker service. However, if no preference is shown, a rotation wrecker
will be called.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-72. License requirements and responsibility.
Permittees and agents and employees of permittees who operate in behalf of the city shall be required to maintain a current operator's license of a class
applicable to the equipment being operated. Agents and employees of permittees shall be the responsibility of the permittee, and the permittee shall
encumber all responsibility for the employees' actions while operating in behalf of the city.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-73. Towing and impounding of vehicle; declaration of nuisance; causes for removal.
(a) Any unoccupied vehicle of any kind or description found in violation of any provision of this Code is hereby declared to be a nuisance and a menace
to the safe and proper regulation of traffic, and such vehicle shall be taken in charge by any police officer and removed from the street as provided in this
section, and kept in custody under the directions of the chief of police. Such vehicle may be recovered by the owner when the owner has furnished
evidence of identity and ownership and has signed a receipt and paid all fees to cover the costs of removal, storage and redemption.
(b) Any police officer is hereby authorized to cause the removal of any vehicle from a highway to the nearest place of safety, to a garage designated or
maintained by the governmental agency for which the officer is a member, or to the nearest impoundment yard, under the circumstances enumerated in this
subsection, as follows:
(1) When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to any private driveway and it is impracticable to move such vehicle from in
front of the driveway to another point on the highway.
(2) When any vehicle is found upon a highway and report has previously been made that such vehicle has been stolen or complaint has been filed
and a warrant thereon issued charging that such vehicle has been stolen.
(3) When any such officer has reasonable grounds to believe that any vehicle has been abandoned.
(4) When a vehicle upon a highway is so disabled that its normal operation is impossible or impractical and the person in charge of the vehicle is
incapacitated by reason of physical injury or other reason to such extent as to be unable to provide for its removal or custody, or is not in the
immediate vicinity of the disabled vehicle.
(5) When an officer arrests any person driving or in control of a vehicle for any alleged offense and such officer is by law required to take the
person arrested immediately before a magistrate.
(6) When, in the opinion of the police officer, a vehicle constitutes a hazard, or interferes with a normal function of a governmental agency, or by
reason of any catastrophe, emergency or unusual circumstance the safety of such vehicle is imperiled.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Sec. 110-74. Impoundment requirements and fees.
Any vehicle removed as provided in article may be impounded at the direction of the police department. Such impoundment shall be in a fenced and
controlled area. The owner of such impoundment yard shall provide the city certificate of insurance certifying liability coverage for the impoundment yard
of not less than $100,000.00 each person, $300,000.00 aggregate for bodily injury, and $100,000.00 property damage. An impoundment fee, shall be
assessed against and collected from the owner or driver of the vehicle.
(Ord. No. 1396,  8, 8-14-07)
Chapters 111-113 RESERVED
Chapter 114
WATERWAYS*
ARTICLE I. IN GENERAL
Sec. 114-1. Boats abandoned on or near the shoreline within the city limits.
Any and all boats lying on the shoreline, abandoned or being grounded within the incorporated limits of the city for a period of more than 96 hours are
hereby declared nuisances. It shall be the responsibility of the police department to provide for the removal, storage and final disposition of such vessels.
(Code 1972,  6-7; Ord. No. 1153,  1, 5-9-00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 360/444
State law referenceAbatement of nuisances, V.T.C.A., Local Government Code  217.042.
Sec. 114-2. Discharges into waters within the city limits.
Except as authorized by rule permit, or order issued by the Texas Natural Resource Conservation Commission (TNRCC), no person may:
(1) Discharge sewage, municipal waste, recreational waste, agricultural waste, industrial waste, refuse into or adjacent to any water within the
city limits.
(2) Discharge other waste into or adjacent to any water within the city limits which in itself or in conjunction with any other discharge or activity
causes, or will cause pollution of any of the water within the city limits.
(Ord. No. 1153,  1, 5-9-00)
Secs. 114-3114-25. Reserved.
ARTICLE II. SAFETY REGULATIONS
Sec. 114-26. Applicability of article.
The provisions of this article apply to all waters within the corporate limits of the city, except as otherwise specifically designated in this article.
(Code 1972,  6-29; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00 )
Sec. 114-27. Penalty.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and on conviction any such violation shall be punishable by a fine
as provided in section 1-7(a).
(Ord. No. 961,  3, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
Sec. 114-28. Water safety patrol vessels; evading police in a vessel; powers of marine safety enforcement officer.
(a) The Rockport Police Department shall maintain a water safety patrol boat or boats to be operated by sworn peace officers of the department that are
certified as marine safety enforcement officers.
(b) The patrol vessel shall be clearly marked as a police vessel at the discretion of the chief of police and be equipped with a blue warning light and an
audible warning device.
(c) Upon sighting the police patrol vessel with the blue warning light activated, the operator of a vessel underway shall reduce speed immediately and
bring his vessel to headway speed and subsequently stop until the intention of the water safety patrol vessel is understood.
(d) Police officers of the city and all other enforcement officers as designated in the Water Safety Act (V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code Chapter 31)
may stop and board any vessel to inspect the same in order to determine compliance with applicable provisions of the Water Safety Act (V.T.C.A., Parks
and Wildlife Code Chapter 31) of this article.
(e) If a police officer of this city or other enforcement officer, as hereinabove designated, determines that a vessel and its associated equipment is being
used in violation of the Water Safety Act (V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code Chapter 31) or the provisions of this article so as to create an especially
hazardous condition, he may direct the operator to remove the vessel from the waters of the city, and such operator shall not therefore operate such vessel
upon waters within the city until such condition creating the violation has been corrected.
(Code 1972,  6-21; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
State law referenceEnforcement and penalties, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.121 et seq.
Sec. 114-29. Speed limit.
Except as specifically exempted in this article, no person shall operate a motor vessel in any water areas within the city limits designated as "Slow, No
Wake Zones" at greater than headway speed.
Headway speed is defined as the slowest possible speed a particular vessel can travel and still maintain steerage.
(1) No person may operate a motor vessel within the city limits at a rate of speed greater than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the
conditions and hazards, actual and potential, then existing, including weather and density of traffic, or greater that will permit him, in the exercise
of reasonable care, to bring such vessel to a stop within the assured clear distance ahead.
(2) Motor vessels operated by the city police department, the county sheriff's department, the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department-law
enforcement division, the U.S. Coast Guard or other law enforcement agencies, in the course of their official duties may exceed the speed limit in
the restricted water areas within the city limits as necessary.
(3) The following areas are designated as "Slow, No wake Zones".
a. All waters of the channel connecting Little Bay and Aransas Bay from the red and green lighted markers at the entrance to such channel
from Aransas Bay to Little Bay (Legget Channel).
b. All waters of Little Bay lying north of the south line of the Legget Channel as extended in a direct line to Broadway Street. These areas
include but are not limited to:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 361/444
1. All canals of the Key Allegro subdivision.
2. All waters west of the channel entrance located at the north end of the Key Allegro subdivision and Allegro North Condominiums
(Blevins Channel).
3. All canals of the Harbor Oaks subdivision and Canoe Lake.
(c) All water areas inside the Rockport Harbor.
(Code 1972,  6-22; Ord. No. 896,  1, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
State law referenceExcessive speed, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.095.
Sec. 114-30. Creation of a public nuisance.
No person shall operate a motor vessel in the water areas within the city limits in a manner that creates an excessive wake, wash or noise, which interferes
with the public use and enjoyment of the water, or public or private use and enjoyment of the water, or public or private use and enjoyment of the property
abutting the water. Violation of this section shall be considered a public nuisance.
(Code 1972,  6-23(a); Ord. No. 896,  2, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
State law referenceHazardous wake or wash, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.098.
Sec. 114-31. Hazards.
(a) No person shall operate a vessel or manipulate waterskis, an aquaplane or similar device in willful or wanton disregard of the rights or safety of
others, or without due caution or circumspection, or at a speed or in a manner that endangers, or is likely to endanger, a person or property.
(b) No person shall operate a motor vessel within any water area in the city limits, as now or hereafter established, which has been clearly marked by
buoys, signs or other distinguishing device as a fishing, swimming or otherwise restricted area when such buoys or other such devices have been placed by
the city. These areas include but are not limited to:
(1) The watercraft exclusion zone is defined as: All waters within the boundaries of Little Bay and the Rockport Ski Basin excluding the marked
navigable channels of the Rockport Ski Basin and Little Bay, the Legget Channel, the Blevins Channel, Canoe Lake and the canals of Key Allegro
and Harbor Oaks subdivisions.
(2) The Salt Water Pool.
(3) The marked swimming area in Aransas Bay at the Rockport Beach Park.
This section shall not apply in case of an emergency or to patrol or rescue vessels.
(Code 1972,  6-23(b), (c); Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
State law referenceReckless or negligent operation, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.094; reckless operation and excessive speed, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.096;
operating boats in restricted areas, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.102.
Sec. 114-32. Anchoring/mooring/docking in Little Bay and the Rockport Ski Basin.
(a) Except where expressly prohibited in this code, it is lawful for persons to anchor or moor vessels within the boundaries of Little Bay.
(1) Persons may anchor or moor vessels within the boundaries of Little Bay up to 96 hours and then only so as not to prevent, impede, obstruct or
otherwise interfere with the navigation of a channel or with the safe passage of any other vessel in the area.
(2) Any vessel anchored within the boundaries of Little Bay for more than 96 hours must be removed from the area, or otherwise docked, not less
than 30 days before being permitted to lawfully again anchor in Little Bay.
(3) If an enforcement officer determines a vessel unlawfully anchored or moored in violation of subsection (a)(1) of this section, the owner must
be notified in person or in writing of the violation. Once notified, the owner will be in violation should he intentionally or knowingly fail to comply
with subsection (a)(2) of this section.
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a vessel from being anchored or moored in a restricted water area in violation of this
section due to severe weather conditions.
(5) No person may anchor or moor any vessel within any canal of the Key Allegro or Harbor Oaks subdivisions.
(b) It shall be unlawful for a person to anchor, moor, or dock a vessel in Little Bay in the following areas:
(1) The Harbor Oaks bridge channel, on both sides thereof from under the bridge to and including 120 feet on the south side of the bridge.
(2) The Key Allegro bridge channel, on both sides thereof from under the bridge to and including 120 feet on the south side of the bridge.
(Code 1972,  6-24; Ord. No. 961,  1, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
Sec. 114-33. Water-skiing, related activities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 362/444
(a) No person shall operate a vessel engaged in towing another person on waterskis, surfboards, aquaplanes or other similar contrivances, and no person
shall engage in waterskiing, surfboarding or similar activity at any time between the hours from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise.
(b) All motorboats having in tow or otherwise assisting in towing a person on waterskis, aquaplane or similar contrivance, shall be operated in a careful
and prudent manner, and at a reasonable distance from persons and property so as not to endanger the life or property of any person.
(c) No person shall operate a vessel engaged in towing another person on waterskis, surfboards, aquaplanes or any similar contrivance unless such
operator shall have on board such vessel at least one additional person 13 years of age or older whose sole responsibility shall be to keep careful watch
upon the person being towed.
(d) No person shall operate a vessel engaged in towing another person on waterskis, surfboards, aquaplanes or any similar contrivance, and no person
shall engage in waterskiing, surfboarding or similar activity in any waters of Little Bay, including the canals of any subdivision connected thereto, except
in such areas as may be specifically designated for such activities.
(Code 1972,  6-25; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
State law referenceRearview mirrors, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.071; time and manner of operation of water skis, aquaplanes, etc., V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code 
31.103.
Sec. 114-34. Boundaries of Little Bay Rockport Harbor and the Rockport Ski Basin defined; Miscellaneous provisions.
(a) Little Bay is defined as all water areas whether navigable or not, including manmade canals or channels, within the city limits that are protected from
the waters of Aransas Bay, by land mass that is the Key Allegro subdivision and the land mass that is the Rockport Beach Park. These areas include, but
are not limited to:
(1) All waters north of the channel entrance located between the northeast end of Rockport Beach Park and the southern end of Key Allegro
subdivision;
(2) All waters west of the channel entrance located at the north end of the Key Allegro subdivision and Allegro North Condominiums;
(3) All waters accessible between subsections (a)(1) and (2) above that are not contiguous to the waters of Aransas Bay. This includes the canals
of the Key Allegro and Harbor Oaks subdivision and Canoe Lake; and
(4) All waters west of a line extended south from and in line with the end of the Rockport sea wall, being the Rockport harbor channel entrance.
(b) The Rockport Ski Basin is defined as the area of Little Bay, whether navigable or not, within the city limits that are protected from the waters of
Aransas Bay by the land mass that is the Rockport Beach Park and lying south of the south line of the Legget Channel as extended to Broadway Street.
(c) The Rockport Harbor is defined as all water areas protected from the waters of Aransas Bay by the Rockport sea wall north of a direct line
perpendicular to the sea wall from the southernmost end of the sea wall to the mainland.
(d) All vessels operating in the Rockport Ski Basin shall operate in the same direction by proceeding in the counterclockwise direction around the bird
islands in the middle of the Rockport Ski Basin.
(e) It shall be unlawful for any person while operating a motor vessel to pass between the north and south bird islands in the Rockport Ski Basin.
(f) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any sailboat or similar vessel in the Rockport Ski Basin being powered by wind power alone.
(g) Fishing shall be prohibited from the boat dock at the boat ramp located at the Rockport Beach Park.
(h) Recreational swimming is prohibited in the Rockport Harbor and in the area of the boat ramp and boat dock located at the Rockport Beach Park.
(i) It shall be unlawful for any person to moor or attach any boat or vessel to any buoy, beacon, light, marker, stake, flag, or other aid to safe operation
and navigation placed in or upon the waters contained within the city limits, and it shall be further unlawful for any person to move, remove, displace,
tamper with, damage or destroy any of such markers or aids to safe operation and navigation.
(j) The areas described in this code are depicted on the map incorporated in this Code by reference, which map shall remain on file in the office of the
city secretary.
(Code 1972,  6-26; Ord. No. 454,  1, 2, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 896,  3, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 961,  2, 11-23-93; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00; Ord. No. 1157, 
1, 6-27-00)
State law referenceDamaging markers, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  12.017; interference with markers or ramps, V.T.C.A., Parks and Wildlife Code  31.100.
Sec. 114-35. Airboats prohibited in Little Bay, Rockport Ski Basin, connected canals.
No person shall operate an airboat in any waters of Little Bay or the canals of any subdivisions connected thereto. An airboat is one propelled by wind
force generated by a propeller located above the surface of the water.
(Code 1972,  6-27; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
Sec. 114-36. Aircraft prohibited in Little Bay Rockport Ski Basin and Legget Channel.
No person shall land any aircraft, operate any aircraft, or take off in any aircraft, in the waters of the channel connecting Little Bay and Aransas Bay or in
the waters of Little Bay.
(Code 1972,  6-28; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 363/444
Sec. 114-37. Additional water safety rules.
The city manager shall establish a water safety advisory committee each year to assist in an annual review of this article, development of appropriate
public signs, etc., so as to ensure the safe and pleasurable use of the public waters.
(Ord. No. 896,  5, 8-27-91; Ord. No. 1153,  2, 5-9-00)
Chapters 115-117 RESERVED
Chapter 118
ZONING*
Article I. Zoning Ordinance*
Sec. 118-1. Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as the Rockport Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 1, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-2. Purpose.
The zoning regulations and districts as herein established have been made in accordance with a comprehensive plan and designed to lessen congestion in
the streets; to secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; to promote health, safety and the general welfare; to provide adequate light and air; to
prevent the overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of population; and to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewer,
schools, parks and other public requirements. They have been made with reasonable consideration, among other things, for the character of the district and
its particular suitability for certain uses, and with a view of conserving the value of buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout
the city.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 2, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-3. Definitions.
3.1 Tense, Gender and Number. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the singular include the plural, and words in the
plural include the singular. Words used in the masculine include the feminine and words in the feminine include the masculine. The word
"building" includes the word "structure". The word "shall" or the word "must" is mandatory and not discretionary. The word "lot" may also be
construed to mean "lots" where appropriate.
3.2 Words Defined.
Accessory. Incidental to another use of a structure on the same lot or lots.
Accessory Building. A subordinate building customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by the main use or building. Accessory
buildings may include, but not limited to, an attached or detached garage, garage apartment, wash house, hobby room, servants quarter/guest quarter,
storage/utility shed, covered patio, well/well house and gazebo to name a few.
Accessory Living Quarters. An accessory use or building used solely as the temporary dwelling of guests of the occupants of the premises; such dwelling
not rented or otherwise used as an independent dwelling unit.
Accessory Use. A use conducted on the same lot as the primary use of the structure to which it is related; a use that is clearly incidental to and customarily
found in connection with such primary use.
Adult. As defined herein, a person who has attained a legal age of majority (i.e. 18 years of age).
Adult Entertainment. Adult entertainment uses are those uses providing sexually oriented entertainment for on-site consumption. Uses may include, but are
not limited to, adult motion picture theaters, massage parlors, nude studios, modeling studios, nude photography studios, sex parlor, love parlor, adult
movie/video arcade/store, adult motel. This definition also includes liquor-by-the-drink establishments and restaurant establishments where sexually
orientated entertainment is offered.
Adult Stores. A retail establishment offering items for off-site consumption intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification, or purporting to
enhance sexual activity.
Agriculture. The raising or growing of crops, fowl and/or livestock, providing such use does not constitute a nuisance or health hazard.
Alley. A public space or thoroughfare which affords only secondary means of access to property abutting thereon.
Apartment. A dwelling unit part of, or within an apartment building.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 364/444
Apartment Building. A building containing three or more apartments.
Area of the Lot. The net area of the lot, not including portions of streets and alleys.
Bed & Breakfast. A lodging house, other than a hotel/motel, where for compensation and pre-arrangement for definite periods, meals and lodging are
provided.
Block. A piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by natural or man-made barriers such as public streets, streams, parks, etc. or a combination thereof.
Build. To erect, convert, enlarge, reconstruct, or structurally alter a building or structure.
Building. Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use or occupancy. (Reference: The International Building Code.)
Building Line. The line established by law, beyond which a building shall not extend, except as specifically provided by law (Reference: The International
Building Code).
Child Care Center. A child-care facility that provides care at a location other than the residence of the director, owner, or operator of the child-care facility
for seven or more children under 14 years of age for less than 24 hours a day, but at least two hours a day, three or more days a week. (Reference: Tex.
Human Resources Code  42.002(7))
Child Care Home. A home that provides regular care in the caretaker's own residence for not more than six children under 14 years of age, excluding
children who are related to the caretaker, and that provides care after school hours for not more than six additional elementary school children, but the total
number of children, including children who are related to the caretaker, does not exceed 12 at any given time. The term does not include a home that
provides care exclusively for any number of children who are related to the caretaker. (Reference: Tex. Human Resources Code  42.002(9))
City. The City of Rockport, Texas.
Civic Club. A building, or portion thereof, used primarily by an association of persons to promote special purpose activities, but not primarily for profit
and not primarily to render a service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Clinic. A place where psychological or physiological care is furnished to persons on an out-patient basis by licensed providers.
Commission. The Planning and Zoning Commission of the City of Rockport, Texas.
Common Open Area. Private property owned in common by and designed for the private use of, the owners or occupants of residences in a particular
project or subdivision. Common open area uses include, but are not limited to, recreation areas, parks and plazas, ornamental areas open to the general
view within the project or subdivisions, and building setbacks not otherwise required by ordinance. The common area does not include public streets,
alleys, required building setbacks or utility easements.
Condominium. Shall have the same meaning as defined by Sec. 82.003 of the Texas Property Code.
Council. The City Council of the City of Rockport, Texas.
District. A part of the city wherein regulations of this ordinance are uniform.
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof designed or used for residential occupancy by not more than two families.
Dwelling Unit. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
Efficiency Apartment. An apartment having a combination living room and bedroom (No separate bedroom).
Family. A person or persons, occupying a dwelling, living together and maintaining a common household.
Fence. A structure serving as an enclosure or barrier usually found near or around the boundary of property. The term fence may also include such
structures as decorative lattice work, trellises, fence gates or projections of building walls.
Foster Group Home. A child-care facility that provides care for seven (7) to twelve (12) children for 24 hours a day. (Reference: Tex. Human Resources
Code  42.002(5))
Foster Home. A child-care facility that provides care for not more than six (6) children for 24 hours a day. (Reference: Tex. Human Resources Code 
42.002(6))
Hazardous Material. Any substance required by the U.S. Dept. of Transportation to have a Hazardous Material ID placard for transport.
Height of Building. The vertical distance from the grade to (a) the highest point on a flat roof, (b) the deck line of a mansard roof, or, (c) the mean height
between the eaves and the ridge of a gable, hip or gambrel roof.
Home Occupation. An occupation or activity that is incidental and secondary to the primary use of a dwelling as a residence, not involving the conduct of
a retail business, and conducted solely by an occupant of the residence. (See article 24 [section 118-24] regarding Regulation of Home Occupations).
Hotel. Any building containing six (6) or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied for
sleeping purposes by guests. Ingress and egress to and from all rooms is usually made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at
all hours. A hotel may include restaurants, taverns or club rooms, banquet halls, ballrooms, and meeting rooms which are physically part of and incidental
to the main use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 365/444
HUD-Code Manufactured Home. A structure constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the rules of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight (8') body feet or more in width or forty (40') body feet or
more in length, or when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320 sq.ft.) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed
to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, airconditioning,
and electrical systems. The term does not include recreational vehicle as defined by 24 C.F.R. Section 3282.8(g).
Industrialized Housing/Buildings. A residential structure or commercial structure which is manufactured, constructed and erected in accordance with the
regulations governing Industrialized Housing and Buildings, as published by the Texas Department of Licensing & Regulation, Manufactured Housing
Division. See Modular Construction.
Living Area. The area included within surrounding exterior walls, or exterior walls and fire walls, exclusive of courts, porches and garages.
Lot. Any piece or parcel of land or a portion of a subdivision, the boundaries of which have been established by some legal instrument of record, that is
occupied or intended to be occupied by one building or a group of buildings, and accessory buildings and uses, including such open spaces as required by
this ordinance and other laws or ordinances, and having its principal frontage on a public street.
Lot Area. The area of land within the boundary of a lot, excluding any part under water.
Lot Lines. The lines marking the legally recorded boundary of a lot.
Manufactured Housing or Manufactured Home. This means a HUD-Code Manufactured Home or a Mobile Home and collectively means and refers to
both.
Manufactured Home Park. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home spaces and available on a rental basis. May
coexist with a Recreational Vehicle Park.
Manufactured Home Subdivision. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots and available for rent or for
sale, with each manufactured home being located on a separate lot.
Mobile Home. A structure that was constructed before June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which, in traveling mode, is eight (8') body
feet or more in width or forty (40') body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320 sq. ft.) or more square feet, and
which is built on a permanent chassis designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities
which includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical system.
Modular Construction. A structure or building module that is manufactured at a location other than the location where it is installed and used by a
consumer, transportable in one or more sections on a temporary chassis or other conveyance device, and designed to be used as a permanent dwelling or
permanent structure when installed and placed upon a permanent foundation system. See Industrialized Housing/Buildings.
Motel. Same as hotel, except that the building or buildings are designed primarily to serve tourists traveling by automobile and that ingress and egress to
rooms need not be through a lobby or office.
Multi-Family Dwelling. A building designed or used for the residential occupancy of three or more families living independently of one another.
Nonconforming Uses. A building, structure or use of land lawfully occupied at the time of the effective date of this ordinance or amendments thereto, and
which does not conform to the use regulations of the district in which it is situated.
Nursing Care. Services provided by nursing personnel which include but are not limited to: observation; promotion and maintenance of health; prevention
of illness and disability; management of health care during acute and chronic phases of illness; guidance and counseling of individuals and families; and
referral to physicians, other health care providers, and community resources when appropriate.
Nursing Facility/Home. An institution or establishment that provides organized and structured nursing care and service and is subject to licensure as a
nursing home under Health and Safety Code, Chapter 242, and/or certified to participate in the Medicaid Title XIX program. Nursing home is also referred
to as Nursing Facility. Depending on context, these terms are used to represent the management, administrator, or other persons or groups involved in the
provision of care to the residents; or to represent physical building, which may consist of one or more floors or one or more units, or which may be a
distinct part of a licensed hospital.
Plat. A map or drawing detailing the specifics of the division of land for the purposes of development. (Reference: Rockport Platting & Subdivision
Regulations);
* Concept Plan. A map of proposed land development showing the character and proposed layout of the tract in sufficient detail to indicate the
suitability of the proposed development.
* Final plat. A map of proposed land development prepared in a form suitable for filing of record with necessary affidavits, dedications and
acceptances, and with complete bearings and dimensions of all lots and blocks, streets, alleys, public areas and other necessary or required
information.
Portable Building. A moveable or portable building constructed to be towed by a motor vehicle, on its own frame or on a trucking device, which may be
connected to utilities after mounting on a permanent foundation, or adequately anchored to the ground, and to be used as accessory for residential, business
or commercial purposes.
Premises. Land together with all buildings and structures thereon.
Recreational Vehicle. Abbr. RV. A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; is four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; is designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty vehicle; and is designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 366/444
Recreational Vehicle Park. Abbr. RV park. A parcel or contiguous parcels of land divided into two or more recreational vehicle spaces and available on a
rental basis. May coexist with a Manufactured Home Park.
Screening Fence. A fence constructed of sufficient solid material to screen a premise effectively from view of the traveling public.
Setback. The required distance between every structure and building, and any lot line on the lot or lots upon which the structure or building is located.
Sexually Orientated Entertainment. Sexually orientated entertainment is the offering of a service or the selling, renting or exhibiting of devices, or any
other items or services intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer.
Shipping Container. A containment receptacle which is used or designed to be used in intermodal or over-the-road shipping that consists of a truck trailer
body that may be detached from the chassis for loading onto a ship or other vessel, a rail car, or stacked in a container depot; and does not exceed 40 feet in
length, 9 feet in height and 9 feet in width. Such container when used for industrialized buildings shall comply with the State of Texas Industrialized
Housing and Building Act.
Single-Family Dwelling. A building designed and arranged exclusively for the use and occupancy of one family.
Street. An improved public thoroughfare, which affords the principal means of access between various land use activities. (Reference: Rockport Platting &
Subdivision Regulations);
a) Arterial. Streets which are principal traffic arteries more or less continuous across the city which are intended to connect remote parts of the
city and which are used primarily for fast or heavy volume traffic.
b) Collector. Streets which collect and carry traffic from residential streets to major systems of streets and highways, including the principal
entrance streets of residential or nonresidential development and similar streets for circulation within such a development.
c) Residential. Streets which are used primarily for access to abutting properties and which are intended to serve traffic within a limited district
or area.
d) Marginal access. A street (frontage or service road) that may be parallel to and adjacent to all streets, which provide access to abutting
properties and protection from through traffic.
e) Alley. A public passage or public right-of-way affording a secondary means of vehicular access to abutting property but not intended for
through traffic.
Structure. Anything constructed or erected, which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground.
Subdivision. A subdivision is the division of any lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more parts, lots or sites, for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of sale or division of ownership. This definition also includes the re-subdivision of land or lots which are a part of a previously recorded
subdivision. An addition is a subdivision as is defined herein.
Townhouse. One of a series of single-family dwelling units which are either structurally connected, or which are constructed immediately adjacent to each
other without side yard between the units, and with property lines separating such units. The term "townhouse" and "townhomes" may be interchangeable.
Trailer. See Recreational Vehicle.
Two-Family Dwelling. A building designed and arranged exclusively for the use and occupancy of two families living independently of each other. A
duplex dwelling.
Motor Vehicle Sales Lot. A lot or portion thereof to be used only for the display and sale of titled motor vehicles that are in condition to be driven on or off
the lot. A motor vehicle sales lot shall not be used for the storage of wrecked motor vehicles, or the dismantling of motor vehicles, or the storage of motor
vehicle parts.
Vision Triangle. That area created by a straight line from the points of the two intersecting right-of-way lines 20 feet back from their common intersection.
Yard. An open, unoccupied space on a lot, other than a court, which is unobstructed from the ground upward by buildings or structures, except as otherwise
provided in these regulations.
Yard, Front. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line
parallel thereto. Projections of the usual uncovered steps, terraces, decks, porches, entranceways or roof eves as addressed within these regulations, are
allowed. On corner lots the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension, except that if the lot is square,
i.e., has dimensions where the shorter side is at least 90% or more of the longer side, then the front yard may face either street. Lots with double frontage
(through lots) must have the required front yard on both streets. This requirement shall not apply to existing lots of record.
Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line
parallel thereto. Projections of the usual uncovered steps, terraces, decks, porches, entranceways or roof eves, as addressed within these regulations, are
allowed (see Article 21 [section 118-21] for accessory uses).
Yard, Side. A yard between the main building and the side line of the lot, extending from the front yard to the rear yard and being the minimum horizontal
distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto. Projections of the usual uncovered steps, terraces, decks, porches, entranceways or roof eves,
as addressed within these regulations, are allowed (see Article 21 [section 118-21] for accessory uses).
Zero Lot Line. A lot on which there is no minimum side yard on one side, but not less than 10 (10) feet on the opposite side.
Zoning Administrator. The city employee designated to be responsible for the administration of the Zoning Ordinance regulations.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 3, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1602,  1, 3-26-13)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 367/444
Sec. 118-4. Districts and general provisions.
4.1 Districts Established. Zoning districts as herein set forth are established. The city is hereby divided into the following districts:
R-1 1st Single-Family Dwelling District
R-2 2nd Single-Family Dwelling District
R-2B Zero Lot Line Single-Family District
R-2M Manufactured Housing District
R-3 Duplex Dwelling District
R-4 1st Multi-Family Dwelling District
R-5 2nd Multi-Family Dwelling District
R-6 Hotel/Motel District
R-7 Residential and Office District
B-1 General Business District
B-2 Central Business District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
P.U.D. Planned Unit Development District
The boundaries of the districts listed above are shown on the official Zoning Map. The map and all markings, notations, references and other
information shown on said map shall be and are hereby made a part of this ordinance as if all were fully set forth or described herein. The
original drawing of this map, properly signed and attested, is on file with the City Secretary.
4.2 General Provisions.
4.2.1 Except as herein provided, the use of premises and buildings, the lot area and height of buildings in the city shall be in accordance with
the minimum standards hereinafter established.
4.2.2 Except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) below, every building shall be on a platted lot.
(a) Development within R-4 through I-2 districts, except one- and two-family dwellings, incorporating multiple buildings to be
constructed simultaneous, platted lots for each building is not required.
(b) Re-plating is not required when an improvement (including any detached structure) crosses a lot line(s) for single-family dwelling
uses in R-1 through R-6 districts only. When a building or detached structure crosses a lot line(s), building set backs shall be measured to
the next lot line of record. In no case shall this exception apply to more than four (4) lots without re-plating.
(c) Re-plating is required when an improvement (including any detached structure) violates any applicable building setback or open
yard requirement as regulated herein.
4.2.3 The provisions in 4.2.2 shall not affect the validity of any deed restriction that is otherwise valid.
4.2.4 When streets and rights-of-way are closed and abandoned by the city that portion of street or right-of-way area adjacent to the real
property shall thereafter become the zoning designation of said adjacent property upon platting or re-platting of the closed street or right-of7/
15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 368/444
way.
4.2.5 Yards, parking space or lot area required for one building or use cannot be used for another building or use; nor can the size of a lot be
reduced below the requirements of this ordinance.
4.2.6 Mobile Homes, as defined, are prohibited within the city limits of the City of Rockport on individual lots unless such mobile home
existed prior to annexation.
4.2.6.1 Replacement of an existing mobile home shall be with a HUD-Code Manufactured Home.
4.2.6.2 A one time replacement of an existing HUD-Code Manufactured Home shall be with a HUD-Code Manufactured Home of
equal size (square footage) or greater and be a newer model.*
4.2.6.3 Manufactured Homes damaged by fire or natural disaster may always be replaced with another HUD-Code Manufactured Home
meeting the same criteria described in 4.2.6.2.
* NOTE: Newer model is defined as a manufactured home with a manufactured date being not more than ten (10) years prior to the
calendar year it is to be placed on the property.
4.2.7 Utility distribution facilities and appurtenances, including water, sewer, electric, gas, telephone and cable television, may be permitted
in any district. Wind power generation facilities shall comply with Wind Powered Systems in Article VI, Chapter 42, Rockport Code of
Ordinances.
4.2.8 For fence regulations in all Districts of the City, see Section 22.2 [section 118-22, subsection 22.2].
4.2.9 In interpreting and applying these provisions, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the protection of the public safety,
health, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general welfare.
4.2.10 This ordinance shall be reviewed on an annual basis by the Planning & Zoning Commission and city staff or legal and technical
compliance with local, state and federal laws, with the intent to include sound zoning concepts and practices. Furthermore, this ordinance shall
be thoroughly reviewed and completely reorganized, if necessary, at least every five (5) years. Such reorganization shall reflect compliance
with the master plan, local, state, and federal laws and other laws and regulations governing zoning within the City of Rockport.
4.2.11 See Article II, Chapter 6, Rockport Code of Ordinances for sign regulations in all zoning districts.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 4, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1600,  1, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 1715,  1, 5-10-18)
Sec. 118-5. Newly annexed territory.
5.1 Temporary Zoning.
5.1.1 Land annexed to the city is automatically placed in the R-1 District until changed by amendment to this ordinance on initiative of the
city in accordance with Article 26 [section 118-26], unless annexed under terms of Article 19 [section 118-19] or under terms of the
Subdivision Ordinance or where pre-existing conditions may be considered at time of annexation.
5.1.2 In an annexed area temporarily classified as R-1, no permit for the construction of a building other than those permitted in an R-1
District shall be issued by the Building Official unless such permit has been specifically authorized by the City Council subject to the
following:
1. An application for any use shall be made to the Building Official in accordance with the provisions of the Building Code.
2. Applications for buildings other than those permitted in an R-1 District shall be referred by the Building Official to the Planning and
Zoning Commission for consideration and recommendation to the City Council.
3. The recommendation to the City Council shall be advisory only, and the City Council may grant or deny the application as the facts
may justify.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 5, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-6. R-1 1st Single-Family Dwelling District.
6.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide for low density residential areas and to protect and conserve them permitting only
such accessory and supporting uses as are compatible with the primary purpose of one-family residential use. The district also functions as a
holding district, where land is not yet developed or committed for other use. Land and premises may be used only for:
1. One-family dwellings (see Article 24 regarding Industrialized Housing).
2. Public parks, public buildings (except detention centers, penal and mental institutions).
3. Churches, schools and colleges.
4. Golf courses and golf clubs, but no commercial miniature courses or driving ranges.
5. Oil, gas and service wells provided they comply with the Rockport Oil and Gas Well Drilling Ordinance, as amended.
6. Bed and breakfast, by CUP.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 369/444
7. Agricultural purposes.
8. Cemeteries in accordance with state law.
9. Child nurseries or pre-kindergarten schools, by CUP.
10. The keeping and raising of farm animals or non-domestic animals, by CUP. Agricultural land annexed into the city is exempt where such
uses existed at time of annexation.
11. Wind powered systems in accordance with Article VI., Chapter 42, Rockport Code of Ordinances.
6.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
6.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet. See Table 20.
6.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See Table 20.
6.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be eight hundred (800) square fee. See Table 20.
6.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See Table 20.
6.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3-Definitions and Article 20.
6.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21.
6.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 6, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-7. R-2 2nd Single-Family Dwelling District.
7.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide a residential district with smaller lot sizes in keeping with established standards in
certain parts of the city, but which will provide the same residential environment as the 1st Single-Family Dwelling District. Land and premises
may be used only for:
1. Uses 1 through 8 in an R-1 district.
7.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
7.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
7.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
7.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be six hundred (600) square feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
7.2.4 Yard Area and Building Setbacks. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
7.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
7.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
7.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 7, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-8. R-2B Zero Lot Line Single-Family Dwelling District.
Section 1. Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide a residential area which will allow for zero lot line construction with all
buildings limited to single-family dwellings. Each unit shall be constructed on a privately-owned individual lot with a minimum of eight (8) lots
being developed within an R-2B district. (Maximum density shall be determined by Article 20 of the Rockport Zoning Ordinance). Land and
premises may be used only for:
1. Use 1 through 6 in an R-1 District.
Section 2. Area and Yard Regulations.
1. Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
2. Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
3. Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be six hundred (600) square feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
4. Yard Area and Building Setbacks. See [section 118-20] Table 20 for yard regulations.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 370/444
Section 3. Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
Section 4. Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
Section 5. Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained
in Article 22 [section 118-21].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 8, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-9. R-2M Manufactured Housing District.
9.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide residential zoning for both HUD-Code Manufactured Housing and site built homes
while providing the same environment found in the 2nd Single-Family Dwelling District. Land and premises may be used only for:
1. HUD-Code Manufactured Housing.
2. Use 1 in an R-2 district..
9.2 General Standards. HUD-Code Manufactured Homes shall comply with the standards of the United States Department of Housing and
Urban Development and the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act concerning manufactured housing stock. Mobile Homes, as defined, are
prohibited within this district unless such mobile home existed prior to annexation. Manufactured homes being placed on lots cannot have a
manufactured date of more than ten (10) years prior the calendar year it is to be placed on the property. Replacement of an existing mobile home
shall be with a HUD-Code Manufactured Home. Replacement of an existing HUD-Code Manufactured Home may be with a HUD-Code
Manufactured Home of equal size (square footage) or greater and be a newer model.*
* NOTE: Newer model is defined as a manufactured home with a manufactured date being not more than ten (10) years prior to the calendar
year it is to be placed on the property.
9.3 R-2M Manufactured Housing District Specifications. The R-2M district shall consist of at least two (2) acres in size.
9.3.1 Development of the proposed district shall be in accordance with the city's platting and subdivision regulations regarding
manufactured housing subdivisions.
9.3.2 All manufactured homes in the district shall be installed on HUD approved foundations and shall be enclosed with approved skirting.
9.4 Area and Yard Regulations.
9.4.1 Area of the lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be five-thousand (5,000) square feet.
9.4.2 Width of the lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet.
9.4.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of a site built dwelling shall be six hundred (600) square feet. The minimum living
area of a manufactured home shall be in accordance with the Texas Manufactured Housing Standards Act (currently 320 sq. ft.).
9.4.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. Shall be the same as the R-2 district.
9.4.5 Height of the Building. No building or structure shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.
9.4.6 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses shall be the same as in the R-2 district.
9.4.7 Auxiliary Use Regulations. Auxiliary uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use, shall be the same as in the R-2 district.
9.5 Auxiliary Use Regulations. Auxiliary uses which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 9, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1715,  1, 5-10-18)
Sec. 118-10. R-3 Duplex Dwelling District.
10.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide for duplex uses on single lots and multiple lots meeting the lot area per family
requirements of Article 20 [section 118-20], Table 20. In addition to the previous listed uses in an R-2 district, land and premises may be used for:
1. Two-family dwellings.
10.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
10.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot for duplex dwellings shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet with thirty-five
hundred (3,500) square feet needed per dwelling unit. The minimum area of the lot for single-family dwellings shall be the same as required in
an R-2 district. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
10.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
10.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit. See [section
118-20] Table 20.
10.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 371/444
10.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
10.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
10.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 10, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-11. R-4 1st Multi-Family Dwelling District.
11.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide an area where multi-family dwellings may be built to low density. Land and
premises may be used for:
1. Uses 1 through 6 in an R-1 district.
2. Use 1 in an R-3 district.
3. Multi-family dwelling, apartments and condominiums.
4. Civic clubs, lodges, fraternities or sororities, except those whose chief activity is providing a type of service or activity normally
considered to be the operation of a business.
5. Bed and breakfast.
6. Nursing homes.
7. Religious, educational and philanthropic institutions.
11.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
11.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot for duplex dwellings shall be thirty-five hundred (3,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
The minimum area of the lot for single family dwellings shall be the same as required in an R-2 district. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
11.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
11.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit. See [section
118-20] Table 20.
11.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
11.3 Height of the Building. No Building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
11.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
11.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 11, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-12. R-5 2nd Multi-Family Dwelling District.
12.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide an area where multi-family dwellings may be built to moderate density. Land and
premises may be used only for:
1. Uses a listed for an R-4 district.
12.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
12.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot for multi-family dwellings shall be twenty-two (2,200) square feet per dwelling unit.
The minimum area of the lot for single-family dwellings shall be the same as required in an R-2 district. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
12.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
12.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be five hundred (500) square feet per dwelling unit. See [section
118-20] Table 20.
12.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
12.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
12.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 372/444
12.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 12, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-13. R-6 Hotel/Motel District.
13.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable locations for hotels and motels. Land and premises may be used for:
1. Uses listed for an R-5 district.
2. Hotels and Motels.
3. Retail shops, restaurants, clubs and lounges when not established within a hotel/motel building, by CUP.
13.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
13.2.1 Area of the Lot. Does not apply for hotel/motel use only. The minimum area of the lot for single-family dwellings shall be the same
as required in an R-2 district. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
13.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
13.2.3 Area of Hotel/Motel Rooms. The minimum living area of the rooms shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet per room. See
[section 118-20] Table 20.
13.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. Where a hotel/motel abuts a Residential District, a side and/or rear yard must be provided along the
boundary line but shall not be less than ten (10) feet. For hotels/motels, egress and ingress must be provided from a main street. Five percent
(5%) of the square footage of the site must be left free of structures to be used for beautification/landscaping. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
13.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed forty five (45) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
13.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
13.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 13, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-14. R-7 Residential and Office District.
14.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide an area where professional offices and office buildings may locate and be
compatible with dwellings or structures located within or adjacent to the district. Land and premises may be used for:
1. Uses listed for an R-6 district.
2. Office buildings provided the following conditions are met:
a. No building may be constructed or altered to produce a store front, show window or display window.
b. No storage or merchandise in the building or on the premises.
c. No machinery or equipment, other than that customarily found in professional or business offices, used or stored in the building or on
the premises.
3. Financial Institutions.
4. Studios (provided conditions in item 2 are met).
5. Penal institutions and detention centers, by CUP.
6. Clinics or hospitals.
7. Radio, television or communications tower (transmitting dish antenna), by CUP. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements are satisfied. Refer to Article 24 [section 118-24] for Special Conditions.
14.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
14.2.1 Area of the Lot. The minimum area of the lot shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. See Article 20 [section 118-20].
14.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
14.2.3 Area of the Building. The minimum living area of the dwelling shall be five hundred (500) square feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
14.2.4 Yard Area and Building Setbacks. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
14.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 373/444
14.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
14.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 14, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-15. B-1 General Business District.
15.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable locations for a wide variety of business and mercantile uses. In addition
to the previous listed uses in R-1 through R-7 districts, land and premises may be used for:
1. Restaurants, cafes, food catering services.
2. Offices, banks, libraries, museums, etc.
3. Service stations, car washes, laundromats.
4. Malls, shopping centers, retail stores.
5. Shops (butcher shops, shoe shops, shell shops, etc., including pawn shops that have been licensed to transact business by the Consumer
Credit Commissioner under Chapter 371, Finance Code).
6. Grocery stores, convenience stores, markets.
7. Retail markets (seafood/meat) and bait stands.
8. Entertainment facilities (theaters, bowling alleys, pool halls, clubs and lounges, etc.
9. Sales, service and repair shops (radio, television, shoe repair, tool repair and rental, lawn mower repair, auto and boat repair shops, etc).
10. Personal service shops (beauty salons, barber shops, tailoring and dressmaking shops, etc).
11. Storage buildings, auto storage yards.
12. Animal hospitals, boarding kennels and grooming shops.
13. Mortuaries and funeral homes.
14. Agricultural services, greenhouses and landscaping services.
15. Outdoor welding, fabricating operations, by CUP.
16. Permanent or long term (more than 30 days) public entertainment facilities or uses, by CUP. Such uses may include, but not be limited
to, amusement parks, carnivals, circuses, marine life shows, dance/theatrical productions and natatoriums.
17. Fish houses, seafood processing plants, by CUP.
18. Adult entertainment, by CUP.
15.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
15.2.1 Area of the Lot. None required for non-dwelling uses. For dwelling uses, See [section 118-20] Table 20.
15.2.2 Width of the Lot. The minimum width of the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
15.2.3 Area of the Building. For a primary use structure, the minimum floor area shall be five hundred (500) square feet. See [section 118-
20] Table 20.
15.2.4 Yard Area and Building Setbacks. See [section 118-20] Table 20
15.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed forty five (45) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
15.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
15.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 15, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-16. B-2 Central Business District.
16.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to define the downtown commercial and business area. The principal difference in this
district and the B-1 General Business District is that buildings may be built to the front property lines. Basically, this district encompasses the older
downtown commercial and business structures. Arrangement and construction of structures make it impractical to require off-street parking and
loading spaces for each business on its own lot. Land and premises may be used for:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 374/444
1. All uses listed for a B-1 district.
2. Residential uses are permitted under the same provisions of the R-1 through R-7 Districts.
16.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
16.2.1 Area of the Lot. None required for non-dwelling uses. For dwelling uses, see [section 118-20] Table 20.
16.2.2 Width of the Lot. None required for non-dwelling uses. For dwelling uses, see [section 118-20] Table 20.
16.2.3 Area of the Building. None required for non-dwelling uses. For dwellings, see [section 118-20] Table 20.
16.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
16.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed thirty five (35) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
16.4 Parking Regulations. No off-street parking or loading spaces are required for this district. See Article 21 [section 118-21] for general
parking regulations.
16.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 16, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-17. I-1 Light Industrial District.
17.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for storage and distribution uses. In this district land and premises
may be used for any purpose except that no building may be used for any dwelling or residential use; however, dwellings or manufactured housing
for resident watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises are permitted; and excepting those uses enumerated in Article 22 [section 118-22]
thereof, for which a special permit is required. Land and premises may be used for:
1. All non-dwelling uses listed in a B-1 or B-2 district.
2. Food products and beverage products, storage and distribution thereof.
3. General storage and distribution of products, goods and services.
4. Apparel and other finished clothing products.
5. Transportation equipment, boat, trailer, and R.V. repair and service.
6. Unclassified uses, but not limited to such products and usages as: Animal stables and commercial animal raising; building materials,
recycling collection centers, storage and sales thereof; circus grounds; laboratories, research and experimental.
17.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
17.2.1 Area of the Lot. None required for this district. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
17.2.2 Width of the Lot. None required for this district. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
17.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. For resident watchmen or caretaker's quarters. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
17.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
17.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed forty five (45) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
17.4 Parking Regulations. Parking regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
17.5 Accessory use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the Primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 22 [section 118-22].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 17, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-18. I-2 Heavy Industrial District.
18.1 Use Regulations. The purpose of this district is to provide suitable areas for manufacturing and production services. In this district land and
premises may be used for any purpose except that no building may be used for any dwelling or residential use; however, dwellings or manufactured
housing for resident watchmen or caretakers employed on the premises are permitted; and excepting those uses enumerated in Article 23 [section
118-23], for which a special permit is required. Land and premises may be used for:
1. Any use listed for an I-1 district.
2. Chemicals, petroleum, coal and allied products.
3. Clay, stone, and glass products.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 375/444
4. Food and beverage products and the manufacture thereof (fish houses, seafood processing plants).
5. Metals and metal products.
6. Textiles, fibers and bedding.
7. Wood and paper products.
8. Unclassified uses, but not limited to such products and usages as: Animal stables and commercial animal raising; building materials,
storage and sales thereof; circus grounds; construction shops and storage yards; greenhouses, wholesale; laboratories, research and
experimental; leather tanning plant; produce storage warehouse; wholesale storage and distributors; ordinance, munitions and accessories.
18.2 Area and Yard Regulations.
18.2.1 Area of the Lot. None required for this district. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
18.2.2 Width of the Lot. None required for this district. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
18.2.3 Area of the Dwelling. For resident watchman or caretaker's quarters. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
18.2.4 Yard Areas and Building Setback. See [section 118-20] Table 20.
18.3 Height of the Building. No building shall exceed forty five (45) feet in height. See Article 3 [section 118-3] Definitions and Article 20
[section 118-20].
18.4 Parking Regulations. Parking Regulations for permitted uses as contained in Article 21 [section 118-21].
18.5 Accessory Use Regulations. Accessory uses, which are auxiliary or incidental to the primary use of a building or premises, as contained in
Article 20 [section 118-20].
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 18, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-19. Planned Unit Development District (PUD).
19.1 Purpose. The purpose of a Planned Unit Development Overlay District (PUD) is to accommodate unified designs of residential,
commercial, office, professional services, retail and institutional uses and facilities or combinations thereof, in accordance with an approved
development plan.
19.2 Intent. A PUD Overlay District is intended to permit flexibility and encourage a more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design
and placement of buildings, open spaces, circulation patterns and parking facilities in order to best utilize special site features of topography, size or
shape. The PUD concept is not intended to be solely or merely a method of avoiding area restrictions required in other straight zoned districts.
19.3 Design. A PUD Overlay District is designed as an overlay zone to an existing and compatible zoning district, which in itself will support
such planned development. No such PUD shall be granted unless such development will meet the use limitations of the zoning district in which it is
located and meet the density and other limitations of such districts, except as such requirements may be lawfully modified as provided by this code
(refer to Conditional Use Permit regulations for land uses). Compliance with the regulations of this article in no way excuses the developer from the
applicable requirements of a subdivision ordinance, except as modifications thereof are specifically authorized in the approval of the application for
the PUD.
Exceptions:
1. Where a site is situated in more than one use district, the permitted uses applicable to such property in one district may be extended into
the adjacent use district without requiring a Conditional Use Permit.
2. The use of HUD-Code manufactured housing is permitted within a PUD district provided such housing meets the requirements
established by the Texas Dept. of Licensing and Regulation, Manufactured Housing Division.
19.4 Application. The owner of any tract of land may apply for and request a PUD. A proposed site plan shall be submitted indicating density of
residential, commercial and/or industrial areas, along with the location of all proposed streets, alleys, protective screening and open spaces. It is the
intent of this section that site and building plans for a PUD shall be prepared by a designer or team of designers having professional competence in
urban planning as proposed in the application.
19.5 Review by Administrative Official. After determining that the application is complete, the administrative official shall contact the chairman
of the Planning and Zoning Commission. The chairman shall then schedule a joint public hearing with both the Planning and Zoning Commission
and City Council in accordance with Article 26 of the Rockport Zoning Code [section 118-26 of this chapter].
19.6 Joint Public Hearing. After appropriate notice is given, a joint public hearing with the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council
on each request for a PUD shall be heard. During the joint public hearing pertinent comments by the applicant(s), city staff and public testimony
given shall be considered. After the close of the joint public hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall deliberate the PUD application at
its own scheduled meeting.
19.7 Review and Action by the Planning and Zoning Commission. At a scheduled meeting, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall consider
the application, any pertinent comments by the applicant(s), city staff, other relevant support materials and after reviewing the site plan in
accordance with the criteria listed in this section and reviewing all pertinent information, the Commission shall recommend that the City Council
rezone to PUD, subject to approval of the submitted site plan; recommend that the City Council rezone to PUD, subject to modifications to the
submitted site plan; or recommend that the City Council deny the request.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 376/444
19.8 Review and Action by City Council. At a scheduled meeting, the City Council shall consider the recommendations from the Planning and
Zoning Commission regarding each PUD application. The City Council shall further discuss any pertinent comments by the applicant(s), city staff,
and after reviewing the site plan in accordance with the criteria listed in this section and reviewing all pertinent information, shall rezone to PUD,
subject to the submitted site plan; rezone to PUD, subject to modifications to the submitted site plan; or deny the request. In granting such PUD, the
City Council may impose or amend all conditions recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission. The Council may attach such conditions
to a PUD approval as are necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on other property in the neighborhood, including, but not limited to:
limitations on size, bulk and location, provision of adequate ingress and egress, duration of use approval, and hours of operation of the planned unit
development.
19.9 Amendment. A planned unit development granted under these provisions shall be considered as an amendment to this Ordinance as
applicable to such property.
19.10 PUD Concept Plan. After approval of a PUD by the City Council, the Planning and Zoning Commission is hereby authorized to accept a
PUD site plan as a concept plan required by the City's Platting and Subdivision Regulations, if required. A final PUD plat will be handled as would
any final plat. At time of submittal of a final plat, the developer shall also submit a Home Owners Association Declaration, or a Condominium
Regime Declaration, or both, as the case may be, to city staff for review. Only after staff is satisfied with subject documents will the final plat be
submitted to the Planning and Zoning Commission for final action.
19.11 Expiration of Approval. A PUD Overlay District zoning designation and its required development site plan shall expire one (1) year after
such PUD zoning is approved by City Council unless a final plat for at least one section or phase of the PUD is approved by the Planning and
Zoning Commission. Upon such expiration, the zoning of the entire PUD-zoned tract shall revert to the original zoning that preceded the approval
of the PUD.
19.12 Site Plan Modifications. In no case shall an approved PUD site plan be amended nor is the area of the total PUD changed or modified once a
portion has been constructed without first resubmitting the changes as a new application for site plan approval, as appropriate.
19.13 General Criteria. A PUD concept plan shall be approved only if all the following general criteria are met.
1. The proposal is consistent with the City's Comprehensive Plan.
2. No PUD shall have area less than five (5) acres. Reductions may be approved by the City Council, with recommendations by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, but no less than two and one-half (2.5) acres.
3. The PUD is necessary to address a unique situation or represents a substantial benefit to the City, compared to what could have been
accomplished through application of the otherwise applicable zoning district standards.
4. The proposed plan mitigates any potential significant adverse impacts to the maximum practical extent.
5. The height of buildings in PUD districts shall conform to this document as prescribed within each zoning district. However, the height of
buildings in an approved PUD Overlay District within the Rockport Heritage District, shall be no higher than seventy-four (74) feet as
measured from grade plane to the average height of the highest roof surface (reference International Building Code for definitions of grade
plane and building height).
6. The arrangement of structures and open spaces within the development site shall be as necessary to ensure that adjacent properties will
not be adversely affected and that the development is planned as an attractive and functional asset for the community.
7. Streets, drainage and utility systems within a PUD Overlay District shall be designed to accommodate the overall demand of the PUD.
Off-site streets, drainage and utility systems associated (connected) with a PUD district shall be up-graded, if needed, to accommodate the
overall impact of the PUD. Such systems, both within and outside a PUD district, shall meet minimum requirements as set out in the City of
Rockport Design Standards and the Master Drainage Plan.
8. The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the design, intensity and direction of area lighting or floodlighting, if any, shall
comply with the requirements of the City's Sign Ordinance and the City's Lighting Ordinance.
9. Provision shall be made for ownership and maintenance of common open space through protective covenants running with the land, deed
or trust, or other similar mechanism; or may be dedicated to the public as a park.
19.14 Residential PUD Density and Design Criteria. In addition to the above specific density and design criteria, a residential PUD shall comply
with all of the following:
1. The minimum lot size, lot widths and yard areas shall be established by the Planning and Zoning Commission in accordance with best
planning practices.
2. Detached residential density shall not exceed 12 units per acre. Attached residential density shall not exceed 28 units per acre.
3. If mixed use, residential uses shall comprise 80 percent or more of the gross area of a mixed use development, with the remaining 20
percent or less being used for nonresidential uses, unless recommended otherwise by the Planning and Zoning Commission and accepted by
the City Council.
19.15 Legislative Approvals. The legislative body, as part of the approval of a PUD, shall be permitted to require an applicant to make reasonable
contributions to include, but not limited to, the following or to any combination of the following:
1. Dedication of land for public park purposes.
2. Dedication of land for public school purposes.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 377/444
3. Dedication of land for public road right-of-way purposes and for public drainage systems.
4. Construction of, or addition to, roads serving the proposed project when such construction or addition is reasonably related to the traffic
to be generated.
5. Installation of required traffic safety devices.
6. Preservation of areas containing significant natural, environmental, historic, archeological or similar resources.
19.16 Upon approval of a PUD, construction shall proceed only in accordance with the plans and specifications so approved and in conformity with
any conditions attached by the jurisdiction.
19.17 The code official shall not issue any permit for any proposed building, structure or use within the project unless such building, structure or
use is in accordance with the approved development plan and with any conditions imposed in conjunction with its approval.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 19, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1615,  1, 9-24-13)
Sec. 118-20. District area, yard and height regulations.
20.1 Minimum Lot Areas and Widths. The purpose of regulating lot areas and lot sizes is to control the density of population and to achieve the
degree of openness and livability desired for the community and, at the same time, permit reasonable and economic use of property.
20.1.1 No lot, parcel, premises or tract of land shall be created and no building permit shall be issued for any request that does not meet the
appropriate minimum lot area and width regulations, or exceptions thereof, as set forth in [section 118-20] Table 20 - Area and Height
Regulations. Submerged land shall not be included when meeting these requirements.
20.1.2 Nonconforming lots or acreage of record are addressed in Article 25 of this document.
20.1.3 Lot area per dwelling unit requirements shall not apply to dormitories, retirement homes, nursing homes or similar facilities where no
cooking facilities are provided in individual rooms or apartments.
20.1.4 Existing buildings or portions of buildings that are in violation of lot area requirements may be remodeled or repaired, but may not be
enlarged.
20.1.5 One-family detached dwellings built in B Districts must comply with minimum lot standards and densities of the R-2 District.
20.1.6 Two-family detached dwellings built in B Districts must comply with minimum lot standards and densities of the R-3 District.
20.2 Yard Area and Setback Requirements. Yard regulations are for the purpose of providing open spaces around buildings for light and air, for
safety from fire and to provide a degree of order in the location of buildings in various districts. Minimum yard regulations established by this
section are set forth in [section 118-20] Table 20 - Area and Height Regulations.
20.2.1a Waterfront building lines. Channelized lots in all R-Districts where such are contiguous to or extend into developed or existing bays
or waterways shall provide a minimum set-back of twelve (12) feet from the water side of the bulkhead. If no bulkhead, then a minimum setback
of 20 feet from the water's edge measured at mean high tide. Setbacks from other property lines shall govern as provided for within this
article. For purposes described herein, channelized lots shall be defined as bulkhead property touching or contiguous to a body of water, either
man-made or natural.
20.2.1b For subdivisions platted and recorded prior to annexation by the City of Rockport, platted building lines addressing yard areas and
building setback requirements shall control. If the plat contains no building lines, deed restrictions in effect at the time of annexation, shall
control. If none of the above exists, the zoning restrictions of this article shall control.
20.2.2 In the R-2B district, each lot shall contain a private yard of not less than five hundred (500) square feet. Parking areas shall not be
included in the computation of the required private yard area. A private yard may contain a patio cover or a roof which does not protrude
beyond the required building setback lines.
20.2.3 In the R-2B district there shall be no minimum side yard on one side and not less than ten (10) feet on the opposite side. A side yard
adjacent to a side street shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from the property line.
20.2.4 In the R-2B district, garages or carports having direct access to a rear alley or common driveway shall be set back from the rear lot
line not less than ten (10) feet. In no case shall the dwelling or townhouse be set closer than ten (10) feet to any rear lot line.
20.2.5 In the R-2B district, the following provisions shall apply:
a) A perpetual five (5) foot maintenance easement shall be provided on the lot adjacent to the zero lot line property line which, with the
exception of walls and/or fences, shall be kept clear of structures. This easement shall be shown on the plat and incorporated into each
deed transferring title to the property.
b) The wall of the dwelling located on the lot line or within five feet (5') of the lot line shall have no windows, doors, air conditioning
units, or any other type of openings or projections. Roof overhangs may penetrate the easement on the adjacent lot a maximum of twelve
inches (12") but such roof shall be so constructed, by design or other means, that water runoff from the dwelling placed on the lot line is
limited to the easement area as provided in Item a) above.
20.2.6 In the R-7 district there shall be a front yard of at least twenty (20) feet if the property is used for other than residential.
20.2.7 On corner lots in the R Districts there shall be a side yard along the side street of such lot of fifteen (15) feet, except that on separate
lots less than seventy-five (75) feet in width, only twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot need be provided for such side yard.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 378/444
20.2.8 Where a lot in a B or I District abuts an R District, the yard requirements for that R District shall be provided for the abutting lot in
the B or I District, but shall not be less than ten (10) feet.
20.2.9 Reserved.
20.2.10 Reserved.
20.2.11 Required front yards shall be used only for landscaping, walkways, light standards, mailboxes and driveways necessary for access to
the parking area. Refer to Article 22.2 [section 118-22, subsection 22.2] for fence regulations. Refer to Rockport Sign Ordinance for placement
of signs.
20.2.12 When building lines have been established by a recorded plat the platted building lines shall govern for front, rear and side yards.
Building lines, platted or non-platted, shall be in accordance with regulations as established herein. On corner lots the front yard shall be
considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension, except that if the lot is square, i.e., has dimensions where the
shorter side is at least 90% or more of the longer side, then the front yard may face either street. Lots with double frontage (through lots) must
have the required front yard on both streets. This requirement, however, shall not apply to existing lots of record.
20.2.13 When fifty percent (50%) or more of the lots on the same side of a street within the same block are improved with buildings that
have observed a lesser depth of front yard than specified in [section 118-20] Table 20, then no portion of a new building shall project beyond a
straight line drawn between the point closest to the street line of the building upon either side of the proposed building. If there is a building
upon only one side, then the front yard may be the same as the front yard of such building. In either case such building shall observe a setback
of no less than ten (10) feet (20 feet for garage). Required parking shall not encroach on right-of-way.
20.2.14 Except as may be permitted in Article 22, Section 22.1.6 [section 118-22, subsection 22.1.6] a minimum open space of ten (10) feet
shall be established between all unattached buildings in all zoning districts.
20.3 Height Regulations. The purpose of height regulations is to control the height of structures, to provide for air and light in and around
buildings, and to provide for fire protection. Maximum height regulations established by this section are set forth in [section 118-20] Table 20 -
Area and Height Regulations.
20.3.1 These height regulations shall not apply to belfries, chimneys, church spires, conveyors, cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire
towers, storage towers, flag poles, monuments, ornamental towers or spires, cranes or construction equipment, smoke stacks, stage towers and
scenery lofts, tanks, water towers, ham radio and television antennas, microwave relay towers, radio and television transmission towers,
electric or telephone poles.
The above unrestricted heights may be subject to height limitations and permits required by the Federal Aviation Administration and
Federal Communications Commission.
20.3.2 For all R-Districts, a seven and one-half (7.5) foot minimum interior side yard shall be required for both main and detached accessory
buildings/structures with three (3) or more stories.
20.3.3 Reserved.
20.3.4 Structures combining both commercial uses and dwelling units when located in B Districts shall observe the height limit of that
district.
Table 20
(Refer to Exceptions enumerated in Article 20 [section 118-20])
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 379/444
* Note: 1 - If Single-Family Dwelling; 2 - If Single/Multi-Family Dwelling; 3 - Refer to sections 20.2.7 & 20.3.2 for exceptions; 4 - None if Hotel/Motel;
5 - None if office; 6 - Refer to section 20.2.6 for exception.
SETBACKS
The following illustrations are examples of the minimum setback requirements for residential construction as required by the city's Zoning Ordinance,
Article 20 [section 118-20]. Plats of record, prior to enactment of the Zoning Ordinance or prior to annexation that show greater or lesser setbacks shall
govern.
Unattached accessory use buildings must have a minimum 5' rear and side yard setback. Setbacks for outside corner lots shall be 15', as shown above.
Exception: lots less than 75' in width, only 20% of the width of the lot need be provided for each side yard.
THIS ILLUSTRATION IS INTENDED AS A GUIDE ONLY. CHECK WITH THE BUILDING DEPARTMENT FOR YOUR SPECIFIC
REQUIRMENTS, i.e., KEY ALLEGRO, HARBOR OAKS, ETC.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 20, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-21. Parking regulations.
21.1 Off-Street Parking.
21.1.1 Parking Requirements By Use. In all districts there shall be provided at the time a building or structure is erected or structurally
altered or for a change in occupancy, as classified in the International Building Code, off-street parking spaces are required in accordance with
the following requirements:
USE REQUIREMENT
Adult Entertainment 1 per 200 square feet
Agricultural Sales and Service 1 per 250 square feet
Airport, Landing Strip, Helipad 1 per tie-down, plus 1 per hangar area
Arena, Stadium or Auditorium 1 per 4 seats or bench space
Assisted Living Facility 1 per 4 beds
Auto Paint and Body Shop 1 per 250 square feet, plus 2 per bay
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 380/444
Auto Repair Shops 1 per 250 square feet
Bank, Savings and Loan 1 per 250 square feet, excluding storage,
employee break-room/restroom
Bar, Saloon, Lounge, Dance Hall 1 per 50 square feet - net area
Boarding or Lodging House 1 per sleeping room
Bowling Alley 5 per alley
Carwash .5 per bay, plus queuing as determined by the
Code Official, plus 1 per 250 square feet of
office space
Cemetery 1 per 200 square feet of administrative area
Civic Organization, private or public Greater of 1 per 200 sq. ft. or 1 for each 3 seats
Clinic/Hospital 1.5 per bed
Community Building/Recreation Field 1 per 100 square feet
Convenience Store, with or without Gas Sales 1 per 200 square feet
County Club/Golf Course 1 per 5 members plus 1 per 150 sq. ft. of floor
area
Flea Market 1 per 100 square feet
Gasoline Service Station 1 per 250 sq. ft. (excluding bays)
Government Office or Building 1 per 300 square feet
Hotel or Motel 1 per sleeping room, plus total of requirements
for associated commercial, restaurant, lounge,
etc.
House of Worship 1 per 4 seats or bench spaces; schools, gyms and
other public areas calculated separately
Laundry, Self-Service 1 per 250 square feet
Light Industrial, Mini-Storage, Assembly or
Manufacturing, Contractor Storage Yard
1.75 per 1,000 square feet plus needed parking
for commercial vehicles
Manufactured/Industrialized Home 2 per dwelling
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 381/444
Marinas 0.5 space per wet boat slip; 0.25 space per dry
boat storage
Mining, Excavation, Extraction Determined by the Code Official
Mortuary or Funeral Home 1 per 50 square feet
Multi-Family Dwelling - 2 or more bedrooms 2.0 per dwelling
Multi-Family Dwelling - efficiency & 1
bedroom
1.5 per dwelling
Nursing/Convalescent Home 1 per 4 beds
Office, Professional 1 per 300 square feet, excluding storage,
employee break-room/restroom
Park, Recreation Area, Indoor or Outdoor
Entertainment, Commercial Recreation and
Amusements
1 per 4 permanent seats or bench space, plus 1
per 200 square feet, plus 10 per field
Personal Mini-Storage 1 per 50 storage bays, plus 2 customer spaces
Personal Services 1 per 250 square feet, excluding storage,
employee break-room/restroom
Printing, Engraving, Newspaper Plant 1.75 per 1,000 square feet, plus parking for all
commercial vehicles
Production of Crops, Livestock, etc. Determined by the Code Official
Public Institution 1 per 250 square feet
Restaurant The greater of 1 per 100 square feet of service
area or 1 per 4 fixed seats, plus minimum of 0.5
per staff
Restaurant, Drive-in/Carry-out Number of stalls plus 1 per 100 square feet;
determined by Code Official for carry-out
Retail, General 1 per 250 square feet of sales/display area
Riding Stable 1 per 300 square feet of stable space
School, College The greater of 1 per 6 auditorium seats or 8 per
classroom
School, Elementary The greater of 1 per 10 auditorium seats or 1 per
classroom
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 382/444
School, Secondary The greater of 1 per 8 auditorium seats or 6 per
classroom
Shoe or Small Appliance Repair 1 per 250 square feet
Single-Family Dwelling 2 per dwelling
Studio, Professional 1 per 250 square feet
Theater, indoor/drive-in 1 per 4 seats for indoor; 1 per stall plus 1 per 200
sq. ft. of concession/office area for drive-in.
Townhouse 2 per dwelling
Trade Shop; Carpentry, Painting or Plumbing 1.75 per 1,000 square feet of net floor area plus
parking for all commercial vehicles
Two-Family dwelling 2 per dwelling
Utilities, All Determined by Code Official
Vehicle Sales (including Boats and RVs) 1 per 250 square feet of building area
Veterinarian/Animal Hospital 1 per 250 square feet
Wholesale Accessory to Retail Determined by code official
21.1.2 Rules for Computing Number of Parking Spaces. In computing the number of parking spaces required, the following rules shall
govern.
a. "Floor area" shall mean the gross floor area of the entire building housing the specific use unless otherwise provided for herein.
b. Where fractional spaces result, the parking spaces required shall be construed to be the nearest whole number.
c. The parking space requirement for a use not specifically mentioned herein shall be the same as required for a use of similar nature as
determined by the code official.
d. Whenever a building or use constructed or established after the effective date of this ordinance is changed or enlarged in floor area,
number of employees, number of dwelling units, seating capacity or otherwise, to create a need for an increase of 10 percent or more in
the number of existing parking spaces, such spaces shall be provided on the basis of the enlargement or change.
e. Whenever a building or use existing prior to the effective date of this ordinance is enlarged to the extent of 50 percent or more in
floor area or in the area used, said building or use shall then and thereafter comply with the parking requirements set forth herein.
f. The parking requirements in this article do not limit special requirements which may be imposed in connection with Special Permits
or Planned Unit Developments.
g. In the case of known mixed uses, the parking spaces required shall equal the sum of requirements for the various uses computed
separately.
h. In the case of unknown mixed uses, the parking spaces shall be based on a ratio of 1 space per 220 square feet of gross floor area.
i. All non-residential uses within the B-2 district shall be exempt from these requirements, except that when off-street parking is
furnished, it shall conform to these standards.
21.2 Parking Location and Joint Use.
1. All parking spaces required herein shall be located on the same lot with the building or use served, except that where an increase in the
number of spaces is required by a change or enlargement of use or where such spaces are provided collectively or used jointly by two or more
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 383/444
buildings or establishments, the required spaces may be located and maintained not to exceed 400 feet from the building served and within the
same or less-restrictive zoning district.
2. Up to 50 percent of the parking spaces required for public auditoriums and up to 100 percent of the parking spaces required for a church
auditorium may be provided and used jointly by banks, offices, retail stores, repair shops, service establishments and similar uses not normally
open, used or operated during the same hours as the auditorium or church; provided, however, that a written agreement assuring retention for
such purpose shall be properly drawn and executed by the parties concerned, approved as to form by the City Attorney, and filed with the
application for a building permit, or if a building permit is not required, then filed with the permit department.
21.3 Parking Design Standards.
1. An off-street parking space (stall) is a paved surface not in a street or alley and having the following dimensions:
* Head-in parking spaces shall be no less than 9 feet wide by 18 feet long.
* Parallel parking spaces shall be no less than 8 feet wide by 22 feet long.
2. Except where on-site parking is not required, no vehicle shall be allowed to back onto any public street or sidewalk to leave any parking
space when such space serves a multi-family, commercial or industrial use. Furthermore, no vehicle shall be allowed to back onto any public
collector or arterial street to leave a parking space, except from those platted residential lots in existence prior to January 1, 2008.
3. Access drives to parking facilities shall be provided as follows;
* Private driveways shall be no less than 9 feet wide.
* Commercial driveways shall be no less than 12 feet wide for one-way enter/exit and 24 feet wide for two-way enter/exit.
4. Minimum parking module widths shall be in accordance with the following chart:
PARKING LAYOUT
MINIMUM REQUIRED PARKING LOT DIMENSIONS
5. All parking spaces shall be legibly marked on the pavement.
6. A parking lot shall be designed to physically prevent any portion of a vehicle from encroaching into or overhanging any public or private
property line by means of a permanently installed curb, wall, wheel stops or other such physical barrier.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 384/444
7. Where sidewalks occur in parking facilities, parked vehicles shall not overhang or extend over the sidewalk.
8. Where unusual conditions exist, the code official shall determine the appropriate aisle width necessary.
21.4 Paving Standards for Driveways and Parking Spaces. All access driveways and parking areas required herein shall be paved with material
meeting the following criteria:
21.4.1 Private driveways and required parking areas for one- and two-family dwellings shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt or with
a non-paved all weather surface provided:
* The total length of the driveway exceeds 100 feet as measured from the property line to the point of ending (does not include floor
area of a building, garage or carport); and
* The driveway apron, in either case, shall be paved with concrete or asphalt from it's juncture with the street surface and extending to
the property line of real property or for a distance of 25 feet, whichever is less. A culvert, new or existing, must be paved over. This
provision does not apply if there is no paved street.
* Repair work to existing driveways/parking areas may be allowed to be repaired or re-surfaced with like material existing at the time
of repair or re-surface.
NOTE: All-weather surface means a surface paved with a stable material, specifically crushed limestone, crushed concrete, recycled
asphalt or other documented stable material. Material not meeting these standards shall be engineered.
21.4.2 All development sites, other than one- and two-family dwellings, shall have access driveways and parking areas surfaced with either
concrete or asphalt. Exceptions may be as follows:
* Additional parking stalls required under Section 21.1.2 of this ordinance [section 118-21, subsection 21.1.2 of this Code] may be
exempt from paving standards if conditions fall below the minimum criteria as set forth therein. This exemption applies only for sites that
have existing non-paved surfaces.
* Other documented/engineered material may be allowed as long as such material does not create an unstable surface. In all cases, a
driveway/access drive apron shall be paved with concrete or asphalt from it's juncture with the street surface and extending to the property
line of real property. This provision does not apply if there is no paved street.
* Repair work to driveways, access ways and parking stalls at existing sites may be allowed to be re-surfaced with like material
existing at the time of repair.
21.4.3 Temporary roads and access ways to development sites, oil field work, well drilling, etc., shall meet Sec. 42-123, Article V, Chapter
42, Rockport Code of Ordinances.
21.5 Loading Space. Every building or part thereof erected or occupied for retail business, service, manufacturing, storage, warehousing, hotel,
mortuary, or any other use similarly involving the receipt or distribution by vehicles of materials or merchandise, shall provide and maintain on the
same premises loading space in accordance with the following requirements, unless determined otherwise by the code official.
1. Commercial districts: one loading space for the first 5,000 to 15,000 square feet of floor area in the building and one additional loading
space for each additional 15,000 square feet or fraction thereof.
2. Industrial districts: one loading space for each 10,000 square feet or fraction thereof, of floor area in the building.
3. Each required loading space shall have a minimum size of 10 feet by 25 feet.
21.6 Maintenance of Off-Street Parking and Loading Areas. All off-street parking and loading areas shall be permanently maintained in a safe,
sound, usable condition. All associated driveways, curbs and gutters shall be kept in good repair.
21.7 Accessibility. Provisions for accessible parking shall be in accordance with accessibility standards in the International Building Code.
Accessible parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with ICC A117.1.
21.8 Unoccupied RV Units. Private unoccupied recreational vehicles (RV's), pick-up campers or wheeled campers may be located on occupied
private property in any zoning district. Guests of a property owner may occupy an RV unit if said unit is owned by guests of the property owner
with the restriction that a limit of 14 days at one location will be permitted, after which a 14 day vacancy is required before an RV unit can be
placed on a previously occupied location. Any unit left unattended during the hurricane season must be adequately tied down (see building code).
21.9 Landscape parking. The following provisions (see chart below) for reduced parking pursuant to an accepted tree/landscape plan by the City
of Rockport Tree & Landscape Committee may be allowed as determined by the code official. Reductions are applied to minimum parking only
and may be adjusted as necessary:
Category Classification Standards
Residential A 15% reduction allowed for other than one- and
two-family dwellings, manufactured and
industrialized housing or townhouses.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 385/444
Institutional/Public Use No reduction allowed.
Recreation, Public & Private A 10% reduction allowed for private facilities
only.
Retail/Commercial A 20% reduction allowed for other than
assembly and restaurant occupancies.
Industrial A 30% reduction allowed for non-public
industries.
Agricultural To be determined by the tree/code official
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 21, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-22. Accessory use regulations.
22.1 Accessory Use and Building Regulated. It is the purpose of this section to permit certain necessary accessory or incidental uses along with
the primary use of a building or premises, thus permitting the full enjoyment of such primary use, but at the same time preventing such incidental
uses from becoming objectionable where they would be a detriment to the neighborhood or area. Accessory uses may be used for, but are not
limited to:
22.1.1 In R-1, R-2, R-2M, and R-2B Districts:
1. Private garages, servants/guest quarters. Servants and guest quarters shall not be for rent; shall not exceed 50% of the main residence
in size; and shall not exceed one (1) unit per residential lot (see 24.2.3 in Article 24 for additional restrictions).
2. Swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, tennis courts, permanent barbecue grills, ornamental gates and structures, storage/utility sheds,
wells/well houses, gazebos, patios, etc. (refer to definition of accessory building in Article 3).
3. Shipping containers (see Article 24).
4. Vegetable and flower gardens, non-commercial greenhouses.
5. Private recreation facilities (See Article 24).
6. Fences (See Section 22.2 of this article).
7. Home Occupations (see Article 24).
Building permits and certificates of occupancy may be required as prescribed herein or in the Building Code.
22.1.2 In R-3, R-4, and R-5 Districts:
1. Any use as listed above in 22.1.1
2. Designated area for garbage and trash containers.
22.1.3 In R-6 and R-7 Districts:
1. Any use as listed above in 22.1.2
2. Subordinate uses for hotels, motels, and bed and breakfast establishments. Such facilities shall include, but not be limited to, retail
shops, restaurants, clubs and lounges, and shall be wholly or partially within the primary structure and not built or used as a detached
structure or facility.
3. Piers, boat docks and related marine facilities may be detached from the main structure and are to be used only by the occupants and
their guests.
22.1.4 In B-1, B-2, I-1 and I-2 Districts:
1. Any use as listed in 22.1.3, except that 1) child care centers and nurseries shall not be located in an I district, and 2) shipping
containers as addressed in Section 24.2.3 [section 118-24, subsection 24.2.3].
2. Accessory use, which is deemed subordinate to the main use.
3. Multiple structures or usages in conjunction with shopping centers.
22.1.5 Temporary buildings, industrialized buildings or portable buildings used for construction offices are permitted in any district as
accessory buildings only during the course of construction.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 386/444
22.1.6(a) Any accessory building or structure (except concrete flatwork or wooden decking) shall have a minimum five (5) foot rear and side
yard setback from property lines and shall not be built over an easement. Front yard and side street yard setbacks must be observed. A
minimum open space of ten (10) feet shall be established between all unattached buildings.
(b) An accessory building or structure exempt from permit requirement under either Chapter 1 of the International Residential Code or
Chapter 1 of the International Building Code is exempt from both rear and side yard setbacks and the 10 foot minimum separation
between buildings. However, such accessory buildings or structures are not exempt from front yard and side street yard setbacks. The 10
foot minimum separation between buildings in front and side street yards shall be observed.
(c) No accessory building or structure may be built on or over a recorded easement.
(d) An accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the principal building or erected detached from the principal building.
Should the accessory building be connected therewith by a breezeway or similar structure to the principal building, this shall not lessen
the 10 foot separation requirement unless:
* The accessory building is attached to and made structurally a part of the principal building, and
* The accessory building shares a common wall with the principal building, and
* The accessory building complies with this ordinance and the building code applicable for such structures.
22.1.7 Reserved.
22.1.8 In all R-districts, such usages as yard sales, garage sales, lemonade stands and neighborhood car washes are permitted not more than
three (3) times per year per location.
22.1.9 Reserved.
22.2 Fence Regulations. The purpose of these regulations is to permit the use of fences upon real property subject to the following:
i Fences shall consist of material and design that is common to the built environment for fences and shall be limited to chain link, wire
mesh, wood, masonry, stone, manufactured composite materials designed for exterior fencing, metal or combinations of same. Some industry
trade names may include Manufactured Vinyl Fencing, Cable Rail Fencing, Trex, Timbertech, Evergrain or equal.
ii No fence shall consist of material and design that is uncommon to the built environment for fences including stacked fire wood, hay bales,
scrap material, glass containers, cans, barricade material, tape, metal panels and any kind of sheathing material.
iii Solid fences shall only be constructed of wood lumber (not wood/plastic composite or wood structural panel as defined by the building
code), stone or masonry or combinations of same.
iv Maintenance of all fences shall be the responsibility of the respective property owner and/or occupant.
22.2.1 When annexed rural or farm land exists, barbed wire fences may be permitted.
22.2.2 Except, as otherwise allowed in this subsection, fences in R-1 through R-7 districts shall not exceed six (6) feet in height. Fences
adjacent to city parks or public space shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Fences on a property adjacent to business or industrial districts
shall not exceed the maximums allowed for the adjacent district, whichever is higher. For the purpose in this subsection, when a street right-ofway
divides two districts, it is considered to be a separation between the districts, and a property on one side of the street is not considered
adjacent to the district on the other.
22.2.3 Except, as otherwise allowed in this subsection, fences in B districts shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Fences on a property
adjacent to industrial districts shall not exceed the maximum allowed for the adjacent district, whichever is higher. For the purpose in this
subsection, when a street right-of-way divides two districts, it is considered to be a separation between the districts, and a property on one side
of the street is not considered adjacent to the district on the other.
22.2.4 Fences in I districts shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height. For the purpose in this subsection, when a street right-of-way divides two
districts, it is considered to be a separation between the districts, and a property on one side of the street is not considered adjacent to the
district on the other.
22.2.5 The zoning administrator may approve special enhancements (arches) to gates or other openings within a fence.
22.2.6 Easements may be fenced as long as access is provided either through gates or removable fence sections. Replacement, removal or
maintenance of fencing is the responsibility of the property owner.
22.2.7 Fence heights are measured by the following methods:
1. Fences erected on the ground are to be measured from the top of grade or average ground level to the top of fence.
2. Fences erected on raised footings (curbing) are to be measured from the top of footing, if footings are no higher than six (6) inches
above grade, to top of fence.
3. Fences erected on bulkheads, retaining walls, decks, porches, patios or other such raised surfaces, are to be measured from the top of
such surface to the top of fence.
4. For architectural purposes, posts, pillars or supporting columns for fences may be extended above the fence level an additional
twelve (12) inches above the fence.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 387/444
5. Wood board fences constructed with a six (6) inch kick-board along the bottom will be allowed to extend the fence height to six (6)
feet - six (6) inches.
22.2.8 On any corner lot on which a front or side yard is required, no fence, wall, structure or vegetation used as a fence shall be permitted
or maintained higher than three (3) feet above the level of the center of the roadway within a vision triangle formed by a straight line from the
points of the two intersecting right-of-way lines twenty (20) feet back from their common intersection. Chain link fence are allowed within this
triangle sight area. This restriction shall not apply to permanent structures authorized by other sections of this ordinance, the building code or
by other local, state or federal laws. (Refer to Chapter 106, Rockport Code of Ordinances for landscaping within the vision triangle.)
22.3 Buffering and Screening Regulations. Buffering and screening requirements shall be in accordance with the City of Rockport Tree &
Landscape Regulations.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 22, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1571,  1, 5-22-12)
Sec. 118-23. Conditional use permit.
23.1 General. A Conditional-Use Permit (CUP) shall be obtained for certain uses, which would become harmonious or compatible with
neighboring uses through the application and maintenance of qualifying conditions and located in specific locations within a zone, but shall not be
allowed under the general conditions of the zone as stated in this Code. The granting of a CUP has no effect on the uses permitted as of right and
does not waive the regulations of the underlying zoning district. The CUP requirement for a use in a district does not constitute an authorization or
an assurance that the use will be permitted. Uses requiring a CUP are listed within a zoning district and in subsection 23.10 of this article. Uses not
listed within a zoning district that may be eligible for a CUP shall be administered through this article.
23.2 Applications. All CUP applications shall be submitted to the code official on a form provided by the city consistent with the provisions
herein. All applications shall be accompanied by maps, drawings, statements or other documents in support of the request. An application fee shall
be collected at the time of submittal. Said fee shall be: One Hundred Dollars and no cents ($100.00) for the first acre of land or fraction thereof,
plus Ten Dollars and no cents ($10.00) per acre or fraction thereof over the first acre.
23.3 Public Hearing. Prior to the approval, approval with conditions or denial of a CUP, public hearings shall be held in accordance with the
provisions of Article 26 of this ordinance [section 118-26 of this Code]. Upon the completion of said proceedings, the Commission shall render a
recommendation(s) to the City Council. Decisions of the City Council shall be final.
23.4 Review Criteria. An application for a CUP shall be permitted to be approved, approved with conditions or denied. Each application for a
CUP shall be submitted with enough data and information to be consistent with the criteria listed below:
1. That such use is necessary or desirable and provides a service or facility that contributes to the general well-being of the surrounding area.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 388/444
2. That such use shall not adversely affect adjacent properties.
3. That such use is compatible with the existing or allowable uses of adjacent properties.
4. That such use can demonstrate that adequate public facilities, including roads, drainage, potable water and sanitary sewer, and police and
fire protection exist or will exist to serve the requested use at the time such facilities are needed.
5. That such use can demonstrate adequate provision for maintenance of the use in question along with any associated structures.
6. That such use has minimized, to the degree possible, adverse effects on the natural environment.
7. That such use will not create undue traffic congestion.
8. That such use will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare.
9. That such use conforms to all applicable provisions of this Code.
10. That such use is consistent with all applicable provisions of the comprehensive plan.
23.5 Expiration. A CUP shall be considered exercised when the use has been established. When such CUP is not exercised, or is abandoned, or is
discontinued for a period of 1 year from the date of granting thereof, it shall be considered expired and shall not be reestablished unless authorized
by the City Council with recommendation(s) from the Planning & Zoning Commission.
23.6 Annual Review. Subsequent to the issuance of a CUP, a review shall be conducted annually by the Code Official to determine that the terms
of the CUP are being met.
23.7 Revocation. A CUP shall be revoked when the applicant fails to comp1y with conditions imposed by the permit. Said CUP shall not be
reestablished unless authorized by the City Council with recommendation(s) from the Planning & Zoning Commission.
23.8 Existing Conditional-Use Permit. Any amendment sought to an existing CUP shall be considered as a new application and shall comply
with this article.
23.9 Existing Special Permit. Any amendment sought to an existing Special Permit existing prior to (date of amending ordinance inserted here),
shall be considered as a new application and shall comply with this article as a CUP. Such amendment(s) may not preclude or nullify the conditions
to any Special Permit previously issued unless requested by the applicant. Annual review shall be in accordance with subsection 23.6.
23.10 Specific uses requiring a CUP. The following listed uses will require a CUP approval prior to issuance of a building permit. These uses are
also listed within their respective zoning district.
1. Permanent or long term (more than 30 days) public entertainment facilities or uses. Such facilities or uses shall include, but not be limited
to, amusement parks, carnivals, animal shows, marine life shows, dance/theatrical productions or natatoriums. This provision is listed in a B-1
district).
2. Private, child nurseries or pre-kindergarten schools in R-1 through R-7 districts.
3. Retail shops, restaurants, clubs and lounges in R-6 and R-7 districts when not built within a hotel or office building.
4. Meat, fish or shellfish processing plant in a B-1 district.
5. Penal institutions and detention centers in R-7 districts only. A listed use out-right in a B-1 district.
6. Bed and Breakfast accommodations in R-1 through R-3 districts.
7. The keeping and raising of farm animals in all districts pursuant to the city's animal control ordinance. Agricultural land annexed into the
city as R-1 zoning is exempt where such uses are existing uses.
8. Radio, television or communications tower in an R-7 district, provided Federal Communications Commission and Federal Aviation
Administration permit requirements are met (refer to Article 24 [section 118-24] for Special Conditions).
9. Outdoor welding operations when located in a B district only.
10. Recreational Vehicle/Manufactured Housing Parks in any district when complying with recreational vehicle/manufactured housing park
standards addressed in Article 24 of this ordinance [section 118-24 of this Code].
11. Adult entertainment in B and I districts.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 23, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1601,  1, 3-26-13)
Sec. 118-24. Special conditions.
24.1 General. The following sections describe special conditions under which certain uses are permitted in a zoning district when reference is
made to one or more of said sections in the Ordinance. A building permit or certificate of occupancy shall not be issued for any permitted use with
"Special Conditions" until all of the required conditions have been met.
24.2 Special Conditions By Use.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 389/444
24.2.1 Adult Entertainment Uses. The following special conditions and regulations shall apply for adult entertainment uses (see definitions
in Article 3 of this ordinance) without regard to whether the adult entertainment use is a primary or accessory use.
1. An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within 1,500 feet of the district boundary line of any residential or
PUD zoning district.
2. An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within 1,500 feet of any other adult entertainment use, bar, pool hall,
liquor store or any other establishment which sells or serves alcoholic beverages.
3. An adult entertainment use shall not be established or expanded within 1,500 feet of the property line of a church, school, or public
park.
4. Because adult entertainment uses generally have unusual nuisance characteristics which can be incompatible and injurious to other
commercial or residential uses and which may significantly diminish or impair area property values and impede the normal and orderly
development of surrounding areas, a Conditional Use Permit (CUP) shall be required when an adult entertainment use is pending (refer to
Article 23 [section 118-23]). In making their decisions, both the Planning & Zoning Commission and the City Council shall determine the
overall impact such developments will have on the community.
24.2.2 Swimming pool. A pool may be located anywhere on a premise except in the required front yard (see subsection 24.2.4 below
regarding private and semi-private facilities; and Article VIII, Chapter 22, Rockport Code of Ordinances for swimming pool fencing and
standards).
24.2.3 Accessory Building. An accessory building may be erected as an integral part of the principal building or erected detached from the
principal building. Accessory buildings shall only be erected on the same lot as the main structure and shall maintain a minimum open space of
ten (10) feet between all other buildings. Separate utilities for accessory buildings shall be provided from those utility services serving the
main structure (see Article 23, Sec. 23.2.17 [section 118-23, subsection 23.2.17]). Accessory buildings may be constructed to coincide with the
construction of the main structure but in no case shall they be constructed without a main structure. Such accessory buildings shall conform to
all yard, open space and off-street parking requirements addressed herein.
Pre-constructed buildings, portable structures, prefabricated buildings, and similar buildings, structures and containers shall not be used
for accessory buildings unless approved by the State of Texas under the Industrialized Housing and Building Act. Structures built on site
and available for all construction inspections are not included in this requirement. Shipping containers, as defined herein, shall only be
used as accessory storage structures in B and I zones. No more than two shipping containers shall be permitted except by Special Permit.
Containers shall not be stacked.
24.2.4 Private/Semi-Private Recreation Facilities. Private/semi-private recreation facilities in residential districts shall be limited to such
uses as swimming pools, open game fields, basketball, shuffleboard, racquet ball, croquet, tennis courts and meeting or locker rooms. Private
recreation facilities shall be no closer than twenty (20) feet of any street right-of-way or within ten (10) feet of any abutting property line.
Activity areas shall have a screening fence from abutting properties. Dispensing of food and beverages shall be permitted on the premises only
for the benefit of users of the recreation facility and not for the general public.
24.2.5 Reserved.
24.2.6 Reserved.
24.2.7 Refer to other City Codes and Ordinances which may relate to or affect a permitted use and any accessory use.
24.2.8 Refer to Code of Ordinances for oil/gas well drilling.
24.2.9 Refer to State Law regarding Cemetery and Cemetery Operations.
24.2.10 Regulation of Home Occupations.
24.2.10.1 The accessory use of a home occupation is allowed in all zoning districts, except I Districts, as regulated by this section. No
person shall conduct a home occupation in a non-residential zoning district without first making application for and receiving approval by
the Building Official for a Certificate of Occupancy (C of O) required by Article 27 of the Rockport Zoning Ordinance [section 118-27 of
this Code]. Should a permitted home occupation cease, a new application and C of O shall be required for any new activity.
24.2.10.2 A home occupation or activity, or any occupant's actions in the residence or on the premises, shall:
24.2.10.2.1 Not have exterior or interior signage to advertise said occupation and there shall be no illumination or other devices of
attraction. Home occupations in non-residential zoning districts may have signs as regulated by Chapter 6 Advertising, Rockport
Code of Ordinances;
24.2.10.2.2 Not employ nor openly subcontract with any person other than the occupants of the residence;
24.2.10.2.3 Not conduct such occupation or activity where any routine outdoor activity related to the occupation or activity shall
be visible from neighboring property.
24.2.10.2.4 Not conduct any retail sales from the premises in conjunction with such home occupation. Orders previously made by
telecommunications or as a sales party may be filled on the premises;
24.2.10.2.5 Not have exterior storage of material, equipment and/or supplies used in conjunction with such occupation or activity;
24.2.10.2.6 Not permit excessive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor or heat outside the confines of the property lines.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 390/444
24.2.10.2.7 Not require any specific additional on-site parking which would be in excess of that which is required for the
residence (see Article 21 for parking requirements);
24.2.10.2.8 Not generate any increase traffic flow in greater volumes than normally associated with a residential neighborhood; or
24.2.10.2.9 Not allow the following specific activities: mechanic (auto, boat or small engine repair), machinist, manufacturing
operations, welding shops, physical or medical treatment of persons or animals, contractor's shops or yards (electrical, plumbing and
HVAC shops), and personal service operations (beauty shops, barber shops).
24.2.10.3 Should the Building Official find that an occupant is in violation of this section notice shall be given to the occupant stating
the violation. The occupant shall immediately come into compliance with the home occupation requirements as outlined above or cease
and desist the occupation activity within 10 days that notice is given.
24.2.10.4 Should an occupation or activity pre-existing within a newly annexed territory not comply with the provision of this section,
then such occupation or activity shall be deemed as non-conforming and shall therefore be regulated pursuant to Article 25 [section 118-
25] of this document.
24.2.10.5 It shall be unlawful for a person to have or allow a home occupation in a non-residential district to be in violation of 24.2.10
of this article [section].
24.2.11 Regulation of Industrialized Housing. Single-family or duplex industrialized housing must have all local permits and licenses that
are applicable to other single-family or duplex dwellings. Industrialized housing and buildings must meet or exceed the requirements of
Chapter 1202. "Industrialized Housing and Buildings" of the Texas Occupations Code. In addition, single-family or duplex industrialized
housing is considered real property and must:
24.2.11.1 Have a value equal to or greater than the median taxable value for each single-family or duplex dwelling located within 500
feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located, as determined by the most recent certified tax appraisal roll
for each county in which the properties are located;
24.2.11.2 Have exterior siding, roofing, roof pitch, foundation fascia, and fenestration compatible with the single-family or duplex
dwellings located within 500 feet of the lot on which the industrialized housing is proposed to be located;
24.2.11.3 Comply with municipal aesthetic standards, building setbacks, side and rear yard offsets, subdivision control, architectural
landscaping, square footage, and other site requirements applicable to single-family or duplex dwellings; and
24.2.11.4 Be securely fixed to a permanent foundation.
24.2.11.5 For the purpose of subsection 24.2.11.1., "value" means the taxable value of the industrialized housing and the lot after
installation of the housing,
24.2.11.6 Except as provided by subsection 24.2.11.1., a municipality may not adopt a regulation that is more restrictive for
industrialized housing than that required for a new single-family or duplex dwelling constructed on-site.
24.2.11.7 This section does not limit the authority of a municipality to adopt regulations to protect historic properties or historic
districts nor does it affect deed restrictions.
24.2.12 Communication/Cell Towers. Communication/Cell Towers, by CUP. In addition to CUP requirements, the following conditions
shall apply to a Communication/Cell Tower and may be in addition to any other conditions as may be applicable:
24.2.12.1 Tower shall not exceed 150 feet in height measured at ground level. Antennas placed on buildings or other independent
support structure shall not exceed this height requirement;
24.2.12.2 Tower shall not have guy-wires for bracing. Preferable tower shall be of the monopole type or three legged truss frame type;
24.2.12.3 Tower may be incorporated/camouflaged into other structures (i.e.: water towers, buildings, etc.) as approved;
24.2.12.4 Roof mounted antenna structure shall be built of non-combustible material;
24.2.12.5 Accessory building for tower shall be built of non-combustible material;
24.2.12.6 Tower site shall be fenced and landscaped as required;
24.2.12.7 Tower shall not be illuminated except as required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other applicable federal or
state agency; or
24.2.12.8 Tower shall not be allowed within the following locations:
(a) Eastward of Church Street from Third Street northward to Texas Business Highway 35.
(b) Within 1,000 feet of the waters of Aransas Bay or Little Bay;
(c) Within 500 feet from any school, public park and areas of organized outdoor activities for children; or
(d) Within 200 feet from the nearest residential (single, duplex or multi-family) zoning district boundary as defined by the city's
Zoning Ordinance.
24.2.12.9 The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to towers used exclusively by governmental entities.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 391/444
24.2.12.10 In the event the use of any Wireless Communication system, which would include any antenna support structure, has been
discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the antenna support structure shall be deemed to be abandoned.
Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the Building Official who shall have the right to request documentation
and/or affidavits from the antenna support structure owner/operator of the antenna support structure shall remove the antenna support
structure within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Building Official notifying the owner/operator of such abandonment. If such
antenna support structure is not removed within said ninety days, the Building Official may cause such antenna support structure to be
removed at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of an antenna support structure, this provision shall not become effective
until all users cease using the antenna support structure.
24.2.13 Regulation of Recreational Vehicle/Manufactured Housing Parks.
1. General Provisions. The following general provisions are required for the development or the expansion of RV/Manufactured
Housing Parks within the R-1 up through and including the R-7 zoning districts.
2. Mobile Homes, as defined, are prohibited within RV/Manufactured Housing Parks inside the city limits of the City of Rockport
unless such mobile home existed prior to annexation. Replacement of an existing mobile home shall be with a HUD-Code Manufactured
Home. Replacement of an existing HUD-Code Manufactured Home shall be with a HUD-Code Manufactured Home of equal size, but not
less than 320 square feet, or larger, and be a newer model.*
* NOTE: Newer model is defined as a manufactured home with a manufactured date being not more than ten (10) years prior to the
calendar year it is to be placed on the property.
3. Upon application, the installation of a Recreational Vehicle/Manufactured Home Park shall be permitted as determined appropriate
by the City through a conditional-use permit (CUP), including a Planned Unit Development (PUD) that may contain a RV/Manufactured
Home Park. An application to install a HUD CODE Manufactured Home for use and occupancy as a residential dwelling is deemed
approved and granted unless the City denies the application in writing within forty-five (45) days from receipt of the application setting
forth the reason.
4. This section shall not affect the applicability of any deed restriction that is otherwise valid.
5. Specific Provisions. In addition to CUP approval, land used as a RV/Manufactured Home Park shall be developed according to the
following criteria.
6. The above described park may include Manufactured Homes, RV's/Travel Trailers and Campgrounds or any combination thereof.
Other uses, in addition to the uses described herein, shall be conditioned or amended, as the case may be, by Special Permit.
7. Parks containing a combination of Manufactured Homes, RV's/Travel Trailers or Campgrounds must designate separate areas for
each classification. No mixture of Manufactured Homes, RV's/Travel Trailers, campgrounds or other approved uses is permitted in any
designated area (Density control).
8. The park area shall consist of at least four (4) acres in size. The number and location of external access drives shall be approved by
the Zoning Administrator and the Director of Public Works.
9. Scaled plans and specifications showing details of the proposed park layout shall be submitted and reviewed by city staff prior to any
zoning approval and/or building permit activity. Future additions to the park shall be processed in the same manner as an original
proposal.
10. There shall be no minimum lot/space area except that each RV/Manufactured Housing unit shall be located on each space so that
there is at least twenty (20) feet unobstructed clearance between units, side-to-side and end-to-end and ten (10) feet unobstructed
clearance between units and adjacent permanent structures or lots. No unit shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any internal road and no
closer than twenty (20) feet from any external access road.
11. Manufactured Housing and RV's/Travel Trailers located in the park shall be connected to city water and wastewater systems if
available.
12. Interior access drives shall be maintained with a hard surface, with approved drainage and be of sufficient width in each area to
conform with the type of unit to be assigned to the area, as determined by the Zoning Administrator. Parking on interior access drives
shall be permitted only if sufficient clearance exists for one (1) car passage in addition to parking.
13. A service building to provide necessary sanitation and laundry facilities shall be provided. Such building(s) shall be conveniently
located and shall provide fixtures as required by the Plumbing Code.
14. The park shall conform to all other City of Rockport regulations and codes relating to planning and zoning, building, gas,
mechanical, plumbing, electrical installations and tie-downs for windstorm compliance. All manufactured housing units unoccupied
during hurricane season (June 1 to November 30) must be tied down (see Building Code) or removed from the park. Lot spaces shall be
labeled with numbers to augment identification by 911 operations. Fire hydrants shall be required as specified by the Director of Public
Works and shall be included in the park layout plans submitted for approval.
15. Out-side lighting shall be in accordance with the city's Light Nuisance Ordinance.
16. Storage, collection and disposal of refuse shall be so conducted as to create no health hazard, rodent harborage, insect breeding
areas, accident or fire hazard or air pollution. Pets shall be leashed (Animal Control Ordinance).
17. The property owner/operator shall at all times operate the park in compliance with this ordinance and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean, sanitary and orderly condition at all times.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 392/444
18. There shall be at least one (1) recreation area which shall be accessible from all spaces. The site or sites of such recreation area or
areas shall total not less than eight percent (8%) of the gross site area of the park.
19. The park shall be screened from a public place or public right-of-way and adjacent occupied property by a solid screening fence in
accordance with subsection 22.2 of this ordinance. Planted vegetation may be allowed as an alternate screening device by the Tree and
Landscape Regulations in Chapter 106, Rockport Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 24, 4-9-96; Ord. No. 1716, 5-22-18)
Sec. 118-25. Non-conforming use regulations.
25.1 Non-Conforming Uses Regulated. The purpose of this section is to make the Ordinance more workable, legal and not impose unnecessary
hardships on individuals who have established certain uses before the enactment of the Zoning Ordinance. Certain privileges are accorded such
uses. It is the long range objective, however, that such uses will ultimately be eliminated by attrition or other means.
25.1.1 Non-Conforming Uses Established. The lawful use of land or a building existing at the time of passage of this Ordinance or any
amendment thereto may be continued, although such use does not conform to all the provisions of this Ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided. Non-conforming lots of record existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance and lots or parcels created as a result of
condemnation or involuntary sale by owner to a government entity with the power of eminent domain shall be exempt, unless indicated, from
the minimum lot area and width requirements provided they are developed in accordance with all minimum yard areas as required in Article
20 [section 118-20] of this document.
25.1.2 Non-Conforming Uses May be Changed. A non-conforming use of a building, structure or premises may be changed to another nonconforming
use of the same or of a higher classification provided no structural alterations are made in the building. If the use is changed to a
higher classification or to a conforming use, it cannot be changed back to the original non-conforming use. For the purposes of this paragraph,
the "same classification" means uses permitted in the same district; a "higher classification" means uses in a district with a prior listing (lower
density) in this Ordinance.
25.1.3 Discontinuance of a Non-Conforming Use. If a non-conforming use of a building or premises is discontinued, the use of such
building or premises then must conform to the use regulation of the District in which it is located.
25.1.4 Damage to Non-Conforming Use. No building or structure which has been damaged by any cause whatsoever to the extent of more
than sixty percent (60%) of the appraised value of the building immediately prior to the damage, shall be restored except in conformity with
the regulations of this ordinance, and all rights as a non-conforming use are terminated. If a building or structure is damaged by less than sixty
percent (60%) of appraised value, it may be repaired or reconstructed and used as before the time of damage, provided that such repairs or
reconstruction be substantially completed within six (6) months of the date of such damage.
25.1.5 Enlargement of Non-Conforming Use. A non-conforming use cannot be enlarged, extended or structurally altered unless changed to a
conforming use.
25.1.6 Existing Special Uses Not Non-Conforming. Existing uses of the types eligible for Special Permits under Article 23 shall be
conforming uses and shall receive a Special Permit for the existing use from the Zoning Administrator upon request. A Special Permit shall be
required for any enlargement or addition.
25.1.7 Intermittent and Illegal Uses. The occasional, intermittent, temporary or illegal use of land or buildings shall not be sufficient to
establish the existence of a non-conforming use and the existence of a non-conforming use on the part of a lot or tract shall not be construed to
establish a non-conforming use on the entire lot. Passage of this ordinance in no way legalizes uses existing at the time of its adoption.
25.1.8 Discontinuance of Non-Conforming Uses. Where a premise in an R District is used for open storage, such uses must be discontinued
and the stored material removed within one (1) year after the effective date of this Ordinance. Open storage in an R district existing beyond
one (1) year after the effective date of this ordinance shall be abated pursuant to Chapter 42, Rockport Code of Ordinances. Open storage
existing within newly annexed territory shall be deemed non-conforming and shall therefore be regulated pursuant to this article.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 25, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-26. Amendment of the ordinance.
26.1 Procedure. The City Council may from time to time, on petition, in form and content as prescribed by the City Council, or on its own
motion, amend, supplement, change, or modify by ordinance the boundaries of districts, or the regulations or restrictions herein established. Any
proposed amendment, supplement, change or modification shall first be submitted to the Commission. The Commission and City Council shall hold
a public hearing, either jointly or separately. The Commission shall then make a report and recommendation to the City Council. The City Council
shall not take action until it has received the report and recommendations from the Commission. Notice of required hearings shall be in accordance
with state law. If the Commission does not make its report within thirty (30) days, it shall be considered to have made a report approving the
proposed amendment, supplement, modification or change. Notice of such hearings shall be published in the official paper or a paper of general
circulation at least one time. Such hearing shall not be held earlier than fifteen (15) days from the date of publication of such notice.
26.2 Twenty Percent Rule. If a protest against such proposed amendment, supplement, change or modification shall be presented to the City
Secretary, duly signed and acknowledged by the owners of twenty percent or more, either of the area of lots or land immediately adjoining the same
extending 200 feet therefrom, such amendment, supplement, change or modification shall not become effective except by favorable vote of threefourths
of the members of the City Council.
26.3 Fees. Before any action shall be taken as provided in this article, the applicant for such action shall pay the fees prescribed in the Rockport
Zoning and Platting Fee Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 26, 4-9-96)
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 393/444
Sec. 118-27. Administrative procedures.
27.1 Administrative Official. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator to enforce the provisions of this ordinance and to refuse to issue any
permit for any building or for use of any premises which would violate any of the provisions of this ordinance.
27.2 Building Permits. No building may be undertaken without a building permit as required by the Building Code. Each application for a
building permit shall be accompanied by such information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance.
27.3 Certificate of Occupancy. Subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance, no change in the use or occupancy of land, nor any change of
use or occupancy in an existing building shall be made, nor shall any new building be occupied until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by
the Zoning Administrator or Building Official.
27.4 Notice of Violation. A written notice of violation shall be given to the owner and/or tenant of a property in violation. The notice shall require
abatement of the violation within ten (10) calendar days. The notice may be served by personal delivery, by mail, or by publication in a local
newspaper if other service cannot be made. The Zoning Administrator is authorized to grant one or more continuances upon written application
where satisfactory progress is being made to abate a violation.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 27, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-28. Penalty for violation.
28.1 Criminal. Any person, agent, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon
conviction shall be fined any sum up to $2,000.00. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense.
28.2 Civil. The city may also direct its attorney to bring a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the provisions of this
ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 28, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-29. Administrative liability.
No officer, agent or employee of the city shall be personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or
permitted in the discharge of his duties under this ordinance. Any suit brought against any officer, agent or employee of the city as a result of any act
required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under this ordinance shall be defended by the city attorney until the final determination of the
proceedings.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 29, 4-9-96)
Sec. 118-30. Validity.
30.1 Severability Clause. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or provision of this ordinance is or any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance.
30.2 Conflict. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict.
30.3 Effective Date. This Ordinance shall become effective on the 13th day of April, 1996, and shall be published one time in an official
newspaper of the City of Rockport, Texas.
(Ord. No. 1027, art. 30, 4-9-96)
Secs. 118-31118-199. Reserved.
Articles II, III. Reserved.
Article IV. Zoning Board of Adjustment
Division 1. Board Established
Sec. 118-200. Purpose
The Zoning Board of Adjustment is hereby established whose role is to:
1. Provide equity for individuals who, through no fault of their own, would suffer injury if the Zoning Ordinance were strictly applied to their
unique situation;
2. Grant special exceptions when provided by the Zoning Ordinance;
3. Hear appeals to decisions of the administrative officials; and
4. Decide other matters delegated to them by the City Council.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-201. Members of the Board of Adjustment
a) Composition of Board. The Zoning Board of Adjustment shall consist of five members appointed by the City Council, two for a term of one year and
three for a term of two years, and thereafter for terms of two years. Any vacancies shall be filled immediately for the unexpired term by appointment by
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 394/444
the City Council.
b) Removal of Board Member. The City Council may remove a board member for cause on a written charge after a public hearing. The City Council
shall appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired term of any vacancy in compliance with state law.
c) Alternate Members. The City Council shall appoint two alternate members to the board of adjustment, for a term of two years, who shall serve in the
absence of one or more of the regular members when requested to do so by the mayor or city manager as the case may be. An alternate member serves for
the same period as a regular member and is subject to removal in the same manner as a regular member. A vacancy among the alternate members is filled
in the same manner as a vacancy among the regular members.
d) Term Limits. No person shall be appointed to serve more than three (3) consecutive terms.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-202. Rules and Procedures of the Board.
a) Regular meetings are to be held on the first or third Tuesdays of the month, at 6:30 p.m. at Rockport City Hall when issues are to be presented to the
Board. The Board has the power to set other meetings. Meetings of the Board may also be held at the call of the chairman.
b) All meetings of the Board shall be open to the public. Compliance with the Open Meetings Act is mandatory. Open meetings notices must be posted
at least 72 hours prior to each meeting. The notices must clearly identify each topic of discussion. Emergency sessions must be real emergencies, and not
due simply to someone's poor planning or lack of preparation. If an emergency session is called, the notice must set out the reason for the emergency.
c) The Board shall select from its membership a chairman, a secretary and other officers it may deem necessary.
d) The secretary of the Board shall keep detailed records of all proceedings; set forth reasons for decisions, the vote of each member, the absence of any
member and any failure of a member to vote and to keep appropriate forms for persons to bring an appeal to the Board. The City Secretary shall act as the
secretary's agent for all record keeping.
e) The minutes and records shall be completed and filed immediately and are public records.
f) The Board shall hold a public hearing within forty-five (45) days on each application for a variance. A certified letter stating the time and place of the
hearing will be sent to each person or business entity which has brought an appeal. Copies of these notices, together with the return receipt card shall be
kept as a part of the record of proceedings in the case. Each person who attends a hearing, even as a member of the audience, will be asked to write his/her
name on a sign-in sheet. Each person who speaks before the Board also should be carefully identified.
g) The chairman or acting chairman may compel the attendance of witnesses. Guidance for conducting hearing may be obtained from the municipal
court.
h) The chairman or acting chairman may administer oaths to witnesses. To ensure due process and a fair hearing, witnesses should be required to testify
under oath. Adverse parties have the right to cross examine adverse witnesses and to examine and rebut all evidence.
i) The Board must decide each appeal with not more than twenty (20) business days following the close of the public hearing on a variance. The Board
may grant a variance as the variance was applied for or in modified form, or subject to conditions, or the application may be denied. A variance may be
revocable, may be granted for a limited time period, or may be granted subject to conditions as the Board may prescribe. The Board shall notify the
applicant of its decision.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-203. Appeals to the Board.
a) Appeals or variance from the decision of the administrative official may be taken by any person aggrieved by, or by an officer, department, board, or
bureau of the municipality affected by, any decision of the administrative official.
b) The appeal shall be made within 10 business days after the decision of the administrative official is made, by filing with the administrative official a
completed application for appeal and filing fee. Upon receipt of application and appropriate fees, the Director of Building & Development may request
additional information necessary to enable a complete analysis and evaluation of the variance request, and a determination as to the completion of the
application.
c) The official from whom the appeal application and fee is taken shall transmit to the Board all the papers constituting the record of the action that is
appealed within 10 business days.
d) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action. After the notice of appeal is filed, the officer from whom the appeal is taken
may certify to the Board that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In that case
proceedings shall not be stayed except by a restraining order which may be granted by the Board or by a court of record on application after notice to the
officer from whom the appeal is taken, if due cause is shown.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-204. Hearings before the Board of Adjustment.
All cases heard by the Board shall be heard by at least 75% of the Board. Alternates may serve in place of absent members. The concurring vote of 75% of
the Board shall be necessary to:
1. Reverse any order, requirement, decisions or determination of any administrative official of the municipality;
2. To decide in favor of any applicant on any matter; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 395/444
3. To authorize a variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-205. Powers of the Board.
a) The Board of Adjustment has the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative
official in the enforcement of the zoning statutes.
2. To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance when the ordinance requires the Board to do so.
3. To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance as will not be contrary to the public interest,
where, owning to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship, and so that the
spirit of the ordinance shall be observed and substantial justice done.
4. To hear and decide other matters authorized by an ordinance adopted under the zoning statues.
b) In exercising the powers as authorized above, the Board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the administrative official's order;
requirement, decision or determination appealed from and make the correct order, requirement, decision or determination.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-206. Appeal to District Court.
a) Any person or persons, jointly or severally, aggrieved by any decision of the Board, or any taxpayer, or any officer, department, board or bureau of the
municipality, may present to a court of record a verified petition stating that the decision is illegal, in whole or in part, and specifying the grounds of the
illegality. The petition shall be presented to the court within ten days after the filing of the decision in the Board's office naming the Board as a defendant.
b) Upon presentation of the petition the court may grant a Writ of Certiorari directed to the Board to review the Board's decision. The writ shall indicate
the time by which the Board's return must be made and served on the petitioner's attorney. This time must be at least ten days after the writ is issued and
the time may be extended by the court. Granting the writ does not stay the proceedings on the decision on appeal, but on application and after notice to the
Board, the court may grant a restraining order if due cause is shown.
c) The Board submits a "return" to the court consisting of the documents on which the board acted and a statement of pertinent material facts that show
the grounds of the decision under appeal.
d) If, at the hearing, the court determines that testimony is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter, it may take evidence or may appoint a
referee to take evidence as directed. The referee shall report the same to the court with the referee's findings of fact and conclusions of law, which shall
constitute a part of the proceedings upon which the determination of the court shall be made. The court may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may
modify the decision brought up for review. The court's review is not based upon the substantial evidence rule.
e) Costs shall not be allowed against the Board unless it shall appear to the court that it acted with gross negligence, or in bad faith, or with malice in
making the decision appealed from.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-207. Lapse of variance.
a) Unless a longer time period shall be specifically established as a condition of approval, a variance shall lapse and shall become void one year
following the date on which the variance became effective, unless prior to the expiration of one year a building permit is issued and construction is
commenced and diligently pursued toward completion on the site which was the subject of the variance application, or a certification of occupancy is
issued for the site or structure which was the subject of the variance if no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required.
b) A variance subject to lapse may be renewed by the Board for an additional period of one year, provided that prior to the expiration date, a written
request for renewal is filed with the Board.
c) The Board may grant or deny any application for renewal.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-208. Suspension and Revocation.
Upon violation of any applicable provision of this article, or, if granted subject to conditions, a variance shall be suspended after thirty (30) days written
notification of the owner of the use or property to the variance.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-209. Variances to run with land or structure.
A variance shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure to which it applies.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-210. Effective date of variance.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 396/444
A decision of the Zoning Board of Adjustment on a variance shall be effective immediately.
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-211. Findings of Fact.
Upon giving public notice and conducting a public hearing on a variance request, the Board shall complete the Finding of Fact for Zoning Ordinance
variance form. All findings must be determined in the affirmative for the variance to be granted (Exhibit B, attached hereto).
(Ord. No. 1512,  1, 9-28-10)
Secs. 118-212118-239. Reserved.
Division 2. Variance Procedure
Sec. 118-240. Purpose.
This procedure is intended to provide relief from the terms of the Zoning Ordinance when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the
strict application of the Zoning Ordinance deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning
classification, to ensure that any adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other
properties in the vicinity and the district in which such property is situated, and that no variance shall be allowed that will establish, prolong, or preserve a
condition that constitutes a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
(Ord. No. 1512,  2, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1618,  2, 12-10-13)
Sec. 118-241. Reserved.
Sec. 118-242. Application.
a) Application for a Variance shall be filed with the Director of Building and Development. The application (attached hereto) shall include the following:
1. Name and address of the owner or applicant.
2. Address and legal description of the property.
3. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, a statement that the applicant is the authorized agent of the owner.
4. A statement describing the Variance requested and the reasons why it complies with the criteria for Variances.
5. Site plans, preliminary building elevations, preliminary improvement plans or other maps or drawings, sufficiently dimensional as required to
illustrate the following, to the extent related to the Variance application:
a. Existing and proposed location and arrangement of uses on the site, and on abutting site within fifty (50) feet.
b. Existing and proposed site improvements, buildings and other structures on the site, and any off-site improvements related to or
necessitated by the proposed use. Building elevations shall be sufficient to indicate the general height, build, scale and architectural character.
c. Existing and proposed topography, grading, landscaping, screening, irrigation facilities and erosion control measures.
d. Existing and proposed parking, loading and traffic and pedestrian circulation features, both on the site and any off-site facilities or
improvements related to or necessitated by the proposed use.
b) The Director of Building and Development shall review each application for both administrative completeness and the subject matter of the requested
variance, and shall:
1. Notify the applicant of any incompleteness or need for additional information and specify a reasonable deadline by which the application shall
be made complete and acceptable for filing.
2. Return any application for a condition that, if authorized by a variance, will in the opinion of the Director of Building and Development,
establish, prolong, or preserve a condition that constitutes a risk to the health, safety or welfare of the public. In determining whether such a
condition exists, the Director of Building and Safety shall:
a. Consult with and obtain the opinion of the Chief of Police, City Attorney, City Manager, or other person in possession of information that
demonstrates the nature of the risk that would be established, prolonged or preserved;
b. Make written findings of the nature of the risk, including reference to any ordinance or state or federal law that prohibits or regulates the
risk, which written finding shall be included with the returned application.
(Ord. No. 1512,  2, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 1618,  3, 12-10-13)
Sec. 118-243. Fees.
The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee of $150.00, plus $10 per acre or a portion thereof. The fee is non-refundable.
(Ord. No. 1512,  2, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-244. Time of Payment.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 397/444
The fees are due and payable at the time of the initial request or the application and entitle the applicant to consideration only and not affirmative
disposition.
(Ord. No. 1512,  2, 9-28-10)
Sec. 118-245. Public Hearing and Notice.
a) The Board will hold a hearing within forty-five (45) days after receipt of completed variance application and fee.
b) Notice of public hearing shall be published in the official newspaper of the city at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the hearing.
c) Notice shall be given by mail to the applicant at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
d) Notice shall be given by mail to the owner of each site within two hundred (200') feet of the subject property at least ten (10) days prior to the date of
the public hearing.
(Ord. No. 1512,  2, 9-28-10)
Secs. 118-246118-260. Reserved.
Article V. Heritage District Zoning Overlay Code*
Sec. 118-261. Purpose and intent.
1.1 Implement the Design Goals of the 2006 Heritage District Master Plan. The character districts created within the zoning overlay are intended
to facilitate pedestrian oriented, mixed-use urban development, providing shopping, employment, housing, and business and personal services. The
Rockport Heritage District (RHD) is intended to be the center of life in the community. This is achieved by promoting an efficient, compact land
use pattern; encouraging pedestrian activity; reducing the reliance on private automobiles; promoting a more functional and attractive community
through the use of recognized principles of urban design; and allowing developers flexibility in land use and site design. A high level of attention to
site and building design is required to promote an attractive district.
1.2 Establish Specific Standards. Creation of different character districts within the Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay (RHDZO) will
enable specific site and locational standards to be enumerated and applied. Such standards will promote the public welfare, will enhance the
implementation of specific area studies, will promote walkable mixed use development and will promote the goals and objectives of the City's
Comprehensive Plan and 2006 Heritage District Master Plan. Creation of specific character districts for Rockport Heritage District will enable
specific development standards that will result in implementing the vision for each area identified in the Heritage District Master Plan.
1.3 Encourage Historic Preservation. While revitalization of the Heritage District area is a high priority, it must be accomplished in a manner
that preserves and perpetuates the history and heritage of Rockport. It is the city's goal to enhance the attractiveness of the city's inner core to
residents, tourists and visitors and serve as a support and stimulus to business and industry. It is further declared as a matter of public policy that
government needs to forge a partnership with affected property owners to ensure the health, prosperity, safety and economic well-being of the
community as a whole. Federal, state and local governments have passed laws to protect and preserve historic downtown properties through the
development of incentives, including the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
1.4 Economic Development. The Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay and corresponding development standards are created to support
economic development, sustainable tax base, and job creation by establishing adjacency predictability of private development that supports and
leverages public investment in the RHD.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-262. Components of the Code.
2.1 The Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay Code shall apply to the area within the Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay as
identified in the RHD Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan. Development of property within the area included in the RHD Zoning Overlay Regulating
Plan shall comply with all applicable development standards set forth in this Code. The components of this RHD Zoning Overlay Code are:
2.1.1 RHD Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan. The RHD Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan, hereafter known as the "Regulating Plan", is
attached as Appendix A. It identifies the following within the RHD Zoning Overlay including:
i. Character Districts. The RHD Zoning Overlay is further distinguished into "Character Districts". A Character District is intended to
create a distinct urban form different from other Character Districts. Each Character District shall establish building standards including
height, mass, bulk, building and parking location, and functional design of buildings on all lots within that Character District. The
Regulating Plan classifies all lots within RHD Zoning Overlay into one of six (6) Character Districts. The different Character Districts are
based on historic and regional architectural traditions and development intent to create a built environment that is consistent with the
vision for the RHD.
ii. Frontage Standards. The Frontage Standards establish exceptions and special conditions for all buildings along designated frontages.
Frontage Standards shall apply in addition to the underlying Character District standards.
iii. Street Designations by Street Type. The Street Designations on the Regulating Plan shall distinguish between Type 'A' and Type 'B'
Streets within the Heritage District Zoning Overlay. In addition, they shall identify the location of recommended new streets within the
RHDZO by street type.
iv. Required Civic/Open Space. The Required Civic/Open Space areas shown on the Regulating Plan designate the locations of
proposed civic/open spaces (including plazas and paseos).
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 398/444
v. Recommended Street Network. The Recommended Street Network indicates locations of suggested, but not required streets within
the RHDZO. These streets are not mandatory, but at the election of the applicant or developer and their design shall be guided by the
Street Type Specifications.
vi. Recommended Civic/Open Space. The Recommended Civic/Open Space designation indicates the locations of desired, but not
required civic/open spaces (including plazas and paseos) to implement the Regulating Plan. Recommended Civic/Open Spaces are not
required, but at the election of the applicant or developer.
2.1.2 Development Standards. The RHD Zoning Overlay Code (the text portion of this Code) enumerates the development standards with
text and graphics for Character Districts, Frontages, building form, civic open space, landscape, building design, signage, lighting, and all
related standards for public and private development. Building form, site development, and design standards contained within each character
district are those activities that will promote or enhance the development of a specific area of the RHD in response to the recommendations of
2006 Rockport Heritage District Plan.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-263. Administration.
This section sets forth the provisions for reviewing and approving development applications within the RHDZO. The intent is to ensure that all
development is consistent with the provisions of this Code. All sections of this Code shall be applied during the review process.
3.1 All applications for development and redevelopment within the RHD Zoning Overlay shall require the approval of a site plan prior to
issuance of a building permit per Table 3.1.
Table 3.1 RHDO Applicability Matrix
Code Section
Building
Form -
Frontages
Building
Form -
Placement
Building
Form -
Height
Building
Form 
Parking &
Service
Building
Form 
Street Screen
Building Form
-
Encroachments
Building
Form 
Residential
Transition
Building
Design
Standards
Landscaping Streetscaping Signage
Civic/Open
Space and
Private Open
Space
Type of Development
Commercial (retail, office, restaurant,
lodging), mixed use building,
apartment/multifamily building (3 or
more units per lot), and live-work uses
New Construction X X X X X X X X X X X X
Change of Use/Expansion of use* X X X
Expansion of Building Area
0% - 49% increase in building area
AND less than 50% increase in building
value
 Standards in applicable sections
shall apply only to the expansions
X X X X X X X X X X X
50% or greater increase in building area
AND less than 50% increase in building
value
 Standards in applicable sections
shall apply only to the expansions
X X X X X X X X X X X
Any increase of building area AND
50% or greater increase in building
value
X X X X X X X X X X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 399/444
 Standards in applicable sections
shall apply the entire building including
retrofitting of the existing building if
non-conforming
Expansion of parking area only (not in
conjunction with a building or use
expansion)
Up to 10 spaces X X
11 or more additional spaces X X X
Facade changes to existing buildings
Type 'A' Street Facade X X X X
All other street facades X
Signage
Refacing or changing a panel on an
existing sign
Modification of an existing sign where
cost of the modification is valued at less
than fifty (50) % of the replacement
value of the existing sign
Modification of an existing sign where
cost of the modification is valued at
more than fifty (50) % of the
replacement value of the existing sign
X
New sign or complete replacement of
an existing sign
X
Residential Uses (single family
attached, duplexes, and detached
buildings)
New construction X X X X X X X X X X X
Change of Use* X X X X
Expansion of use/structure (any
building addition, deck, porch, etc.)
X X X X X X
Expansion of use/structure (new
accessory building/structure on the lot
or pool)
X X X X X X
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 400/444
Facade changes
Type 'A' Street Facade X X X
All other street facades X
* with no expansion of building
3.2 The development standards under Chapter 118 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances, as amended, shall not apply to the RHDZO
except as specifically referenced herein. Development standards not addressed in this ordinance shall be governed by the City of Rockport Code of
Ordinances to the extent they are not in conflict with the intent or text of the RHDZO Code. Land uses shall be governed by the underlying zoning
district for all properties within the RHDZO per Chapter 118 in the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances. All development in RHDZO shall also
meet the standards in the City's Building Code, as amended.
3.3 Sign Standards under Chapter 6, as amended, of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances, shall not apply to RHDZO except as specifically
referenced herein.
3.4 Using this Code. The following basic steps should be followed to determine the development standards applicable on property within the
RHDZO:
3.4.1 Locate the subject property on the RHDZO Regulating Plan.
3.4.2 Identify:
i. The Character District in which the property is located;
ii. The Street Type designation along all its street frontages; and,
iii. Any specific Frontage Type that may be applicable to the subject property.
3.4.3 Examine the corresponding district standards in the Building Form and Development Standards in Section 6 [section 118-266] to
determine the applicable development standards.
3.4.4 Refer to Section 5.5 [section 118-265, subsection 5.3] for Frontage Standards.
3.4.5 Refer to Section 7 [section 118-267] for Building Design Standards.
3.4.6 Refer to Section 8 [section 118-268] for Streetscape and Landscape Standards.
3.4.7 Refer to Section 9 [section 118-269] for Signage Standards.
3.4.8 Refer to Section 10 [section 118-270] for Civic Space and Private Open Space Standards.
The information from the above listed steps explains where the building will sit on the lot, the limits on its three dimensional form and the
palette of materials that will cover it.
3.5 Development within the RHDZO that complies with the provisions of this Code may be approved by the City Manager or designee (see
Appendix B for flow chart of the review process). In addition to complying with applicable city regulations that are not in conflict with this Code,
the applicant shall provide the information to adequately show compliance with this Code as required in Subsection 3.7. The City Manager or
designee shall be responsible for the following:
3.5.1 Reviewing site plan applications for compliance with the requirements of RHDZO Code.
3.5.2 Approving site plan applications that are in compliance with the requirements of the RHDZO Code.
3.5.3 Making determinations on the applications and interpretations of standards in this Code.
3.5.4 Approving revisions to previously approved site plans that comply with this Code and all applicable city ordinances.
3.5.5 Approving any minor modifications to the approved Regulating Plan and Code per Subsection 3.8.
3.5.6 Forwarding any appeals to the decision of the City Manager and/or major modifications to the Rockport Heritage District Board
(RHDB).
3.6 Minor Modifications to the RHDZO Code. The City Manager or designee shall have the authority to approve a request for minor
modifications to RHDZO Code that:
3.6.1 Does not materially change the circulation and building location on the site;
3.6.2 Does not increase the building area permitted under this Code;
3.6.3 Does not change the relationship between the buildings and the street;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 401/444
3.6.4 Does not allow greater height of any building or reduction of any parking requirement established in this Code; or
3.6.5 Does not change any required element of the Regulating Plan beyond the thresholds established in Table 3.2 below.
The City Manager or designee shall also have the authority to approve minor modifications outlined in Table 3.2. Any appeals to the decisions
of the City Manager on minor modifications shall be heard by the RHDB.
Table 3.2 Minor Modifications Allowed
Standard Minor Modification Allowed Comments
Area/boundary of Character Districts
(including any Required Civic/Open
Spaces)
No more than a 15% change (increase
or decrease) in the area of any
Character District (aggregate or per
block)
 Shall not eliminate any Character District
 15% measurement shall be based on the total
area of that specific Character District within the
entire RHDZO
 For the purposes of this Code, any increase in
any Character District that results from the
elimination of a recommended street shall not
count towards the 15% threshold.
Location of any Required Street Location shall not move more than
50' in any direction
 Shall maintain the connectivity intended by
the Regulating Plan
Building Form and Development Standards
 Build to zones/setbacks No more than a 25% change in the
maximum or minimum setback.
 Changes to the build to zones and setbacks
may only be due to any changes to the street cross
sections, change in the width of a sidewalk, or to
address the base flood elevation requirements.
 In no case shall the sidewalk be less than 6
feet in width
 Building Frontage No more than a 15% reduction in the
required building frontage along each
block of a Type 'A' Street.
 Any reduction in the required building
frontage shall be to accommodate porte-cocheres
for drop-off and pick-up.
 Street screen Waiver of street screen requirement
along a Type 'B' Street.
 Requirement for a street screen may only be
waived along a Type 'B' Street along the frontage
of any interim surface parking lot (off-street) that
is intended to be in-filled with a parking structure.
 In no case shall any portion of the surface
parking have frontage along a Type 'A' Street
without a required street screen.
 In no case shall the (off-street) surface
parking lot be located at a street intersection for a
minimum depth of 20' along each street
(regardless of the Street Type).
Streetscape standards Street tree planting, street lighting,
and other streetscape standards may
be adjusted based on the development
context.
 Any changes to the streetscape standards
shall be based on specific development context
such as vegetation, natural features, drainage, and
fire access and is subject to approval by the city.
Streetscape and sidewalk standards Fee-in lieu allowed  City may accept a proportional fee-in lieu for
any streetscape and sidewalk improvements
required based on the status of development or
redevelopment on either side of the subject
property or based on any improvements proposed
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 402/444
through the city's Capital Improvements Program
(CIP).
 The fee-in lieu shall be based on the
proportional frontage along all streets and based
on construction costs agreed upon by the city.
Any numerical standard in the RHDZO
Code
A modification up to 10% (increase
or decrease)
 A minor modification of a numerical
standard is needed to accommodate existing
conditions.
 The proposed development still meets the
intent of this Code.
3.7 All applications for development based on the applicability established in Table 3.1 within the RHDZO shall require the following:
3.7.1 The applicant shall prepare a site plan demonstrating compliance with the Overlay District standards and the RHDZO Regulating Plan
for administrative review. A site plan application shall include maps (to an appropriate scale) and/or reports that include the following
information:
i. Title block containing the name of the site plan, type of application, name and address of the applicant, plan preparer, and owner and
a written and graphic scale.
ii. Location of the subject property including delineation of Character Districts, Required and Recommended streets (if any), and any
frontage designations (if any).
iii. When subdivision of land is required, the layout of proposed blocks, lots, streets, easements, alleys, and trails, if any, consistent with
this Code and other city ordinances and plans;
iv. The location of all physical improvements, both existing and proposed, including but not limited to buildings, sidewalks, driveways,
parking, landscaping, open space, etc.
v. All proposed uses on the property and/or buildings.
vi. Street designation along all public frontages of the property and compliance with the building form and development standards for
the specific Character District the property is located in per Section 6 [section 118-266] of this Code.
vii. Screening, landscaping, and private open space provision as required by this Code.
viii. Site plans, building plans, architectural elevations and renderings of proposed building(s) including demonstration of compliance
with Building Design Standards in Section 7 [section 118-267] of this Code.
ix. Any other information that may be reasonably necessary to review and determine whether the proposed development complies with
this Code.
3.8 Rockport Heritage District Board Established. The City Council shall appoint a five (5) member citizen board called the Rockport Heritage
District Board (RHDB).
3.8.1 Duties and Responsibilities. The RHDB shall have the following duties and responsibilities:
i. To coordinate, if necessary, with both the Aransas County Historical Commission and the Aransas County Historical Society
regarding studies of historic residences, buildings, properties, or landmarks and support the preparation of a plan for their preservation in
accordance with the guidelines of the Texas Historical Commission and/or the National Register of Historic Places;
ii. To recommend to the Rockport City Council the adoption of standards for preservation, redevelopment, and new construction of
buildings within the RHDZO;
iii. Make recommendations to the Rockport Building and Development Department staff regarding proposed demolition of existing
historic buildings or buildings with historic significance within the RHDZO;
iv. Coordinate with other departments of city government on matters of mutual interest and concern;
v. Advise and assist property owners and other persons to better understand the standards described herein for the preservation,
redevelopment and construction of buildings within the RHDZO;
vi. To adopt, promulgate, or implement policies, rules, and bylaws reasonable and necessary to govern the functions of the board and
carry out the purpose and intent of this Code;
vii. To review and make recommendations to City Council on development applications for civic/public buildings (new and
redevelopment of existing buildings);
viii. To review and make recommendations to City Council on all development and/or redevelopment within the Harbor Destination
District;
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 403/444
ix. Hear appeals to staff's decisions on development applications or Design Exceptions; and
x. Hear requests for design direction and/or interpretation of any requirements of this Code.
3.8.2 Board Composition. City Council shall appoint five (5) members with at least one from each of the following categories or as
determined by City Council:
i. Historic Preservation representative (professional with interest and expertise in Historic Preservation, or representative of a design
profession such as architecture, landscape architecture, urban design, interior design, historic preservation, engineering or similar
profession with interest and expertise in Historic Preservation).
ii. Development or construction industry representative (developer, builder, contractor, real estate professional, broker or similar
profession).
iii. Rockport community representative.
iv. Heritage District resident representative.
v. Heritage District business owner representative.
3.8.3 Terms of Appointment. One (1) member of the board shall serve for a term of one (1) year, two (2) members of the board shall serve
for a term of two (2) years, and two (2) members of the board shall serve for a term of three (3) years. Thereafter, the term of all members shall
be for a term of three (3) years, and they may be reappointed for additional terms. Each member shall serve until the appointment and
qualification of his or her successor. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by City Council when the vacancy occurs during a term of office.
The person selected shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term.
3.8.4 Election of Officers. Members of the board shall serve without compensation and the board shall annually elect from among its
membership, one (1) member who shall serve as chair, one (1) member who shall serve as vice chair, and one (1) member who shall serve as
secretary. The vice chair shall perform all duties and functions of the chair in the latter's absence or incapacity. The board shall keep official
minutes and other appropriate records of its meetings and all proceedings and matters brought before it, and shall make same available for
public inspection to the extent required by law. All members of the board shall be familiar with and abide by the city's attendance policies, as
amended from time to time. Specifically, no board members shall participate in any discussion or vote on any matter coming before the board
involving property in which they have a direct ownership, financial, or business interest.
3.8.5 Conduct of Meetings. The board shall adopt and make public, rules for the transaction of its business and shall hold regular meetings
and specially called meetings, as deemed necessary and appropriate. Written agendas shall be prepared for all regular and specially called
meetings and shall be made available for public inspection. All meetings shall comply with the Texas Open Meetings Act. A simple majority
of the membership of the board shall be required to conduct the business of the board.
3.8.6 Quarterly Report. The board shall report at least quarterly to the Rockport City Council on the activities and accomplishments of the
board.
3.9 Appeals and Design Exceptions. Any appeals to the decision of the City Manager or requests for Design Exceptions to standards in this Code
may be made to the Rockport Heritage District Board (RHDB) within 30 days of such a decision in writing by the City Manager. All requests for
appeals or Design Exceptions shall be heard by the RHDB within 30 days of such a request or at the next available regularly scheduled meeting of
the RHDB, whichever occurs first. Appeals of decisions of the RHDB shall be made to District Court of Aransas County. All appeals shall be taken
in the District Court within thirty (30) days after the action or decisions of the RHDB and all decisions which have not been appealed within thirty
(30) days shall become final. After the appeal is taken, the procedure shall be governed by the rules of civil procedure.
3.10 Variances. All decisions on variances to dimensional standards for setbacks and heights in the RHDO shall be determined by the Zoning
Board of Adjustment after a recommendation has been made by the RHDB. In granting or denying a variance RHDB and Zoning Board of
Adjustment shall evaluate the extent to which the proposed modifications result in greater or lesser conformance with the specifications of the
RHDO and the extent to which the modifications meet the vision and intent of the Heritage District Master Plan.
3.11 In addition to standards in Section 6.6 [section 118-266, subsection 6.6], all public/civic buildings within the RHDO may only be approved
by City Council after a recommendation has been made on the application by the RHDB. In reviewing such development applications, the
following shall be taken into consideration:
3.11.1 Civic and public buildings should occupy prominent sites such as at the end of a terminated vista.
3.11.2 Major entrances and exits should be clearly marked and should front on plazas or wide sidewalks that allow pedestrians safe ingress
and egress into the building.
3.11.3 Major entrances and key street intersections, including locations recommended for vista terminations, shall be emphasized with
vertical elements that create a unique identity to the civic building.
3.11.4 Public buildings may be larger in scale than retail and mixed use buildings and thus have larger setbacks to provide for appropriate
transitions. They should be articulated horizontally and vertically with architectural elements to break the mass of the structure down.
3.11.5 Major street frontages such as Type 'A' frontages shall not be blank walls. Windows, changing building materials, arcades, building
articulation, and other architectural elements shall be used to add interest at the street level.
3.11.6 Building materials used should convey the impression of permanence and stability and to the extent possible, masonry (brick, stone,
stucco using the three step process, marble, or granite) should be used for a majority of the exterior building facades.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 404/444
3.12 Harbor Destination District. All development within the Harbor Destination District may only be approved by City Council after a
recommendation has been made on the application by the RHDB. In reviewing such development applications, the following shall be taken into
consideration:
3.12.1 The creation of an overall Harbor Destination Master Plan complementing the Heritage District Master Plan for the various uses
within the district that coordinates and integrates buildings, establishes an architectural design theme and palette of building materials,
provides linkages between different uses, parking, accommodates pedestrian and automobile access, service uses, open spaces, and provides
unified wayfinding signage for all destinations located within the district.
3.12.2 The extent to which the design of the building is sensitive to the context of the Heritage District and an overall Harbor Destination
Master Plan, if any.
3.13 RHDB Review Considerations. In providing design direction and clarification, reviewing Design Exception requests or hearing appeals, the
Rockport Heritage District Board shall use the following criteria:
3.13.1 The goals and intent of Rockport Heritage District Master Plan;
3.13.2 Whether the proposal fits the adjoining design context by providing appropriate transitions;
3.13.3 Extent to which the application provides public benefits such as usable civic and open spaces, livable streets, structured and/or shared
parking, and linkages to transit; and
3.13.4 Considerations of health and welfare of the general public.
3.14 Demolitions.
3.14.1 All applications for demolition of buildings or portions of buildings within the RHD Zoning Overlay shall require the approval of a
demolition permit by the city after a recommendation has been made on the application by the RHDB. In reviewing a request for demolition,
the RHDB shall consider the following:
i. The public's interest in the preservation of the cultural resource.
ii. Whether the building is a contributing building that has the potential to be a historic building.
iii. The age of the cultural resource, its uniqueness or uncommon design, texture, and/or material and its ability to be reproduced
without unreasonable difficulty and/or expense.
iv. The ability of the cultural resource to help preserve and protect a historic place or prehistoric site or area of historic interest in the
city.
v. The ability of the cultural resource to promote the general welfare of the city by:
1) Encouraging the study of local and American History, architecture and design;
2) Developing an understanding of the importance and value of the American culture and heritage; and
3) Making the city a more attractive and desirable place in which to live.
vi. Whether the building is being demolished for new construction on the same site which is more economically feasible than restoring
the existing structure.
3.14.2 A request for demolition may only be approved by the City Manager or designee if the RHDB finds that:
i. A building or part of a building is deemed as not being historically significant to Rockport's cultural roots or is not a contributing
building;
ii. The building can be replaced more economically by another that better supports the goals of the 2006 Rockport Heritage District
Master Plan;
iii. A building or part of a building is structurally unstable or in a stage of advanced deterioration and has been deemed by the city as a
hazard to public safety or an attractive nuisance;
iv. The demolition will not significantly impact adjoining properties or the integrity of Rockport's Heritage District; or
v. The costs of rehabilitation are prohibitive and evidence is presented that the existing improvement is incapable of reasonable use or
producing an economic return.
3.15 Non-Conforming Buildings, Uses, and Signs.
3.15.1 Regardless of transfer of ownership, existing Non-Conforming Buildings with a Non-Conforming Use that do not conform to the
provisions of this Code may continue as they are until:
i. The building is reconstructed or substantially modified such that the collective reconstructions or modifications within any
continuous three (3) year period are valued at more than the greater of either $50,000 or a total of fifty (50) % of the assessed value of the
improvements in the most recently certified tax rolls; or
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 405/444
ii. Any building facade on a designated Type 'A' Street is changed. These may include changes to architectural elements, sidewalks,
windows, doors, or any other feature that alters that facade (excluding facade colors, window/glass replacement and maintenance of
existing signage). Only sections of the RHDZO code that affect the facade design of a building in Section 7 [section 118-267] of this Code
shall apply when Type 'A' Street facades are modified.
3.15.2 Regardless of transfer of ownership, existing Non-Conforming Buildings that do not conform to the provisions of this Code may
change use within the same building, provided the new use is permitted in the underlying zoning district until:
i. The building is reconstructed or substantially modified such that the collective reconstructions or modifications within any
continuous three (3) year period are valued at more than the greater of either $50,000 or a total of fifty (50) % of the assessed value of the
improvements in the most recently certified tax rolls;
ii. Any building facade on a designated Type 'A' Street is changed. These may include changes to architectural elements, sidewalks,
windows, doors, or any other feature that alters that facade (excluding facade colors, window/glass replacement and maintenance of
existing signage). Only sections of the RHDZO code that affect the facade design of a building in Section 7 [section 118-267] of this Code
shall apply when Type 'A' Street facades are modified.
3.15.3 Regardless of transfer of ownership, existing Non-Conforming Signs that do not conform to the provisions of this Code may continue
as they are until the sign is reconstructed or substantially modified such that the modifications are valued at more than fifty (50) % of the
replacement value of the sign.
3.15.4 Standards in Chapter 118 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances shall apply to existing Non-Conforming Buildings and Non-
Conforming Uses that have lost their Non-Conforming status.
3.15.5 Any reconstruction or modification of or change to a Type 'A' Street facade of a non-conforming building or non-conforming sign
shall meet the provisions of this Code unless a Design Exception is granted by the RHDB. In granting or denying Design Exception the RHDB
shall evaluate the extent to which the proposed modifications result in greater or lesser conformance with the specifications of this Code and
the extent to which the modifications meet the vision and intent of the Rockport Heritage District Master Plan.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-264. Definitions.
In addition to Definitions in Chapter 118 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances, the following terms shall have the corresponding interpretations.
Arcade means a portion of the main facade of the building that is at or near the property line and a colonnade supports the upper floors of the building.
Arcades are intended for buildings with ground floor commercial or retail uses and the arcade may be one or two stories.
Attics/Mezzanines: is the interior part of a building contained within a pitched roof structure or a partial story between two main stories of a building.
Auto-Related Sales and Service Uses means establishments that provide retail sales and services related to automobiles including, but not limited to, cars,
tires, batteries, gasoline, etc.
Block Face Dimensions means the linear dimension of a block along one of its street frontages.
Block Perimeter means the aggregate dimension of a block along all of its street frontages.
Block means the aggregate of lots, pedestrian passages and rear alleys, circumscribed on all sides by streets.
Build-to Line means the line at which the principal building's front facade shall be built.
Build-to Zone (BTZ) means the area between the minimum and maximum setbacks within which the principal building's front facade is to be built.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 406/444
Building Facade Line means the vertical plane along a lot where the building's front facade is actually located.
Building Form Standards means the standards established for each Character District that specify the height, bulk, orientation, and elements for all new
construction and development.
Building Frontage means the percentage of the building's front facade that is required to be located at the front Build-to Line or Zone as a proportion of the
lot's frontage along that public street. Paseos, plazas, improved forecourts, and pedestrian breezeway frontages shall be considered as buildings for the
calculation of building frontage.
Building Height shall be the vertical distance of a building or structure measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure
to the highest point of the roof of the building or structure. In case of a building height limitation that is specified in feet and number of floors permitted,
the height limitation in feet shall control for all buildings that are equal to or less than the number of floors permitted.
Character District: each Character District is intended to create a distinct urban form different from other Character Districts within the RHDZO.
City Manager means the City Manager of the City of Rockport or his/her designee.
Civic/Open Space means publicly accessible open space in the form of public plazas, paseos, and the Bayfront boardwalk. Building facades facing a civic
space shall be treated as a Type 'A' Street frontage.
Plaza means a primarily hardscaped civic space with formal landscaping, available for civic purposes and commercial activities. A plaza shall
be spatially defined by buildings.
Paseo: is a civic space dedicated for pedestrian movement located between blocks, buildings or along alleys. Paseos may terminate public
streets within the RHDZO.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 407/444
Image of a typical paseo
Civic/Public Building means a building operated by not-for-profit organizations dedicated to arts, culture, education, recreation, government, transit, and
municipal parking, or for similar public use.
Commercial Frontage Standards means the special frontage requirement along all Type 'A' Street frontages within the Austin Street Corridor Overlay.
Such a frontage shall impose additional standards on the designated building facade to make it more pedestrian oriented such as limitation on ground floor
uses at the sidewalk and Retail Ready standards for ground floors.
Comprehensive Plan means the City of Rockport Comprehensive Plan that establishes policy guidance for the long-term growth and development of the
city as adopted on the effective date of this Code. For the purposes of this Code, the 2006 Rockport Heritage District Master Plan shall be the policy
document that provides guidance for the development of Heritage District.
Contributing Building means any building or structure that may or may not necessarily meet the National Register qualifications for historic designation
but are locally important in preserving the community's history. It also includes buildings that may be pedestrian oriented - built to the street, and
permeable ground floors with doors and windows. In evaluating future development opportunities, these buildings are recommended to be saved.
Encroachment means any structural or non-structural element such as a sign, awning, canopy, terrace, or balcony that breaks the plane of a vertical or
horizontal regulatory limit, extending into a Setback, into the Public R.O.W, or above a height limit.
Frontage Requirements means standards applied to certain blocks as indicated in the Regulating Plan in order to address specific requirements and
transitions based on street frontage and adjacency in addition to the underlying Character District standards.
Gallery means an extension of the main facade of the building that is at or near the front property line and the gallery may overlap the public sidewalk.
Historic Building: is a building that has been designated as a historic landmark by local, state, or federal government.
Living Screen means a Street Screen composed of landscaping in the form of vegetation.
Master Sign Plan means a unique sign plan to implement a specific vision for a portion or all of the development that meets Section 10.2 [section 118-270,
subsection 10.2] of this Code.
Minor Modification means any changes to the RHDO Code that meet the threshold criteria established in Section 3.6 [section 118-263, subsection 3.6] and
Table 3.1.
Numerical Standard means any standard that has a numerical limit (minimums and maximums) or value as established within both the text and graphic
standards of the RHDZO Code.
Pedestrian Easement means a grant of use of private property for pedestrian access and use.
Private Open Space means open space provided for all residential uses, privately accessible open spaces such as patios, courtyards, roof terraces, porches,
balconies, etc.
Recommended Civic Space means plaza or paseo identified on the Regulating Plan which meets the goals of the Heritage District Master Plan. A
Recommended Civic Space is not required and is at the election of an applicant or developer.
Recommended Street means a street that is identified on the Regulating Plan which is shown as a suggested street within the Heritage District Master Plan.
The Recommended Street is not required and is at the election of an applicant or developer.
Required Civic Space means plaza or paseo identified on the Regulating Plan which is meets the goals of the Heritage District Master Plan. A Required
Civic Space shall be provided at time of development.
Required Street means a street that is identified on the Regulating Plan which is shown as a mandatory street within the Heritage District Master Plan. The
Required Street shall be required and shall be provided at the time of development.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 408/444
Retail Ready means space constructed at a minimum interior height as established in each character district which may be used for noncommercial uses
and can be converted into retail/commercial use. Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for a retail/commercial use in a Retail-Ready space, the
space must comply with all building and construction codes for that use. The intent of Retail-Ready space is to provide the flexibility of occupying a space
in accordance with market demand and allowing the use in such space to change to retail/commercial uses accordingly.
Rockport Heritage District Board (RHDB): is a Citizen Board appointed by the Rockport City Council per this Code to undertake the duties per Section
3.8 [section 118-263 subsection 3.8] of this Code.
Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay (RHDZO): is the Zoning Overlay District designation that applies area specific development and design
standards for a portion of the Rockport Heritage District in addition to underlying zoning in order to implement the 2006 Rockport Heritage District
Master Plan. It is composed of several "Character Districts" to implement the design goals of the Rockport Heritage District Master Plan.
Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan (Regulating Plan): is a regulatory set of maps that is adopted for Rockport Heritage District in
addition to the Zoning map and shows the Character Districts, Civic Spaces, location of specific Frontages, and Streets Types applicable to the area,
subject to the standards in this Code.
Sign, Building Blade means a pedestrian-oriented sign that is affixed perpendicular to the corner of a building or to the front facade of a building above the
ground floor to provide identification for the whole building.
Image of a Building Blade Sign
Sign, Marquee means a sign structure placed over the entrance to a theatre or other public gathering venue. It has signage stating either the name of the
establishment or the name of the event, artist, and other details of the event appearing at that venue. The marquee is often identifiable by a surrounding
cache of light bulbs, usually yellow or white, that flash intermittently or as chasing lights. Marquee signs may often be combined with Building Blade
signs.
Sign, Monument means any sign which is connected to the ground and which has no clear space for the full width of the sign between the bottom of the
sign and the surface of the ground. A monument sign may include a sign face and sign structure, and may also include a sign base and sign cap.
Sign, Sandwich Board means a portable sign consisting of two panels of equal size, which are hinged at the top or one panel with a support and placed on
the ground or pavement so as to be self-supporting.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 409/444
Sign, Tenant Blade means a smaller pedestrian-oriented sign that is affixed perpendicular to the building facade under a canopy or awning or immediately
over a tenant space and provides identification for individual tenants within a building.
Street Screen means a freestanding wall or living screen built along the BTZ or in line with the building facade line along the street. It may mask a parking
lot or a loading/service area from view or provide privacy to a side yard and/or strengthen the spatial definition of the public realm.
Street Type means a specific designation for streets in the RHDO that establishes a certain development character along its frontage to improve walkability
within the RHD.
Street Network means the Required and Recommended network for new and existing streets within the RHDO as established in the Regulating Plan.
Tree Well means an unpaved area around the trunk of a tree within the sidewalk area that is either landscaped with ground cover or covered with a tree
grate.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 410/444
Type 'A' Street means the streets identified as such on the Regulating Plan. Type 'A' Streets are the primary pedestrian streets and buildings along Type 'A'
Streets shall be held to the highest standard of pedestrian-oriented design.
Type 'B' Street means the streets identified as such on the Regulating Plan. Type 'B' Streets are intended to primarily accommodate access to parking,
service, and other auto-related functions.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-265. Heritage District Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan.
The Heritage District Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan for Rockport is hereby adopted as Appendix A. The standards in this Code shall apply mandatorily
to all properties within the boundaries of the Heritage District Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan.
5.1 Character Districts Established. The following Character Districts are established. The boundaries of the specific Character Districts are
established in the Rockport Heritage District Zoning Overlay Regulating Plan.
5.1.1 Austin Street Corridor. The Austin Street Corridor is intended to preserve and enhance the existing historic core of the Heritage
District from Market to Concho Street. Development standards in this Overlay District discourage demolition of existing historic buildings
while requiring new buildings and changes to existing buildings to be consistent with the historic architectural traditions of the area.
Development within the Austin Street Corridor shall meet the Building Form and Development Standards in Section 6.2 [section 118-266,
subsection 6.2] of this Code.
5.1.2 Waterfront District. The Waterfront District is intended to encourage development of mixed use, pedestrian-oriented development
along the bay front with an active boardwalk along the edge of the bay. Development within the Waterfront District shall meet the Building
Form and Development Standards in Section 6.3 [section 118-266, subsection 6.3] of this Code.
5.1.3 Neighborhood Mixed Use District. The Neighborhood Mixed Use District is intended to encourage the redevelopment of the area
immediately west of the Austin Street Corridor into a smaller scale mixed use neighborhood with retail, office, and residential uses.
Development within the Neighborhood Mixed Use District shall meet the Building Form and Development Standards in Section 6.4 [section
118-266, subsection 6.4] of this Code.
5.1.4 Arterial Mixed Use District. Arterial Mixed Use is intended to provide appropriate transitions to major roadways while taking
advantage of the arterial frontage for limited auto-oriented sites. The Arterial Mixed Use frontage also acts as a gateway into the Heritage
District Overlay by providing an attractive street frontage for the overall development. Development within the Arterial Mixed Use Zone shall
meet the Building Form and Development Standards in Section 6.5 [section 118-266, subsection 6.5] of this Code.
5.1.5 Civic Core District. The Civic Core District is intended to encourage the development of the County Courthouse and other civic uses
within the context of the overall Heritage District. Development within the Civic Core District shall meet the Building Form and Development
Standards in Section 6.6 [section 118-266, subsection 6.6] of this Code.
5.1.6 Harbor Destination. The Harbor Destination District is intended to be the area located at the northern end of the Heritage District for
large destination uses including civic and recreational functions such as aquariums, museums, parks, open space, marinas, festival space, and
other outdoor activities. This area may also include supporting retail and service uses. Development within the Harbor Destination District
shall meet the standards in Section 3.12 [section 118-263, subsection 3.12].
5.2 Street Designations By Street Type Established. The RHD Overlay Regulating Plan shall establish the following Street Designations.
5.2.1 Type 'A' Streets Established. Type 'A' Streets are intended to be the primary pedestrian streets and buildings along Type 'A' Streets shall
be held to the highest standard of pedestrian-oriented design. The Type 'A' Streets are as identified in the Regulating Plan.
5.2.2 Type 'B' Streets Established. Type 'B' Streets are intended to balance pedestrian orientation with automobile orientation. Buildings
along Type 'B' Streets may be permitted to accommodate some service and auto-related functions. Type 'B' Streets are as identified in the
Regulating Plan. Development along Type 'B' Streets may meet the standards of Type 'A' Streets without any required change in the Regulating
Plan.
5.2.3 General Streets Established. General Streets are streets that accommodate service and parking functions and shall be all streets that are
not identified as Type 'A' or Type 'B' on the Regulating Plan.
5.3 Frontage Requirements. In order to address specific requirements and transitions based on street frontage and adjacency, the following
Frontage Requirements as established in the Regulating Plan shall apply:
5.3.1 Main Street Frontage. Ground floors of all buildings designated as Main Street Frontage on the Regulating Plan shall not be occupied
by residential units and/or lodging rooms in hotels to a minimum depth of 30 feet as measured from the front building line.
5.3.2 Boardwalk Frontage. Shall apply to all building frontages along the Boardwalk. Standards in Section 6.3.4 [section 118-266,
subsection 6.3.4] shall apply.
5.4 Recommended Views to Water. This designation is intended to identify locations where new and existing streets and/or development should
provide views to the Bay. These may either be publicly dedicated or privately owned with appropriate access easements.
5.5 Required Public Boardwalk. This designation indicates the requirement for a publicly accessible civic space along the Bayfront from the
Austin Street Corridor as development occurs. The Boardwalk may be privately owned with public access easements along the Bayfront.
5.6 Recommended Terminated Vistas. This designation identifies locations that terminate key streets or view corridors. At these locations, special
attention should be given to the design of new buildings and sites to take advantage of the key location.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 411/444
5.7 Required and Recommended Civic/Open Space. The Required and Recommended Civic/Open Space designations shall indicate the locations
of desired civic and open spaces (including parks, plazas, paseos and squares) to implement the Heritage District Master Plan. The Required and
Recommended paseos may either be publicly dedicated or privately owned with appropriate access easements.
5.8 Recommended Gateway Feature. This designation is intended to indicate the locations of recommended Gateways into the Heritage District,
specifically at Market and Austin Streets. The Gateway feature shall be designed to create a sense of arrival at the core of the Heritage District and
shall include a vertical element that provides orientation to the rest of the District.
5.9 Recommended Civic Building Sites. The Recommended Civic Building Sites designation shall indicate the locations of desired civic
buildings (public and community buildings) to implement the Heritage District Master Plan.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-266. Character district building form and development standards.
6.1 General Requirements. The following shall apply to all Character Districts unless otherwise noted.
#1 Applicability: Building Form and Development Standards in this section shall apply to new construction, additions, or substantial
modifications as established in Table 3.1.
#2 Story: Where a building is limited by a prescribed number of stories, the term "story" shall be as defined by the applicable Building Code.
Refer to the Building Code for special exceptions regarding mezzanines and attics, which may, or may not, constitute a "story."
#3 Building Height: Where a building is limited by a prescribed HEIGHT in feet, the method of measuring building height shall be as
follows:
* External building height shall be measured per the standards established in Chapter 118 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
* Internal building height:
Ground floors and all floors except the last floor of multiple-story buildings: Internal floor to floor height shall be measured from the
internal finished grade of the first/ground floor to finished floor of the next upper floor.
Single-story buildings and uppermost floor of all multiple-story buildings: Internal floor to floor height shall be measured from
internal finished grade of the lower floor to the bottom of the lowest member of the roof structure.
#4 Primary facade: The primary facade is the building facade fronting along the public right-of-way, or if fronting more than one ROW, the
primary facade shall be the facade fronting the Type 'A' street.
#5 Building height at corners: Unless otherwise noted, where a building corner fronts on two public Rights-of-Way, a building's maximum
allowable height may be increased by a height of 5' or 15% of the primary facade's building height (whichever is more). The additional height
is allowed from a distance of 20' measured from the corner property lines. (add illustration)
#6 Shared parking: Wherever parking is required, or provided, cross access easements and shared parking is encouraged to maximize parking
efficiency and reduce the number of curb cuts on the street. Parking may be provided off site within 1,200 feet of the subject property or based
on a shared parking plan approved by the City Manager or designee.
#7 Screening of parking: Any frontage along all streets (except alleys) not defined by a building at the BTZ shall be defined by a 4-foot high
Street Screen, furthermore service areas shall be defined by a Street Screen that is at least as high as the service equipment being screened. The
Street Screen shall be of either the same building material as the principal structure on the lot or masonry or a living screen composed of
shrubs planted to be opaque at maturity. Species shall be selected from the Planting List in Chapter 106 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances.
The required Street Screen shall be located within the BTZ along the corresponding frontage.
#8 Parking lots: The design of surface parking lots shall be meet the standards in Chapter 118 of the City of Rockport Code of Ordinances.
#9 Recessed entries shall be permitted in any overlay zone and within the BTZ (Build-to Zone) or along the BTL (Build-to Line). Recessed
entries are permitted according to the figure below. Recessed entries on buildings that are built to the front property line shall be required.
#10 Required Ceiling Heights: Where there is a required minimum ceiling height, the ceiling height shall extend from the primary facade, to
a minimum depth of 15' back from the facade. The height is measured from finish floor to the finish ceiling. Structural and decorative beams
may extend below the required ceiling height a max. of 18" deep and 12" wide.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 412/444
#11 Roof-mounted equipment: Ground and roof mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened from direct ground level view from
adjoining public rights-of-way. In addition to a parapet wall no higher than 42", the perimeter of any visible roof mounted mechanical
equipment shall be circumscribed by a wall or permanent screen that is at least as tall as the equipment itself.
#12 Off-street loading and unloading areas and access shall be located along Type 'B' Streets, General Streets or alleys. Loading may occur
from a Type 'A' Street only if the property has no feasible access to either a General Street or Type 'B' Street or vehicular alley.
#13 Base Flood elevations: Within the RHDZO, the following options are available to address the base flood elevation required for new
construction.
Dry Flood Proofing: Within the Waterfront and Austin Corridor overlay districts, entrances located on the building's primary facade shall
be at the sidewalk level. Dry Floodproofing shall be the preferred method used to protect the space inside the building below the Base
Floor [Flood] Elevation. Stairs and ramps may be incorporated inside the building envelope to transition to a higher level. In the case that
dry floodproofing is not feasible, ramps shall be positioned to minimize the impact and accessibility of the commercial storefront.
Exterior stairs and ramps or other approaches shall only permitted within the Waterfront and Austin Corridor overlay districts with the
approval of the RHDB.
Exterior Ramps and Stairs: If an exterior ramp is required in order to accommodate access to a raised Base Flood Elevation, the ramp shall
be oriented perpendicular to the primary facade in order to minimize the visual impact and pedestrian accessibility of the primary facade.
Exterior ramps and stairs may be used in all other overlay districts. Other approaches may be used in all other overlay districts only with
the approval of the RHDB.
If an exterior stair is required to accommodate access to a raised Base Floor Elevation, the steps shall be located towards the primary
entrance along the primary facade.
Alternative ramp locations may be considered if it is not feasible to locate the ramp along the side of a building.
For ramps located parallel to the front building facade, a low masonry screening wall with planters shall hide the ramp along the sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 413/444
# 14 Corner Buildings: Buildings that turn the corner along Type 'A' Streets shall be required to maintain the Type 'A' frontage along the
intersecting street even if the intersecting street may be a Type 'B' or General Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 414/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 415/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 416/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 417/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 418/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 419/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 420/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 421/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 422/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 423/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 424/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 425/444
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 426/444
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-267. Building design standards.
7.1 Standards Specific to the Austin Street Corridor. The standards in this section shall apply to all redevelopment and new development within
the Austin Street Corridor Overlay District.
7.1.1 Renovation of Existing Buildings. The following standards shall apply in reviewing and approving applications for renovation of
existing buildings within the Austin Street Corridor Overlay District.
i. Traditional Commercial Facade Components. Maintain the original character of the facade of a contributing or historic building and
its component elements. The traditional historic facades consist of three major parts: (1) the storefront with large display windows and
transom; (2) the upper facade with large regularly spaced windows; and (3) a decorative cornice.
ii. Horizontal Alignment. Reinforce the established horizontal lines of facades on the block. Restore or recreate the historic horizontal
alignment of architectural features such as cornices, window sills and parapets.
iii. Storefronts. Storefront buildings should maintain the original size, shape, and design of the storefront opening. Large ground floor
windows shall be maintained. Mirrored glass is not permitted. Doors shall use painted frames and unfinished aluminum or stainless steel
frames are not permitted. Window and door frames may be metal with anodized or painted finish or varnished or painted wood.
Residential type of opaque and paneled doors shall not be permitted.
iv. Recessed Entrances. Maintain traditional recessed storefront entrances where they exist.
v. Facade Elements. For historic buildings, preserve primary facade elements and building materials. If the original facade has been
concealed, it shall be uncovered. If portions of the original building material must be replaced, duplicate the material used or use a similar
material to the original. Use of "barn" wood or other boarded surfaces which are inconsistent with the original building design shall not be
permitted. Materials that are similar in texture, pattern, and color to those of the dominant brick work found in historic buildings shall be
required.
vi. Window Materials. Aluminum tube type windows shall not be permitted along any street facing facades. Solid vinyl windows are
only permitted as long as the window has a minimum frame depth of 4-1/2", is a color other than pure white, and is fabricated to fit the
original window opening size. Vinyl clad wood windows may be permitted as long as they are not pure white in color.
vii. Storefront Doors. Maintain and repair the original door or replace with a door of similar design and materials. Standard aluminum
and glass commercial doors are permitted but the frames shall be painted in dark colors. Replacement doors shall be commercial type
doors and shall not be of residential proportions or design.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 427/444
viii. Building Colors. Flourescent colors shall not be permitted as primary colors of any building within the Austin Street Corridor. If
brick or masonry is exposed, it shall not be painted. Existing buildings of painted brick shall be repainted and paint removal is not
permitted unless approved under the Secretary of the Interior standards for rehabilitation of historic buildings. The following shall only be
recommendations to follow to develop appropriate building color palettes:
Three colors are sufficient to highlight any facade:
Base Color - is that on the upper walls and piers flanking the storefront. This shall be natural masonry or painted to look as natural
as possible.
Major Trim - is the color that defines the decorative elements of the building, tying together the upper facade trim and the storefront.
The trim color should complement the base color. Major trim elements include the building cornice, storefront cornice, window
frames, sills and hoods, and storefront frame, columns, and bulkheads (kickplate).
Minor Trim - should enhance the color scheme established by the base and major trim. Often a darker shade of the major trim is used
to highlight the window sashes, doors, and selective cornice and bulkhead details.
7.1.2 New Construction and Additions to Existing Buildings. Subsection 7.2 shall apply to the design of new buildings and additions to
existing buildings.
7.2 General to all Overlay Districts.
7.2.1 Building Orientation. Buildings shall be oriented towards Type 'A' Streets, where the lot has frontage along Type 'A' Streets. All other
buildings shall be oriented towards Type 'B' Streets or Civic Spaces. Primary entrances to buildings shall be located on the street along which
the building is oriented. At intersections, corner buildings may have their primary entrances oriented at an angle to the intersection. All
primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access. Secondary and service entrances may be located from
internal parking areas or alleys.
7.2.2 Design of Parking Structures.
i. All frontages of parking structures located on Type 'A' Streets shall be lined by active commercial uses on the ground floor to a
minimum depth of 25'.
ii. Parking structure facades on all public streets (except alleys) shall be designed with both vertical (facade rhythm of 20' - 30') and
horizontal (aligning with horizontal elements in the block) articulation.
iii. Where above ground structured parking is located at the perimeter of a building; it shall be screened in such a way that cars are not
visible from adjacent buildings or the street on all parking levels.
iv. Parking garage ramps shall not be visible from any public street. Ideally, ramps should not be located along the perimeter of the
parking structure. Architectural screens shall be used to articulate the facade, hide parked vehicles, and shield lighting.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 428/444
7.2.3 Design of Automobile Related Building and Site Elements
i. Drive-through lanes for commercial uses shall not be located along or visible from any Type 'A' Street. Along Type 'B' Streets, no
more than two drive-through lanes shall be permitted along that lot's street frontage. Drive-through lanes shall be hidden behind a Street
Screen along the Type 'B' street frontage. There shall be no limit to the number of drive-through lanes located along alleys.
ii. All off-street loading, unloading, and trash pick up areas shall be located along alleys or Type 'B' Streets only unless permitted in the
specific overlay district building form and development standards in Section 7 [this section 118-267]. Any off-street loading, unloading,
or trash pick up areas shall be screened using a 5' (min.) high Street Screen at the BTZ.
7.2.4 Building Colors
i. Flourescent colors shall not be permitted as primary colors of any building within the Heritage District Overlay Zone.
7.3 Specific to Austin Street Corridor (new construction and additions only), Waterfront, and Arterial Mixed Use Overlay Districts
7.3.1 Building Massing and Scale.
i. Commercial and mixed use buildings shall be simple, rectilinear forms with a clear base, middle, and cap (tri-partite architecture).
ii. An expression line or equivalent architectural element shall delineate the Base and Cap of all buildings. A Cornice shall delineate the
caps of facades that do not utilize a pitched roof.
iii. Rooflines shall be simple using flat or basic gable, hip, shed, or combination of these basic roof forms.
iv. Projecting mansard roofs shall be prohibited.
v. Roofing materials visible from any public right-of-way: copper, factory finished standing seam metal, slate, synthetic slate, or similar
materials.
7.3.2 Facade Composition.
i. Buildings shall maintain a facade rhythm of 20 feet to 30 feet along all Type 'A' Streets.
ii. This rhythm may be expressed by changing materials, or color, or by using design elements such as fenestration, columns and
pilasters, or by varying the setback of portions of the facade.
iii. For retail storefront buildings, a transom, display window area, and bulkhead at the base shall be utilized.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 429/444
iv. Storefronts on facades that span multiple tenants shall use architecturally compatible materials, colors, details, awnings, signage, and
lighting fixtures.
v. Building entrances may be defined and articulated by architectural elements such as lintels, pediments, pilasters, columns, porticos,
porches, overhangs, railings, balustrades, and others as appropriate. All building elements should be compatible with the architectural
style, materials, colors, and details of the building as a whole. Entrances to upper level uses may be defined and integrated into the design
of the overall building facade.
vi. Buildings shall generally maintain the alignment of horizontal elements along the block.
vii. Corner emphasizing architectural features, pedimented gabled parapets, cornices, awnings, blade signs, arcades, colonnades and
balconies may be used along commercial storefronts to add pedestrian interest.
viii. Buildings which are located on axis with a terminating street or at the intersection of streets shall be considered as feature
buildings. Such buildings shall be designed with features which take advantage of that location, such as an accentuated entry and a unique
building articulation which is off-set from the front wall planes and goes above the main building eave or parapet line.
7.3.3 Windows and Doors
i. Windows and doors on street (except alleys) fronting facades shall be designed to be proportional and appropriate to the specific
architectural style of the building. First floor windows shall NOT be opaque or mirrored glass.
ii. All ground floor front facades of buildings along Type 'A' Streets or Civic/Open Space shall have transparent storefront windows
covering no less than 60% of the facade area. Each upper floor of the same building facades facing a Type 'A' Street or Civic/Open Space
shall contain transparent windows covering at least 40% of the facade area. All other street facing facades (except alleys) shall have
transparent windows covering at least 20% of the facade area for all floors.
7.3.4 Commercial and Mixed Use Building Materials
i. At least 75% of each building's facade (excluding doors and windows) fronting along any Type 'A' Street or Market Street shall be
finished in one of the following materials:
* Masonry (brick, stone, stucco utilizing a three-step process, cast stone, rock, marble, granite, curtain glass, or glass block)
ii. No more than 25% of each facade along any Type 'A' Street or Market Street shall use accent materials such as wood, architectural
metal panel, split-face concrete block, tile, or pre-cast concrete panels. EIFS shall not be permitted on building frontages along any Type
'A' Street or Market Street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 430/444
iii. All facades along Type 'B' Streets or alleys shall be of a similar finished quality and color that blend with the front of the building.
Building materials for these facades may be any of the primary and accent facade materials listed above. EIFS shall not be permitted
along any ground floor facades along Type 'B' Streets and ground floor facades of alleys. Cementitious-fiber clapboard (not sheet) with at
least a 50-year warranty may only be used on the upper floors only.
iv. Roofing materials visible from any public right-of-way shall be copper, factory finished standing seam metal, slate, synthetic slate,
or similar materials.
7.4 Standards Specific to Development in the Neighborhood Mixed Use Overlay Character District.
7.4.1 Applicability. Standards in this subsection shall NOT apply to single-family and two-family residential units that are existing at the
time of initial adoption of the RHDZO.
7.4.2 Building Orientation for Commercial and Mixed Use Buildings. Buildings shall be oriented towards Type 'A' Streets, where the lot has
frontage along Type 'A' Streets. All other buildings shall be oriented towards Type 'B' Streets or Civic Spaces. Primary entrances to buildings
shall be located on the street along which the building is oriented. At intersections, corner buildings may have their primary entrances oriented
at an angle to the intersection. All primary entrances shall be oriented to the public sidewalk for ease of pedestrian access. Secondary and
service entrances may be located from internal parking areas or alleys.
7.4.3 Building Orientation for Residential and Live-Work Buildings.
i. Garages for Residential Buildings shall be located on alleys at the rear of residential buildings; pull-through garages are allowed if the
garage door is set back behind the rear facade of the main structure. If front-loaded garages or carports are utilized on residential uses, the
garages and carports shall be no greater than 12 feet wide and set back at least 20 feet measured from the face of the main structure closest
to the garage/carport or rotated 90 degrees with windows on the wall facing the street. On corner lots, the garage may be rotated with
windows facing the primary street with driveway access from the secondary street.
ii. All garage doors shall be divided into single bays separated by at least a 16-inch pier or column. Front-loaded garages on residential
lots less than 40 feet wide shall not be allowed. Townhomes and courtyard apartments shall utilize rear-loaded garages.
7.4.4 Building Massing and Scale
i. Buildings shall have few, if any, articulations and simple roofs (gable, hip, combination) with most building wing articulations set at
the rear of the structure. Window projections, bay windows, stoops, porches, balconies, and similar extensions shall be exempt from this
standard.
ii. Gable roofs, if provided for residential buildings, shall have a minimum pitch of 5/12. When hipped roofs are used, the minimum
pitch shall be 5/12. Other roof types shall be appropriate to the architectural style of the building. Porch roofs may be a minimum pitch of
3/12.
iii. Projecting mansard roofs shall be prohibited.
7.4.5 Facade Composition
i. Buildings shall maintain a facade rhythm of 20 feet to 30 feet along Type 'A' Streets.
This rhythm may be expressed by changing materials, or color, or by using design elements such as columns and pilasters, or by
varying the setback of portions of the building facade.
ii. At least one of the following - porches, stoops, eaves or balconies - shall be added along the front residential facades to add
pedestrian interest along the street.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 431/444
iii. For residential buildings the grade of the slab or first floor elevation shall be elevated at least 18 inches above the grade of the
sidewalk.
iv. Alley and/or Type 'B' Street facing facades shall be of finished quality and of the same color that blend with the front of the building.
7.4.6 Windows and Doors
i. Windows and doors shall be designed to be proportional and appropriate to the architectural style of the building.
ii. Windows may have jack arch, keystone arch, flat arch, or ornamental arches.
iii. All building facades of residential buildings fronting on all streets or civic spaces, except alleys, shall have transparent windows
covering at least 30% of each facade.
7.4.7 Residential Building Materials
i. At least 60% of the Type 'A' Street facing facades of all buildings (excluding doors and windows) shall be finished in one or more of
the following materials. No more than three different materials shall be used on any single residential facade:
* Cementitious-fiber clapboard (not sheet) with at least a 50-year warranty.
* Masonry (brick; stone; man-made stone, or stucco utilizing a three-step process).
ii. The following may only be allowed up to 40% as an accent material:
* Architectural metal panels or similar material over a cementitious base, rock, glass block and tile.
iii. EIFS shall not be permitted along any Type 'A' Street facades.
iv. Side and rear facades shall be of finished quality and of the same color that blend with the front of the building. Ground floor side
and rear facades shall not be EIFS.
v. Roofing materials (visible from any public right-of-way): copper, factory finished painted metal, slate, synthetic slate, terra cotta, and
asphalt shingles (laminated and classified as being at least 300 pounds/100 sf.)
vi. An enclosed garage or carport shall be designed and constructed of the same material as the primary building.
7.4.8 Commercial and Mixed Use Building Materials
i. The following shall be permitted finishes for all Type 'A' Street fronting facades of all buildings. No more than three different
materials shall be used on any single facade:
* Cementitious-fiber clapboard (not sheet) with at least a 50-year warranty;
* Lap-sided wood;
* Masonry (brick; stone; man-made stone, or stucco utilizing a three-step process); and
* Architectural metal panels.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 432/444
ii. Other materials will be considered as primary building materials on a case-by-case basis and may only be approved by the City
Manager subject to appeal to the RHDB.
iii. The following may only be allowed up to 40% as an accent material:
* Exterior Insulating Finishing System (EIFS), or similar material over a cementitious base, rock, glass block and tile.
* Other metal finishes
iv. Other street facades, side and rear facades shall be of finished quality and of the same color and materials that blend with the front of
the building.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-268. Streetscape and landscape standards.
8.1 Streetscape standards shall apply to all streets within the RHDZO. Streetscape standards shall address all elements between the building face
and edge of the curb. Typical streetscape elements addressed are street trees, lighting, street furniture and pedestrian amenities, and materials.
Maintenance of all streetscape shall be by the City of Rockport.
8.2 Street Trees and Landscaping.
8.2.1 Street trees shall be required on all RHDZO streets (except on alleys).
8.2.2 Street trees shall be planted approximately 3 feet behind the curbline.
8.2.3 Spacing shall be an average of 40 feet on center (measured per block face) along all streets.
8.2.4 The minimum caliper size for each tree shall be 3 in. and shall be a minimum of 12 feet in height at planting. Each tree shall be planted
in a planting area no less than 24 sq. feet.
8.2.5 Turf and groundcover: When clearly visible from the street and alleys, all unpaved ground areas shall be planted with low growing
shrubs or ground cover, ornamental grasses, or a combination thereof. Turf grass must be installed as solid sod and not seeded on.
8.2.6 Species shall be selected from the Planting List in Chapter 106 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances.
8.2.7 Maintenance of all landscape materials shall meet the requirements of Chapter 106 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances.
8.3 Street Furniture, Lighting, and Materials.
8.3.1 Pedestrian scale lighting shall be required along all Type 'A' Streets in the RHDZO. They shall be no taller than 20 feet.
8.3.2 Street lights shall be placed at 50 feet on center, approximately 3 feet behind the curbline.
8.3.3 The light standard selected shall be compatible with the design of the street and buildings.
8.3.4 Trash receptacles and bike racks shall be required along all Type 'A' Streets. A minimum of one each per block face shall be required.
8.3.5 Street furniture and pedestrian amenities such as benches are recommended along all Type 'A' Streets.
8.3.6 All street furniture shall be located in such a manner as to allow a clear sidewalk passageway of a minimum of 6 feet.
8.3.7 Materials selected for paving and street furniture shall be of durable quality and require minimal maintenance.
8.4 Standards Specific to Liberty and Market Streets.
8.4.1 In addition to street tree standards in Subsection 8.2 above, any surface parking along Liberty and Market Streets shall be set back an
additional 6' from the back of the sidewalk or property line. The 6' wide area shall be covered with ground cover or turf. The required street
screen may be located within this 6' wide landscaped area.
8.4.2 Any surface parking located along Liberty and Market Streets shall be screened by a 4' high street screen.
8.4.3 Along all streets (except alleys), service areas shall be screened in such a manner that the service area shall not be visible to a person
standing on the property line on the far side of the adjoining street. Required Street Screens shall be of one of the following:
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 433/444
* The same building material as the principal structure on the lot, or
* A vegetative screen composed of shrubs planted to be opaque at maturity, or
* A combination of the two.
i. Species shall be selected from the Planting List in Chapter 106 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances. The required Street Screen shall
be located at the minimum setback line along the corresponding frontage.
ii. Street Screens cannot block any required sight triangles along a cross street or driveway.
iii. Street Screens may include breaks to provide pedestrian access from any surface parking or service area to the public sidewalk.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-269. Signage.
9.1 Except as specifically listed below, all other signage and sign standards must comply with Chapter 6 of the Rockport Code of Ordinances, as
amended.
9.2 For new signs, the standards in Table 9.1 shall apply and sign permits shall be approved administratively by the City of Rockport Building
Official or designee unless specifically noted in this section.
Table 9.1
Character Zone
Austin Street
Corridor
Waterfront
Civic Core Mixed
Use Neighborhood
Arterial Mixed
Use
Standard
Sign Type
Wall (Building)
Signs
P P P (civic, commercial
and live-work uses
only)
P * For all ground floor commercial uses
(retail, office, and restaurant): One sign per
tenant space; area to be calculated at 1.5 sq.
feet per linear foot of public street frontage
for the tenant space with a maximum of 100
sq. ft per tenant.
* Second and upper floor commercial
uses may also be permitted one second floor
wall sign per tenant space per public street
frontage; area to be calculated at 1.5 sq. feet
per linear foot of second or upper floor
frontage along that public street with a
maximum of 125 sq. feet.
* Institutional uses (non-profits and
churches): One sign per tenant space; area to
be calculated at 1.5 sq. feet per linear foot of
public street frontage with a maximum of
100 sq. feet.
* Live-Work and Home occupations: One
sign limited to an area of 20 sq. feet max.
* Building sign may encroach a
maximum of 12" on to a sidewalk while
maintaining a vertical clearance of 8 feet
from the finished sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 434/444
* Building signs may be internally or
externally lit.
* Marquee signs as only permitted as
specified below.
Monument Signs NP NP P (civic, commercial
and live-work uses
only)
P One monument sign per lot per lot street
frontage (no more than 2 per lot separated
by at least 100 feet) limited to a maximum
of 60 sq. feet per sign face and 6 feet in
height.
Window Signs P P P (commercial and
live-work uses only)
P Limited to 20% of the window area.
The following shall be exempt from this
limitation:
* Addresses, closed/open signs, hours of
operation, credit card logos, real estate
signs, and now hiring signs;
* Mannequins and storefront
displays of merchandise sold; and
* Interior directory signage identifying
shopping aisles and merchandise display
areas.
Character Zone
Austin Street
Corridor
Waterfront
Civic Core Mixed
Use Neighborhood
Arterial Mixed
Use
Standard
Sign Type
Building Blade
Signs
P P P (commercial and
live-work uses only)
NP * One per building (commercial and
mixed use buildings only).
* Area = 30 sq. feet maximum per sign
face.
* May encroach a maximum of 6 feet
over a sidewalk, but shall not encroach over
any parking or travel lane.
* Building blade signs may be attached
to the building at the corners of building or
along any street facing facade above the
first floor facade.
Tenant Blade
Signs
P P P (commercial and
live-work uses only)
P (along Type
'A' Street
frontages only)
* One per commercial tenant space
(retail, office, or restaurant use).
* Area = 16 sq. feet maximum per sign
face.
* May encroach a maximum of 4 feet
over a public sidewalk, but shall not
encroach over any parking or travel lane.
* Tenant blade signs shall be oriented
perpendicular to the building facade and
hung under the soffit of an arcade or under
a canopy/awning or attached to the building
facade immediately over the ground floor
tenant space while maintaining a vertical
clearance of 8 feet from the finished
sidewalk.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 435/444
Marquee Signs P P P (civic uses only) P * Permitted for theatres, auditoriums, and
other public gathering venues of 100
persons or more.
* Marquee signs shall be attached to the
building or located above or below a
canopy only.
* Area = 100 sq. feet maximum.
* Message board may be changeable
copy (electronic and non-electronic).
Electronic message boards shall be nonflashing.
For sale/for lease
signs
P P P P * Size is limited to 32 sq. feet per sign
face.
* All other standards are the same as City
of Rockport Sign Regulations.
Banners P P P P Same as City of Rockport Sign Regulations.
Sandwich board
signs
P NP NP NP Standards in Chapter 6, Section 6-101
(Ordinance 1504) of the City of Rockport
Code of Ordinances shall apply.
Light Pole
Banners
P P P P * Permitted only with approval of the
City.
* Max. 10 sq. feet per sign face.
* Limited to one per light pole.
* All light pole banners shall be approved
by the appropriate utility company prior to
consideration by the City.
* Light pole banners shall be limited to
publicize community-wide events, holiday
celebrations, public art, and other city
sponsored events.
Directory signs P P P (civic, commercial
and live-work uses
only)
P * Shall be allowed for all multi-tenant
commercial and mixed use buildings only.
* One directory sign per multi-tenant
building limited to 12 sq. feet in area.
* Design of the sign shall be integral to
the facade on which the sign is to be
affixed.
Pole signs NP NP NP NP May only be permitted as part of a Master
Sign Plan.
LED Signs NP P P (civic, commercial
and live-work uses
only)
P Standards in Chapter 6 of the Rockport
Code of Ordinances shall apply.
Off-premises
signs
NP NP NP NP
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 436/444
9.3 An applicant has the option to establish unique sign standards including size, color, type, design, and location. Such applications shall be
reviewed as "Master Sign Plans" by the City Manager and are subject to approval by the RHDB. In evaluating a Master Sign Plan, the RHDB shall
consider the extent to which the application meets the following:
9.3.1 Promotes consistency among signs within a development thus creating visual harmony between signs, buildings, and other
components of the property;
9.3.2 Enhances the compatibility of signs with the architectural and site design features within a development;
9.3.3 Encourages signage that is in character with planned and existing uses thus creating a unique sense of place; and
9.3.4 Encourages multi-tenant commercial uses to develop a unique set of sign regulations in conjunction with development standards.
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)
Sec. 118-270. Civic space and private open space standards.
10.1 This Code establishes the public Civic Space and private Open Space Standards for the RHDZO. The Regulating Plan designates several
areas for different required and recommended public Civic Spaces within the RHDZO. The detailed Civic Space Standards for each type are
included in this Section. These standards include general character, typical size, frontage requirements, and typical uses.
10.2 Private Open Space Standards. Given the mixed use nature of development within the RHDO, all new residential and lodging uses within
the RHDO shall meet the private open space standards established in this Section. Table 10.1 establishes the types of private open space permitted
and Table 10.2 establishes the private open space requirement based on the proposed intensity of residential or lodging development.
Table 10.1 Private Open Space Types
Private Open Space
Type
Description and Image Standards and criteria
Balconies Balcony is a platform projecting from a second or
higher story interior or exterior wall of a building,
usually enclosed for privacy and protection by a rail.
A balcony usually has French or sliding glass doors
leading out to it, and can be entered from a living
room or bedroom.
Balconies that are not flush shall be a
minimum of 5 feet clear in depth and a
minimum of 8 feet in width
Balconies may be semi-recessed or
recessed. Projecting metal or slab
balconies are only permitted if they
have some means of visible support.
Patios A Patio is an outdoor space for dining or recreation
that adjoins a residence and is often paved. It may
also be a roofless inner courtyard within a residence,
typically found in Spanish and Spanish-style
dwellings.
Patios shall be a minimum of 150 sq.
ft.
Patios shall have a clear sense of
enclosure and separation from the
public realm.
Private Open Space
Type
Description and Image Standards and criteria
Courtyard A Courtyard is a landscaped open space in the center
of the block with no street frontage, surrounded by
walls or buildings on all sides. It shall be large
enough to allow for public activities and have
sunlight during midday. It should be designed to
connect to adjacent buildings or to the public
sidewalk through a pedestrian passage.
Courtyards shall be surrounded on all
sides by buildings with at least one
pedestrian connection to an adjoining
building or public sidewalk.
The courtyard shall be a minimum of
200 square feet.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 437/444
Courtyard may be landscaped or a
combination of landscape and hardscape.
However, they shall contain amenities
for residents such as seating, water
features, etc.
Forecourt A Forecourt is similar to a Courtyard, however, it is
located in the front of a building such that the
forecourt is surrounded on two or three sides by
wings of the building.
A Forecourt shall be surrounded on at
least two sides by buildings.
A Forecourt shall be a minimum of 150
square feet.
Private Open Space
Type
Description and Image Standards and criteria
Playground Playgrounds shall be permitted in parks and greens
to provide open space designed and equipped for the
recreation of children. These playgrounds should
serve as quiet, safe places -- protected from the street
and typically located where children do not have to
cross major to access. Playgrounds may be fenced.
An open shelter, play structures or interactive art and
fountains may be included with landscaping between.
Shaded areas and seating shall be provided.
Playground equipment and design must be reviewed
and approved by the City prior to installation.
A larger playground may be incorporated into the
park, whereas a more intimate playground may be
incorporated into the green.
Paygrounds shall be a minimum of 400
sq. ft.
Community Garden A Community Garden is a small to medium size
garden cultivated by members of an area for small
scale agricultural uses for the benefit of the same
people. It may consist of individually tended plots on
Maximum size shall be 1 acre
Gardens shall be enclosed by a fence on
all open sides.
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 438/444
a shared parcel or may be communal (everyone shares
a single plot).
Fences should be installed straight and
plumb, with vertical supports at a
minimum of 8' on center. Chicken wire,
if used, should be continuously
supported along all edges.
Fencing Materials:
Permitted: pressure treated wood (must
be painted or stained medium to dark
color), chicken wire, wrought iron,
painted galvanized steel
Not permitted: chain link, bobbed wire,
vinyl, un-painted/stained pressure treated
wood, plywood
Private Open Space
Type
Description and Image Standards and criteria
Roof terraces Roof terraces are flat areas on top of a building
which are accessible for use as a recreation space for
the residents and users of the building.
A Roof Terrace shall at least be 50% of
the building footprint area.
A Roof Terrace shall provide
landscaping in the form of potted plants,
seating, and other amenities for the users
of the building.
A Roof Terrace may also include a
portion of the roof as a green roof which
may or may not have public access.
Other (pool, play
courts, picnic area,
etc.)
Other private open space could include a pool
(swimming, lap pool, spa area), play courts (basket
ball), or picnic areas with shade structures.
Such private open space may be
incorporated with roof terraces or
courtyards based on the appropriateness
of the design and accommodation of
privacy.
Table 10.2 Private Open Space Standard
Number of Residential Units proposed Private Open Space Standard Proposed
1  4 None
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 439/444
5  12 The development shall provide:
* At least 40% of all residential units fronting on a street,
Boardwalk, public civic space, forecourt, or courtyard shall provide
one balcony or patio; or
* One playground or other private open space amenity
All other private open spaces are optional.
13 25 The development shall provide:
* At least 40% of all residential units fronting on a street, civic
space, forecourt, or courtyard shall provide one balcony or patio; and
* One playground area or other private open space amenity
All other private open spaces are optional
26  50 Any 3 of the private open spaces in the list above
Over 50 units Shall provide at least one public civic space such as a plaza or paseo
Hotel with more than 200 lodging rooms Shall provide at least one public civic space such as a plaza or paseo
10.3 Public Civic Space Standards. The design of public civic space shall be regulated by the civic space standards herein which shall establish a
palette of appropriate civic space types for the RHD. The major civic space types appropriate within the context of the RHDZO are: the public
boardwalk along the bay front, public paseos, and plazas. The Regulating Plan establishes the location and types of required and recommended
civic spaces within the RHDZO. The following section shall apply to all public civic space proposed within the RHDZO.
10.3.1 Public Boardwalk Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 440/444
10.3.2 Paseo Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 441/444
10.3.3 Plaza Standards
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 442/444
Appendix A - Overlay Regulating Plan
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 443/444
Appendix B - Development Review Process
7/15/2019 https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0
https://z2codes.franklinlegal.net/franklin/PrintViewer.jsp?printCollection=0 444/444
(Ord. No. 1574,  1, 8-14-12; Ord. No. 1635,  1(Exh. A), 9-9-14)